
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 25;11(3):e0152407. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152407.
eCollection 2016.

Enhancement of Radiation Sensitivity in Lung Cancer Cells by a Novel Small
Molecule Inhibitor That Targets the ß-Catenin/Tcf4 Interaction.

Zhang Q(1,)(2), Gao M(1,)(2), Luo G(1,)(2), Han X(1,)(2), Bao W(1,)(2,)(3), Cheng
Y(1,)(2,)(3), Tian W(1,)(2), Yan M(4), Yang G(3), An J(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, New York, United States of America. (2)SUNY Upstate Cancer 
Research Institute, State University of New York, Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, New York, United States of America. (3)Department of Medicine, Liaoning
University of Chinese Traditional Medicine, No. 33 Beiling Street, Huanggu
District, Shenyang, China. (4)Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute,
La Jolla, California, United States of America. (5)Department of Medicine,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

Radiation therapy is an important treatment choice for unresectable advanced
human lung cancers, and a critical adjuvant treatment for surgery. However,
radiation as a lung cancer treatment remains far from satisfactory due to
problems associated with radiation resistance in cancer cells and severe
cytotoxicity to non-cancer cells, which arise at doses typically administered to 
patients. We have recently identified a promising novel inhibitor of
ß-catenin/Tcf4 interaction, named BC-23 (C21H14ClN3O4S), which acts as a potent
cell death enhancer when used in combination with radiation. Sequential exposure 
of human p53-null non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) H1299 cells to low doses of 
x-ray radiation, followed 1 hour later by administration of minimally cytotoxic
concentrations of BC-23, resulted in a highly synergistic induction of clonogenic
cell death (combination index <1.0). Co-treatment with BC-23 at low
concentrations effectively inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and down-regulates
c-Myc and cyclin D1 expression. S phase arrest and ROS generation are also
involved in the enhancement of radiation effectiveness mediated by BC-23. BC-23
therefore represents a promising new class of radiation enhancer.

PMID: 27014877  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cancer Cell Int. 2016 Mar 24;16:22. doi: 10.1186/s12935-016-0296-3. eCollection
2016.

Time course analysis based on gene expression profile and identification of
target molecules for colorectal cancer.

Chen G(1), Han N(1), Li G(1), Li X(1), Li G(1), Li Z(1), Li Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Surgery, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, No. 150, Jimo Road, Shanghai, 200120 China.

BACKGROUND: The study aimed to investigate the expression changes of genes in
colorectal cancer (CRC) and screen the potential molecular targets.
METHODS: The GSE37178 of mRNA expression profile including the CRC samples
extracted by surgical resection and the paired normal samples was downloaded from
Gene Expression Omnibus database. The genes whose expressions were changed at
four different time points were screened and clustered using Mfuzz package. Then 
DAVID was used to perform the functional and pathway enrichment analysis for
genes in different clusters. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were 
constructed for genes in the clusters according to the STRING database.
Furthermore, the related-transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) were 
obtained based on the resources in databases and then were combined with the PPI 
networks in each cluster to construct the integrated network containing genes,
TFs and miRNAs.
RESULTS: As a result, 314 genes were clustered into four groups. Genes in cluster
1 and cluster 2 showed a decreasing trend, while genes in cluster 3 and cluster 4
presented an increasing trend. Then 18 TFs (e.g., TCF4, MEF2C and FOS) and 18
miRNAs (e.g., miR-382, miR-217, miR-1184, miR-326 and miR-330-5p) were identified
and three integrated networks for cluster 1, 3, and 4 were constructed.
CONCLUSIONS: The results implied that expression of PITX2, VSNL1, TCF4, MEF2C and
FOS are time-related and associated with CRC development, accompanied by several 
miRNAs including miR-382, miR-217, miR-21, miR-1184, miR-326 and miR-330-5p. All 
of them might be used as potential diagnostic or therapeutic target molecules for
CRC.

PMCID: PMC4806509
PMID: 27013928  [PubMed]


3. Neuro Oncol. 2016 Mar 22. pii: now044. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-301a is activated by the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and promotes glioma cell
invasion by suppressing SEPT7.

Yue X(1), Cao D(1), Lan F(1), Pan Q(1), Xia T(1), Yu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin Neurosurgery Institute, Tianjin, China (X.Y.,
D.C.); Department of Radiation Oncology, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin, China (F.L.);
Department of Neurosurgery, Laiwu City People's Hospital, Laiwu, China (Q.P.);
Department of Radiation Oncology, P.L.A Airforce General Hospital, Beijing, China
(T.X.); Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Radiotherapy, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, China (H.Y.).

BACKGROUND: miR-301a is frequently dysregulated and specific to human tumors,
playing a critical role in tumorigenesis; however, the exact functions and
regulatory mechanisms of miR-301a in glioma cells remain largely unknown. Herein,
we show that miR-301a activated by the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway promoted the
invasion of glioma cells by directly targeting SEPT7.
METHODS: Biochemical, luciferase reporter, and hromatin immunoprecipitation PCR
assays characterized the function and regulatory mechanisms of miR-301a in glioma
invasion.
RESULTS: Initially, we detected the expression of miR-301a in glioma tissues and 
identified that miR-301a had increased, with ascending grades of the tumor.
Furthermore, high levels of miR-301a were associated with a poorer prognosis in
glioma patients. It is important to note that the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway
enhanced miR-301a expression by binding to the promoter region. To determine the 
oncogenic functions of miR-301a in glioma, SEPT7 was supported as the direct
target gene. In addition, the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway repressed SEPT7 expression,
which was dependent on miR-301a in glioma cells. Finally, miR-301a was activated 
by Wnt/ß-catenin and then promoted invasion of glioma cells by inhibiting the
expression of SEPT7 in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed the mechanism of action for miR-301a in tumor 
cell invasion. Moreover, the Wnt/miR-301a/SEPT7 signaling axis might be a novel
target in treating glioma.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27006177  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Amino Acids. 2016 Mar 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) is involved in the anti-cancer mechanism
of dovitinib in human multiple myeloma IM-9 cells.

Chon HJ(1), Lee Y(1), Bae KJ(1), Byun BJ(2), Kim SA(3), Kim J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, School of Medicine, Eulji
University, Daejeon, 34824, Korea. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA. (3)Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Eulji University, Daejeon, 34824, Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, School of Medicine, Eulji
University, Daejeon, 34824, Korea. yeon@eulji.ac.kr.

Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) is a member of the germinal center
kinase family. TNIK was first identified as a kinase that is involved in
regulating cytoskeletal organization in many types of cells, and it was recently 
proposed as a novel therapeutic target in several types of human cancers.
Although previous studies suggest that TNIK plays a pivotal role in cancer cell
survival and prognosis, its function in hematological cancer cell survival has
not been investigated. Here we investigated the relationship between TNIK
function and cell viability in multiple myeloma IM-9 cells using TNIK small
interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection and dovitinib treatment. Treatment of IM-9
cells with TNIK siRNA and dovitinib treatment reduced cell proliferation. The ATP
competing kinase assay and western blot analysis showed that dovitinib strongly
inhibited both the interaction of TNIK with ATP (K i, 13 nM) and the activation
of Wnt signaling effectors such as ß-catenin and TCF4. Dovitinib also induced
caspase-dependent apoptosis in IM-9 cells without significant cytotoxicity in
PBMCs. Our results provide new evidence that TNIK may be involved in the
proliferation of multiple myeloma IM-9 cells and in the anti-cancer activity of
dovitinib via inhibition of the endogenous Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 26995282  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Med Genet. 2016 Mar 18. pii: jmedgenet-2015-103263. doi:
10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103263. [Epub ahead of print]

Improving diagnosis and broadening the phenotypes in early-onset seizure and
severe developmental delay disorders through gene panel analysis.

Trump N(1), McTague A(2), Brittain H(1), Papandreou A(2), Meyer E(2), Ngoh A(2), 
Palmer R(1), Morrogh D(1), Boustred C(1), Hurst JA(1), Jenkins L(1), Kurian
MA(2), Scott RH(3).

Author information: 
(1)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, UK. (2)Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences
Programme, University College London Institute of Child Health, London, UK
Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK.
(3)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, UK Genetics and Genomic Medicine Unit, University College
London Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: We sought to investigate the diagnostic yield and mutation spectrum
in previously reported genes for early-onset epilepsy and disorders of severe
developmental delay.
METHODS: In 400 patients with these disorders with no known underlying aetiology 
and no major structural brain anomaly, we analysed 46 genes using a combination
of targeted sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq platform and targeted, exon-level
microarray copy number analysis.
RESULTS: We identified causative mutations in 71/400 patients (18%). The
diagnostic rate was highest among those with seizure onset within the first two
months of life (39%), although overall it was similar in those with and without
seizures. The most frequently mutated gene was SCN2A (11 patients, 3%). Other
recurrently mutated genes included CDKL5, KCNQ2, SCN8A (six patients each),
FOXG1, MECP2, SCN1A, STXBP1 (five patients each), KCNT1, PCDH19, TCF4 (three
patients each) and ATP1A3, PRRT2 and SLC9A6 (two patients each). Mutations in
EHMT1, GABRB3, LGI1, MBD5, PIGA, UBE3A and ZEB2 were each found in single
patients. We found mutations in a number of genes in patients where either the
electroclinical features or dysmorphic phenotypes were atypical for the
identified gene. In only 11 cases (15%) had the clinician sufficient certainty to
specify the mutated gene as the likely cause before testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate the considerable utility of a gene panel
approach in the diagnosis of patients with early-onset epilepsy and severe
developmental delay disorders., They provide further insights into the phenotypic
spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations for a number of the causative genes 
and emphasise the value of exon-level copy number testing in their analysis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26993267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Elife. 2016 Mar 17;5. pii: e11288. doi: 10.7554/eLife.11288.

The nucleolar protein NIFK promotes cancer progression via CK1a/ß-catenin in
metastasis and Ki-67-dependent cell proliferation.

Lin TC(1), Su CY(1), Wu PY(2), Lai TC(1), Pan WA(2,)(3), Jan YH(1), Chang YC(1), 
Yeh CT(4), Chen CL(5,)(6), Ger LP(7), Chang HT(8,)(9), Yang CJ(10), Huang MS(10),
Liu YP(11,)(12), Lin YF(13), Shyy JY(14), Tsai MD(1,)(2), Hsiao M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute of
Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department
of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, 
New Taipei City, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pathology, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of 
Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung Veterans General, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans General, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Emergency Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (11)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (12)Center for Infectious
Disease and Cancer Research, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(13)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (14)Department of Medicine, University of California,
San Diego, San Diego, United States.

Nucleolar protein interacting with the FHA domain of pKi-67 (NIFK) is a
Ki-67-interacting protein. However, its precise function in cancer remains
largely uninvestigated. Here we show the clinical significance and metastatic
mechanism of NIFK in lung cancer. NIFK expression is clinically associated with
poor prognosis and metastasis. Furthermore, NIFK enhances Ki-67-dependent
proliferation, and promotes migration, invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo
via downregulation of casein kinase 1a (CK1a), a suppressor of pro-metastatic
TCF4/ß-catenin signaling. Inversely, CK1a is upregulated upon NIFK knockdown. The
silencing of CK1a expression in NIFK-silenced cells restores TCF4/ß-catenin
transcriptional activity, cell migration, and metastasis. Furthermore, RUNX1 is
identified as a transcription factor of CSNK1A1 (CK1a) that is negatively
regulated by NIFK. Our results demonstrate the prognostic value of NIFK, and
suggest that NIFK is required for lung cancer progression via the RUNX1-dependent
CK1a repression, which activates TCF4/ß-catenin signaling in metastasis and the
Ki-67-dependent regulation in cell proliferation.

PMID: 26984280  [PubMed - in process]


7. Eur J Histochem. 2016 Feb 9;60(1):2536. doi: 10.4081/ejh.2016.2536.

Characterizing the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway in hilar
cholangiocarcinoma using a tissue microarray approach.

Chen W(1), Liang J, Huang L, Cai J, Lei Y, Lai J, Liang L, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University. chenw57@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Hilar cholangiocarcinoma (HCCA) is an invasive hepatic malignancy that is
difficult to biopsy; therefore, novel markers of HCCA prognosis are needed. Here,
the level of canonical Wnt activation in patients with HCCA, intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC), and congenital choledochal cysts (CCC) was compared to
understand the role of Wnt signaling in HCCA. Pathology specimens from HCCA
(n=129), IHCC (n=31), and CCC (n=45) patients were used to construct tissue
microarrays. Wnt2, Wnt3, ß-catenin, TCF4, c-Myc, and cyclin D1 were detected by
immunohistochemistry. Parallel correlation analysis was used to analyze
differences in protein levels between the HCCA, IHCC, and CCC groups. Univariate 
and multivariate analyses were used to determine independent predictors of
successful resection and prognosis in the HCCA group. The protein levels of Wnt2,
ß-catenin, TCF4, c-Myc, and cyclin D1 were significantly higher in HCCA compared 
to IHHC or CCC. Wnt signaling activation (Wnt2+, Wnt3+, nuclear ß-catenin+,
nuclear TCF4+) was significantly greater in HCCA tissues than CCC tissues.
Univariable analyses indicated that expression of cyclin D1 as well as Wnt
signaling activation, and partial Wnt activation (Wnt2+ or Wnt3+ and nuclear
ß-catenin+ or nuclear TCF4+) predicted successful resection, but only cyclin D1
expression remained significant in multivariable analyses. Only partial Wnt
activation was an independent predictor of survival time. Proteins in the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway were present at higher levels in HCCA and
correlated with tumor resecility and patient prognosis. These results suggest
that Wnt pathway analysis may be a useful marker for clinical outcome in HCCA.

PMID: 26972709  [PubMed - in process]


8. Neuron. 2016 Mar 8. pii: S0896-6273(16)00138-0. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2016.02.021. [Epub ahead of print]

Psychiatric Risk Gene Transcription Factor 4 Regulates Intrinsic Excitability of 
Prefrontal Neurons via Repression of SCN10a and KCNQ1.

Rannals MD(1), Hamersky GR(1), Page SC(1), Campbell MN(1), Briley A(1), Gallo
RA(1), Phan BN(1), Hyde TM(2), Kleinman JE(2), Shin JH(1), Jaffe AE(3),
Weinberger DR(4), Maher BJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (2)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns
Hopkins Medical Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; 
Department of Neurology and the McKusick Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (3)Lieber Institute
for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (4)Lieber Institute for Brain 
Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Neurology and the McKusick
Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (5)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns
Hopkins Medical Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; 
Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. Electronic address: brady.maher@libd.org.

Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4) is a clinically pleiotropic gene associated with
schizophrenia and Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS). To gain insight about the
neurobiology of TCF4, we created an in vivo model of PTHS by suppressing Tcf4
expression in rat prefrontal neurons immediately prior to neurogenesis. This
cell-autonomous genetic insult attenuated neuronal spiking by increasing the
afterhyperpolarization. At the molecular level, using a novel technique called
iTRAP that combined in utero electroporation and translating ribosome affinity
purification, we identified increased translation of two ion channel genes, Kcnq1
and Scn10a. These ion channel candidates were validated by pharmacological rescue
and molecular phenocopy. Remarkably, similar excitability deficits were observed 
in prefrontal neurons from a Tcf4(+/tr) mouse model of PTHS. Thus, we identify
TCF4 as a regulator of neuronal intrinsic excitability in part by repression of
Kcnq1 and Scn10a and suggest that this molecular function may underlie
pathophysiology associated with neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26971948  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Mar 8. pii: S0022-202X(16)30857-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.02.803. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of melanoma progression through the TCF4/miR-125b/NEDD9 cascade.

Rambow F(1), Bechadergue A(1), Luciani F(2), Gros G(1), Domingues M(1),
Bonaventure J(1), Meurice G(3), Marine JC(2), Larue L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, INSERM U1021, Normal and Pathological
Development of Melanocytes, Orsay, France; Université Paris-Sud, Université
Paris-Saclay, CNRS UMR 3347, Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le
Cancer, Orsay, Franc. (2)Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Center for
Human Genetics, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; VIB Center for the
Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Plateforme de Bioinformatique, UMS
AMMICA, Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France. (4)Institut Curie, PSL Research
University, INSERM U1021, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes,
Orsay, France; Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS UMR 3347,
Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Orsay, Franc. Electronic
address: lionel.larue@curie.fr.

Melanoma progression from a primary lesion to a distant metastasis is a complex
process associated with genetic alterations, epigenetic modifications and
phenotypic switches. Elucidation of these phenomena may indicate how to interfere
with this fatal disease. The role of microRNAs (miRNAs) as key negative
regulators of gene expression, controlling all cellular processes including cell 
migration and invasion, is now being recognized. Here we show from in silico
analysis of miRNA expression profiles of primary and metastatic melanomas, and
from functional experiments that miR-125b is a determinant candidate of melanoma 
progression: (i) miR-125b is more strongly expressed in aggressive metastatic
than primary melanomas, (ii) there is an inverse correlation between the amount
of miR-125b and overall patient survival, (iii) invasion/migration potentials in 
vitro are inversely correlated with the amount of miR-125b in a series of human
melanoma cell lines and (iv) inhibition of miR-125b reduces migratory and
invasive potentials without affecting cell proliferation in vitro. Furthermore,
we show that NEDD9 is a direct target of miR-125b and is involved in modulating
melanoma cell migration and invasion. Also, TCF4, associated with EMT, and
invasion, induces the transcription of mir-125b-1. In conclusion, the
TCF4/miR-125b/NEDD9 cascade promotes melanoma cell migration/invasion.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26968260  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 9;7:10883. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10883.

Dual regulatory switch through interactions of Tcf7l2/Tcf4 with stage-specific
partners propels oligodendroglial maturation.

Zhao C(1,)(2), Deng Y(1,)(2), Liu L(1,)(3), Yu K(1), Zhang L(2), Wang H(2), He
X(2), Wang J(2,)(4), Lu C(1), Wu LN(2), Weng Q(4), Mao M(3), Li J(5), van Es
JH(6), Xin M(2), Parry L(7), Goldman SA(8), Clevers H(6), Lu QR(2,)(3,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Division of Experimental Hematology and
Cancer Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. (3)Key
Laboratory of Obstetrics, and Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth
Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (5)Department of Veterinary
Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.
(6)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht 3584CT, The Netherlands.
(7)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff
CF244HQ, UK. (8)Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue Rochester, New York 14642, USA. (9)Key
Laboratory of Birth Defects, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China.

Constitutive activation of Wnt/ß-catenin inhibits oligodendrocyte myelination.
Tcf7l2/Tcf4, a ß-catenin transcriptional partner, is required for oligodendrocyte
differentiation. How Tcf7l2 modifies ß-catenin signalling and controls
myelination remains elusive. Here we define a stage-specific Tcf7l2-regulated
transcriptional circuitry in initiating and sustaining oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Multistage genome occupancy analyses reveal that Tcf7l2 serially
cooperates with distinct co-regulators to control oligodendrocyte lineage
progression. At the differentiation onset, Tcf7l2 interacts with a
transcriptional co-repressor Kaiso/Zbtb33 to block ß-catenin signalling. During
oligodendrocyte maturation, Tcf7l2 recruits and cooperates with Sox10 to promote 
myelination. In that context, Tcf7l2 directly activates cholesterol biosynthesis 
genes and cholesterol supplementation partially rescues oligodendrocyte
differentiation defects in Tcf712 mutants. Together, we identify stage-specific
co-regulators Kaiso and Sox10 that sequentially interact with Tcf7l2 to
coordinate the switch at the transitions of differentiation initiation and
maturation during oligodendrocyte development, and point to a previously
unrecognized role of Tcf7l2 in control of cholesterol biosynthesis for CNS
myelinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4786870
PMID: 26955760  [PubMed - in process]


11. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 7. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.29. [Epub ahead of print]

Topoisomerase IIa mediates TCF-dependent epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
colon cancer.

Zhou Q(1), Abraham AD(1), Li L(1), Babalmorad A(1), Bagby S(2), Arcaroli
JJ(2,)(3), Hansen RJ(3,)(4), Valeriote FA(5), Gustafson DL(3,)(4), Schaack
J(3,)(6), Messersmith WA(2,)(3), LaBarbera DV(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO, USA. (2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, School
of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)University of Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (5)Colorado State University, Flint Animal Cancer
Center, Fort Collins, CO, USA. (6)Josephine Ford Cancer Center, Henry Ford Health
Systems, Detroit, MI, USA.

Aberrant T-cell factor (TCF) transcription is implicated in the majority of
colorectal cancers (CRCs). TCF transcription induces epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), promoting a tumor-initiating cell (TIC) phenotype characterized
by increased proliferation, multidrug resistance (MDR), invasion and metastasis. 
The data presented herein characterize topoisomerase IIa (TopoIIa) as a required 
component of TCF transcription promoting EMT. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and protein co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) studies, we show that TopoIIa
forms protein-protein interactions with ß-catentin and TCF4 and interacts with
Wnt response elements (WREs) and promoters of direct target genes of TCF
transcription, including: MYC, vimentin, AXIN2 and LEF1. Moreover, both TopoIIa
and TCF4 ChIP with the N-cadherin promoter, which is a new discovery indicating
that TCF transcription may directly regulate N-cadherin expression. TopoIIa
N-terminal ATP-competitive inhibitors, exemplified by the marine alkaloid
neoamphimedine (neo), block TCF activity in vitro and in vivo. Neo effectively
inhibits TopoIIa and TCF4 from binding WREs/promoter sites, whereas
protein-protein interactions remain intact. Neo inhibition of TopoIIa-dependent
TCF transcription also correlates with significant antitumor effects in vitro and
in vivo, including the reversion of EMT, the loss of TIC-mediated clonogenic
colony formation, and the loss of cell motility and invasion. Interestingly,
non-ATP-competitive inhibitors of TopoIIa, etoposide and merbarone, were
ineffective at preventing TopoIIa-dependent TCF transcription. Thus, we propose
that TopoIIa participation in TCF transcription may convey a mechanism of MDR to 
conventional TopoIIa inhibitors. However, our results indicate that TopoIIa
N-terminal ATP-binding sites remain conserved and available for drug targeting.
This article defines a new strategy for targeted inhibition of TCF transcription 
that may lead to effective therapies for the treatment of CRC and potentially
other Wnt-dependent cancers.Oncogene advance online publication, 7 March 2016;
doi:10.1038/onc.2016.29.

PMID: 26947016  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Immune Netw. 2016 Feb;16(1):61-74. doi: 10.4110/in.2016.16.1.61. Epub 2016 Feb
25.

TCF4-Targeting miR-124 is Differentially Expressed amongst Dendritic Cell
Subsets.

Han SM(1), Na HY(2), Ham O(3), Choi W(1), Sohn M(1), Ryu SH(1), In H(1), Hwang
KC(4), Park CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.; Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea. (2)Laboratory of Immunology, Severance
Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722,
Korea. (3)Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical
Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.;
Institute for Bio-Medical Convergence, College of Medicine, Catholic Kwandong
University, Gangneung 25601, Korea. (4)Institute for Bio-Medical Convergence,
College of Medicine, Catholic Kwandong University, Gangneung 25601, Korea.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen-presenting cells that sample their
environment and present antigens to naïve T lymphocytes for the subsequent
antigen-specific immune responses. DCs exist in a range of distinct
subpopulations including plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and classical DCs (cDCs), with
the latter consisting of the cDC1 and cDC2 lineages. Although the roles of
DC-specific transcription factors across the DC subsets have become understood,
the posttranscriptional mechanisms that regulate DC development are yet to be
elucidated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are pivotal posttranscriptional regulators of gene
expression in a myriad of biological processes, but their contribution to the
immune system is just beginning to surface. In this study, our in-house probe
collection was screened to identify miRNAs possibly involved in DC development
and function by targeting the transcripts of relevant mouse transcription
factors. Examination of DC subsets from the culture of mouse bone marrow with
Flt3 ligand identified high expression of miR-124 which was able to target the
transcript of TCF4, a transcription factor critical for the development and
homeostasis of pDCs. Further expression profiling of mouse DC subsets isolated
from in vitro culture as well as via ex vivo purification demonstrated that
miR-124 was outstandingly expressed in CD24(+) cDC1 cells compared to in pDCs and
CD172a(+) cDC2 cells. These results imply that miR-124 is likely involved in the 
processes of DC subset development by posttranscriptional regulation of a
transcription factor(s).

PMCID: PMC4770101
PMID: 26937233  [PubMed]


13. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 15;35(6):668-84. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592810. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Wnt-induced deubiquitination FoxM1 ensures nucleus ß-catenin transactivation.

Chen Y(1), Li Y(2), Xue J(1), Gong A(1), Yu G(1), Zhou A(1), Lin K(1), Zhang
S(1), Zhang N(1), Gottardi CJ(3), Huang S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA Cell Engineering Research Center and
Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA Program in Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
TX, USA suhuang@mdanderson.org.

A key step of Wnt signaling activation is the recruitment of ß-catenin to the Wnt
target-gene promoter in the nucleus, but its mechanisms are largely unknown.
Here, we identified FoxM1 as a novel target of Wnt signaling, which is essential 
for ß-catenin/TCF4 transactivation. GSK3 phosphorylates FoxM1 on serine 474 which
induces FoxM1 ubiquitination mediated by FBXW7. Wnt signaling activation inhibits
FoxM1 phosphorylation by GSK3-Axin complex and leads to interaction between FoxM1
and deubiquitinating enzyme USP5, thereby deubiquitination and stabilization of
FoxM1. FoxM1 accumulation in the nucleus promotes recruitment of ß-catenin to Wnt
target-gene promoter and activates the Wnt signaling pathway by protecting the
ß-catenin/TCF4 complex from ICAT inhibition. Subsequently, the USP5-FoxM1 axis
abolishes the inhibitory effect of ICAT and is required for Wnt-mediated tumor
cell proliferation. Therefore, Wnt-induced deubiquitination of FoxM1 represents a
novel and critical mechanism for controlling canonical Wnt signaling and cell
proliferation.

© 2016 The Authors.

PMID: 26912724  [PubMed - in process]


14. Blood. 2016 Feb 23. pii: blood-2015-07-659151. [Epub ahead of print]

MUC1-C drives MYC in multiple myeloma.

Tagde A(1), Rajabi H(1), Bouillez A(1), Alam M(1), Gali R(2), Bailey S(1), Tai
YT(1), Hideshima T(1), Anderson K(1), Avigan D(3), Kufe D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
United States; (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States; (3)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States;
donald_kufe@dfci.harvard.edu.

Multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines and primary tumor cells are addicted to the MYC 
oncoprotein for survival. Little is known, however, about how MYC expression is
upregulated in MM cells. The mucin 1 C-terminal subunit (MUC1-C) is an oncogenic 
transmembrane protein that is aberrantly expressed in MM cell lines and primary
tumor samples. The present studies demonstrate that targeting MUC1-C with
silencing by CRISPR/Cas9 editing or with the GO-203 inhibitor is associated with 
downregulation of MYC mRNA and protein. The results show that MUC1-C occupies the
MYC promoter and thereby activates the MYC gene by a ß-catenin/TCF4-mediated
mechanism. In this way, MUC1-C (i) increases ß-catenin occupancy on the MYC
promoter, (ii) forms a complex with ß-catenin and TCF4, and, in turn, (iii)
drives MYC transcription. Analysis of MM cells using qRT-PCR arrays further
demonstrated that silencing MUC1-C is associated with downregulation of MYC
target genes, including CCND2, hTERT and GCLC. Analysis of microarray datasets
further demonstrated that MUC1 levels positively correlate with MYC expression in
MM progression and in primary cells from over 800 MM patients. These findings
collectively provide convincing evidence that MUC1-C drives MYC expression in MM.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26907633  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2016 Feb 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Reduced Human a-defensin 6 in Noninflamed Jejunal Tissue of Patients with Crohn's
Disease.

Hayashi R(1), Tsuchiya K, Fukushima K, Horita N, Hibiya S, Kitagaki K, Negi M,
Itoh E, Akashi T, Eishi Y, Okada E, Araki A, Ohtsuka K, Fukuda S, Ohno H, Okamoto
R, Nakamura T, Tanaka S, Chayama K, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Biomedical 
& Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan; Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Pathology, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; §Department of Endoscopic Diagnosis 
and Therapy, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; 
<U+2016>Laboratory for Intestinal Ecosystem, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences (IMS) AMEDCREST, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development,
Yokohama, Japan; ¶Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, 
Japan; **Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine and Graduate School,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Advanced
Therapeutics for Gastrointestinal Diseases, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; and Endoscopy and Medicine, Graduate School of
Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mucosal barrier dysfunction is considered a critical component of
Crohn's disease (CD) pathogenesis after the identification of susceptibility
genes. However, the precise mechanism underlying mucosal barrier dysfunction has 
not yet been elucidated. We therefore aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanism 
underlying the expression of human a-defensin 6 (HD6) in patients with CD.
METHODS: HD6 expression was induced by the transfection of an atonal homolog 1
(Atoh1) transgene and was assessed by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. The HD6 promoter region targeted by Atoh1 and ß-catenin was determined 
by reporter analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
HD5/HD6/Atoh1/ß-catenin expression in noninflamed jejunal samples collected by
balloon endoscopy from 15 patients with CD and 9 non-inflammatory bowel disease
patients were assessed by immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Both promoter activity and gene expression of HD6 was significantly
upregulated by the Atoh1 transgene in human colonic cancer cell line. We
identified a TCF4 binding site and an E-box site, critical for the regulation of 
HD6 transcriptional activity by directly binding of Atoh1 in the 200-bp HD6
promoter region. The treatment with ß-catenin inhibitor also decreases HD6
promoter activity and gene expression. Moreover, HD6 expression, but not HD5
expression, was found to be decreased in noninflamed jejunal regions from
patients with CD. In HD6-negative crypts, nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin was
impaired.
CONCLUSIONS: HD6 expression was found to be regulated by cooperation between
Atoh1 and ß-catenin within the HD6 promoter region. Downregulation of HD6 in
noninflamed mucosa may contribute to mucosal barrier dysfunction of patients with
CD.

PMID: 26891258  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Cell Cycle. 2016 Mar 3;15(5):699-710. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1148837.

Repression of Wnt/ß-catenin response elements by p63 (TP63).

Katoh I(1,)(2), Fukunishi N(3), Fujimuro M(4), Kasai H(5), Moriishi K(5), Hata
R(2), Kurata S(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Center for Medical Education and Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Yamanashi , Chuo , Yamanashi , Japan. (2)b Oral Health Science Research
Center, Kanagawa Dental University , Yokosuka , Japan. (3)c Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University , Tokyo , Japan. (4)d Department
of Cell Biology , Kyoto Pharmaceutical University , Yamashina , Kyoto , Japan.
(5)e Department of Microbiology , Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi , 
Chuo , Yamanashi , Japan.

Submitted: TP63 (p63), a member of the tumor suppressor TP53 (p53) gene family,
is expressed in keratinocyte stem cells and well-differentiated squamous cell
carcinomas to maintain cellular potential for growth and differentiation.
Controversially, activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by p63 (Patturajan M. 
et al., 2002, Cancer Cells) and inhibition of the target gene expression
(Drewelus I. et al., 2010, Cell Cycle) have been reported. Upon p63 RNA-silencing
in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) lines, a few Wnt target gene expression
substantially increased, while several target genes moderately decreased.
Although <U+0394>Np63a, the most abundant isoform of p63, appeared to interact with
protein phosphatase PP2A, neither GSK-3ß phosphorylation nor ß-catenin nuclear
localization was altered by the loss of p63. As reported earlier, <U+0394>Np63a enhanced
ß-catenin-dependent luc gene expression from pGL3-OT having 3 artificial Wnt
response elements (WREs). However, this activation was detectable only in HEK293 
cells examined so far, and involved a p53 family-related sequence 5' to the WREs.
In Wnt3-expressing SAOS-2 cells, <U+0394>Np63a rather strongly inhibited transcription
of pGL3-OT. Importantly, <U+0394>Np63a repressed WREs isolated from the regulatory
regions of MMP7. <U+0394>Np63a-TCF4 association occurred in their soluble forms in the
nucleus. Furthermore, p63 and TCF4 coexisted at a WRE of MMP7 on the chromatin,
where ß-catenin recruitment was attenuated. The combined results indicate that
<U+0394>Np63a serves as a repressor that regulates ß-catenin-mediated gene expression.

PMID: 26890356  [PubMed - in process]


17. Genesis. 2016 Mar;54(3):101-14. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22922. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Wnt Signaling Inhibition Deprives Small Intestinal Stem Cells of Clonogenic
Capacity.

Janeckova L(1,)(2), Fafilek B(1), Krausova M(1), Horazna M(1), Vojtechova M(1),
Alberich-Jorda M(3), Sloncova E(1), Galuskova K(1), Sedlacek R(4), Anderova M(2),
Korinek V(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics 
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, Prague 4, Czech
Republic. (2)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Department of Cellular
Neurophysiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, Prague
4, Czech Republic. (3)Laboratory of Haematooncology, Institute of Molecular
Genetics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, Prague, Czech 
Republic. (4)Division BIOCEV, Institute of Molecular Genetics Academy of Sciences
of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, Prague 4, Czech Republic.

The Wnt pathway plays a crucial role in self-renewal and differentiation of cells
in the adult gut. In the present study, we revealed the functional consequences
of inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling in the intestinal epithelium. The study 
was based on generation of a novel transgenic mouse strain enabling inducible
expression of an N-terminally truncated variant of nuclear Wnt effector T cell
factor 4 (TCF4). The TCF4 variant acting as a dominant negative (dn) version of
wild-type (wt) TCF4 protein decreased transcription of ß-catenin-TCF4-responsive 
genes. Interestingly, suppression of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling affected asymmetric 
division of intestinal stem cells (ISCs) rather than proliferation. ISCs
expressing the transgene underwent several rounds of division but lost their
clonogenic potential and migrated out of the crypt. Expression profiling of crypt
cells revealed that besides ISC-specific markers, the dnTCF4 production
downregulated expression levels of epithelial genes produced in other crypt cells
including markers of Paneth cells. Additionally, in Apc conditional knockout
mice, dnTCF activation efficiently suppressed growth of Apc-deficient tumors. In 
summary, the generated mouse strain represents a convenient tool to study
cell-autonomous inhibition of ß-catenin-Tcf-mediated transcription. genesis
54:101-114, 2016. © 2016 The Authors genesis Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 The Authors genesis Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26864984  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb 10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10590. [Epub ahead of print]

Biphasic Modulation of Wnt Signaling Supports Efficient Foregut Endoderm
Formation from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Hoepfner J(1,)(2), Kleinsorge M(1,)(2), Papp O(1,)(2), Ackermann M(3), Alfken
S(1,)(2), Rinas U(4), Solodenko W(1), Kirschning A(5), Sgodda M(1,)(2), Cantz
T(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Dept. Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)iPSC based Gene Therapy, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. (4)Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (5)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (6)Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

Pluripotent stem cells (embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells) 
are of great promise in regenerative medicine, including molecular studies of
disease mechanisms, if the affected cell type can be authentically generated
during in vitro differentiation. Most existing protocols aim to mimic embryonic
development steps by the supplementation of specific cytokines and small
molecules, but the involved signaling pathways need further exploration. In this 
study, we investigated enhanced initial activation of Wnt signaling for
definitive endoderm formation and subsequent rapid shutdown of Wnt signaling for 
proper foregut endoderm specification using 3 µM CHIR99021 and 0.5 µg/mL of
secreted frizzled-related protein 5 (sFRP-5) for biphasic modulation of the Wnt
pathway. The definitive endoderm and foregut endoderm differentiation
capabilities of Wnt pathway-modulated cells were determined based on the
expression levels of the endodermal transcription factors SOX17 and FOXA2 and
those of the transcription activator GATA4 and the a-fetoprotein (AFP) gene,
respectively. Furthermore, the resulting biphasic Wnt pathway modulation was
investigated at the protein level by analyzing phosphorylation of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß) and ß-catenin. Finally, Wnt target gene expression
was determined using an improved lentiviral reporter construct that enabled
robust T-cell transcription factor 4 (TCF4)/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1
(LEF1)-mediated luciferase expression in differentiating pluripotent stem cells. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated robust, homogeneous, and efficient derivation of
foregut endodermal cells by inducing a biphasic modulation of the Wnt signaling
pathway.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26861571  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 5;17(2). pii: E212. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020212.

The Role of Cdkn1A-Interacting Zinc Finger Protein 1 (CIZ1) in DNA Replication
and Pathophysiology.

Liu Q(1), Niu N(2), Wada Y(3), Liu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong
University, 16766 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250014, China. qiangliu.sdu@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China. judyniuna@163.com. (3)The
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, and Isotope Science Center, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.
wada-y@lsbm.org. (4)Medical Research Center, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan
Hospital, Shandong University, 16766 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250014, China.
ju.liu@sdu.edu.cn.

Cdkn1A-interacting zinc finger protein 1 (CIZ1) was first identified in a
yeast-2-hybrid system searching for interacting proteins of CDK2 inhibitor
p21(Cip1/Waf1). Ciz1 also binds to CDK2, cyclin A, cyclin E, CDC6, PCNA, TCF4 and
estrogen receptor-a. Recent studies reveal numerous biological functions of CIZ1 
in DNA replication, cell proliferation, and differentiation. In addition,
splicing variants of CIZ1 mRNA is associated with a variety of cancers and
Alzheimer's disease, and mutations of the CIZ1 gene lead to cervical dystonia.
CIZ1 expression is increased in cancers and rheumatoid arthritis. In this review,
we will summarize the biological functions and molecular mechanisms of CIZ1 in
these physiological and pathological processes.

PMCID: PMC4783944
PMID: 26861296  [PubMed - in process]


20. Exp Cell Res. 2016 Feb 15;341(2):196-206. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2016.01.020. Epub 
2016 Feb 1.

Characterization of a beta-catenin nuclear localization defect in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

Jamieson C(1), Mills KM(1), Lui C(1), Semaan C(2), Molloy MP(3), Sharma M(1),
Forwood JK(4), Henderson BR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The
University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia. (2)Centre for Cancer
Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The University of Sydney, 
Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia; Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences,
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia. (3)Department of Chemistry and
Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW
2678, Australia. (5)Centre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for
Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: beric.henderson@sydney.edu.au.

Beta-catenin plays a key role in transducing Wnt signals from the plasma membrane
to the nucleus. Here we characterize an unusual subcellular distribution of
beta-catenin in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, wherein beta-catenin localizes to the 
cytoplasm and membrane but atypically did not relocate to the nucleus after Wnt
treatment. The inability of Wnt or the Wnt agonist LiCl to induce nuclear
localization of beta-catenin was not due to defective nuclear transport, as the
transport machinery was intact and ectopic GFP-beta-catenin displayed rapid
nuclear entry in living cells. The mislocalization is explained by a shift in the
retention of beta-catenin from nucleus to cytoplasm. The reduced nuclear
retention is caused by unusually low expression of lymphoid enhancer
factor/T-cell factor (LEF/TCF) transcription factors. The reconstitution of LEF-1
or TCF4 expression rescued nuclear localization of beta-catenin in Wnt treated
cells. In the cytoplasm, beta-catenin accumulated in recycling endosomes, golgi
and beta-COP-positive coatomer complexes. The peripheral association with
endosomes diminished after Wnt treatment, potentially releasing ß-catenin into
the cytoplasm for nuclear entry. We propose that in MCF-7 and perhaps other
breast cancer cells, beta-catenin may contribute to cytoplasmic functions such as
ER-golgi transport, in addition to its transactivation role in the nucleus.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26844628  [PubMed - in process]


21. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 3;16(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2090-y.

Cooperation of Sox4 with ß-catenin/p300 complex in transcriptional regulation of 
the Slug gene during divergent sarcomatous differentiation in uterine
carcinosarcoma.

Inoue H(1), Takahashi H(2), Hashimura M(3), Eshima K(4), Akiya M(5), Matsumoto
T(6), Saegusa M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
252-0374, Japan. dm13008y@st.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
hitakaha@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan. mhashimu@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. 
(4)Department of Immunology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
eshima@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan. platysmanejp@yahoo.co.jp.
(6)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
252-0374, Japan. matsumoto@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pathology,
1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) represents a true example of cancer
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which exhibits cancer
stem cell (CSC)-like traits. Both Sox and ß-catenin signal transductions play key
roles in the regulation of EMT/CSC properties, but little is known about their
involvement in UCS tumorigenesis. Herein, we focused on the functional roles of
the Sox/ß-catenin pathway in UCSs.
METHODS: EMT/CSC tests and transfection experiments were carried out using three 
endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cell lines. Immunohistochemical investigation was
also applied for a total of 32 UCSs.
RESULTS: Em Ca cells cultured in STK2, a serum-free medium for mesenchymal stem
cells, underwent changes in morphology toward an EMT appearance through
downregulation of E-cadherin, along with upregulation of Slug, known as a target 
gene of ß-catenin. The cells also showed CSC properties with an increase in the
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 1(high) activity population and spheroid formation,
as well as upregulation of Sox4, Sox7, and Sox9. Of these Sox factors,
overexpression of Sox4 dramatically led to transactivation of the Slug promoter, 
and the effects were further enhanced by cotransfection of Sox7 or Sox9. Sox4 was
also able to promote ß-catenin-mediated transcription of the Slug gene through
formation of transcriptional complexes with ß-catenin and p300, independent of
TCF4 status. In clinical samples, both nuclear ß-catenin and Slug scores were
significantly higher in the sarcomatous elements as compared to carcinomatous
components in UCSs, and were positively correlated with Sox4, Sox7, and Sox9
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that Sox4, as well as Sox7 and Sox9, may
contribute to regulation of EMT/CSC properties to promote development of
sarcomatous components in UCSs through transcriptional regulation of the Slug
gene by cooperating with the ß-catenin/p300 signal pathway.

PMCID: PMC4739330
PMID: 26841870  [PubMed - in process]


22. Transl Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 2;6:e724. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.211.

Polymorphisms in MIR137HG and microRNA-137-regulated genes influence gray matter 
structure in schizophrenia.

Wright C(1,)(2), Gupta CN(1), Chen J(1), Patel V(1), Calhoun VD(1,)(2,)(3),
Ehrlich S(4,)(5,)(6), Wang L(7,)(8), Bustillo JR(2,)(9), Perrone-Bizzozero
NI(2,)(9), Turner JA(1,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (2)Department of
Neurosciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (3)Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM,
USA. (4)Translational Developmental Neuroscience Section, Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität, Dresden,
Germany. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (8)Department of Radiology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (9)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(10)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Evidence suggests that microRNA-137 (miR-137) is involved in the genetic basis of
schizophrenia. Risk variants within the miR-137 host gene (MIR137HG) influence
structural and functional brain-imaging measures, and miR-137 itself is predicted
to regulate hundreds of genes. We evaluated the influence of a MIR137HG risk
variant (rs1625579) in combination with variants in miR-137-regulated genes TCF4,
PTGS2, MAPK1 and MAPK3 on gray matter concentration (GMC). These genes were
selected based on our previous work assessing schizophrenia risk within possible 
miR-137-regulated gene sets using the same cohort of subjects. A genetic risk
score (GRS) was determined based on genotypes of these four schizophrenia
risk-associated genes in 221 Caucasian subjects (89 schizophrenia patients and
132 controls). The effects of the rs1625579 genotype with the GRS of
miR-137-regulated genes in a three-way interaction with diagnosis on GMC patterns
were assessed using a multivariate analysis. We found that schizophrenia subjects
homozygous for the MIR137HG risk allele show significant decreases in occipital, 
parietal and temporal lobe GMC with increasing miR-137-regulated GRS, whereas
those carrying the protective minor allele show significant increases in GMC with
GRS. No correlations of GMC and GRS were found in control subjects. Variants
within or upstream of genes regulated by miR-137 in combination with the MIR137HG
risk variant may influence GMC in schizophrenia-related regions in patients.
Given that the genes evaluated here are involved in protein kinase A signaling,
dysregulation of this pathway through alterations in miR-137 biogenesis may
underlie the gray matter loss seen in the disease.

PMID: 26836412  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15;76(6):1538-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1804. Epub
2016 Feb 1.

Inhibition of MUC1-C Suppresses MYC Expression and Attenuates Malignant Growth in
KRAS Mutant Lung Adenocarcinomas.

Bouillez A(1), Rajabi H(1), Pitroda S(2), Jin C(1), Alam M(1), Kharbanda A(1),
Tagde A(1), Wong KK(1), Kufe D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Radiation and Cellular Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. (3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. donald_kufe@dfci.harvard.edu.

Dysregulation of MYC expression is a hallmark of cancer, but the development of
agents that target MYC has remained challenging. The oncogenic MUC1-C
transmembrane protein is, like MYC, aberrantly expressed in diverse human
cancers. The present studies demonstrate that MUC1-C induces MYC expression in
KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, an effect that can be
suppressed by targeting MUC1-C via shRNA silencing, CRISPR editing, or
pharmacologic inhibition with GO-203. MUC1-C activated the WNT/ß-catenin (CTNNB1)
pathway and promoted occupancy of MUC1-C/ß-catenin/TCF4 complexes on the MYC
promoter. MUC1-C also promoted the recruitment of the p300 histone acetylase
(EP300) and, in turn, induced histone H3 acetylation and activation of MYC gene
transcription. We also show that targeting MUC1-C decreased the expression of key
MYC target genes essential for the growth and survival of NSCLC cells, such as
TERT and CDK4. Based on these results, we found that the combination of GO-203
and the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, which targets MYC transcription,
synergistically suppressed MYC expression and cell survival in vitro as well as
tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, MUC1 expression significantly correlated
with that of MYC and its target genes in human KRAS mutant NSCLC tumors. Taken
together, these findings suggest a therapeutic approach for targeting
MYC-dependent cancers and provide the framework for the ongoing clinical studies 
addressing the efficacy of MUC1-C inhibition in solid tumors. Cancer Res; 76(6); 
1538-48. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4794417 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26833129  [PubMed - in process]


24. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):15086-92. eCollection 2015.

Expression of Nemo-like kinase was increased and negatively correlated with the
expression of TCF4 in lung cancers.

Zhang XW(1), Chen SY(2), Xue DW(3), Xu HH(1), Yang LH(2), Xu HT(2), Wang EH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University Shenyang, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated
Hospital and College of Basic Medical Sciences of China Medical University
Shenyang 110001, China. (3)Department of Urinary Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University Shenyang, China.

Nemo-like kinase (NLK), as a mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)-like kinase,
is involved in the development of several human cancers. In this study, we
explored the expression of NLK in lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and
adenocarcinoma tissues, and investigated the associations among NLK, ß-catenin,
T-cell factor 4 (TCF4), and the clinicopathological factors of lung cancers. The 
expressions of NLK, ß-catenin, TCF4 were examined in 109 cases of lung cancers
using immunohistochemistry method. The expression of NLK was observed in the
nuclei of lung cancer tissues, and was significantly higher in lung cancer
tissues than that in corresponding normal lung tissues (t = 21.636, n = 109, P < 
0.001). The high expression of NLK was found in 45 cases of lung SCCs (45/49,
91.84%), which was much more than that in adenocarcinomas (38/60, 63.33%) (P =
0.001). Furthermore, the high expression of NLK was negatively correlated with
TCF4 expression and positively correlated with the membranous expression of
ß-catenin. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that the expression of
NLK was localized in nucleus and significantly increased in lung cancers. The
expression of NLK was negatively correlated with TCF4 expression and positively
correlated with ß-catenin membranous expression in lung cancers.

PMCID: PMC4713634
PMID: 26823848  [PubMed - in process]


25. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Jan;19(1):113-7.

[Research progress in genetic abnormalities and etiological factors of congenital
anorectal malformation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y, Ren H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatal Surgery, Shanxi Children's Hospital, Taiyuan 030013,
China. renhongxia100@sina.com.

Congenital anorectal malformation (ARM) is one of the most common
gastrointestinal congenital diseases, accounting for 1/4 in digestive tract
malformation, and is one of the congenital malformations in routine surveillance 
by the World Health Organization. Because of the variety of risk factors and the 
complexity of the pathological changes, etiology of ARM is still not clear. It is
mostly considered that ARM is resulted from hereditary factors and environmental 
factors in the development of embryogenesis. Through animal experiments, scholars
have found that Hox, Shh, Fgf, Wnt, Cdx and TCF4, Eph and ephrin play crucial
role during the development of digestive tract. When the genes/signaling pathway 
dysfunction occurs, ARM may happen. In addition, ARM is related to the external
factors in pregnancy. Because of the complexity of related factors in the
development of human embryogenesis, the research progress of human ARM is very
slow. This paper reviews relevant literatures in genetic factors and
environmental factors, in order to provide the theoretical basis for the
treatment and prevention of ARM.

PMID: 26797848  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 Jan 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Connective tissue cells expressing fibro/adipogenic progenitor markers increase
under chronic damage: relevance in fibroblast-myofibroblast differentiation and
skeletal muscle fibrosis.

Contreras O(1), Rebolledo DL(2), Oyarzún JE(3), Olguín HC(4), Brandan E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Aging and Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Libertador Bernardo O´Higgins 340, 8331150, Santiago, Chile.
oicontre@uc.cl. (2)Center for Aging and Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Libertador Bernardo O´Higgins 340,
8331150, Santiago, Chile. drebolledo@bio.puc.cl. (3)Center for Aging and
Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Libertador
Bernardo O´Higgins 340, 8331150, Santiago, Chile. jeoyarzu@uc.cl. (4)Center for
Aging and Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Libertador Bernardo O´Higgins 340, 8331150, Santiago, Chile.
holguin@bio.puc.cl. (5)Center for Aging and Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Libertador Bernardo O´Higgins 340,
8331150, Santiago, Chile. ebrandan@bio.puc.cl.

Fibrosis occurs in skeletal muscle under various pathophysiological conditions
such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a devastating disease characterized by
fiber degeneration that results in progressive loss of muscle mass, weakness and 
increased extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation. Fibrosis is also observed
after skeletal muscle denervation and repeated cycles of damage followed by
regeneration. The ECM is synthesized largely by fibroblasts in the muscle
connective tissue under normal conditions. Myofibroblasts, cells that express
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), play a role in many tissues affected by fibrosis. 
In skeletal muscle, fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs) that express cell-surface
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFR-a) and the transcription factor 
Tcf4 seem to be responsible for connective tissue synthesis and are good
candidates for the origin of myofibroblasts. We show that cells positive for Tcf4
and PDGFR-a are expressed in skeletal muscle under normal conditions and are
increased in various skeletal muscles of mdx mice, a murine model for DMD, wild
type muscle after sciatic denervation and muscle subjected to chronic damage.
These cells co-label with the myofibroblast marker a-SMA in dystrophic muscle but
not in normal tissue. The Tcf4-positive cells lie near macrophages mainly
concentrated in dystrophic necrotic-regenerating foci. The close proximity of
Tcf4-positive cells to inflammatory cells and their previously described role in 
muscle regeneration might reflect an active interaction between these cell types 
and growth factors, possibly resulting in a muscular regenerative or fibrotic
condition.

PMID: 26742767  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. J Med Genet. 2016 Mar;53(3):190-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103568. Epub 2016 
Jan 6.

Identification of novel genetic causes of Rett syndrome-like phenotypes.

Lopes F(1), Barbosa M(2), Ameur A(3), Soares G(4), de Sá J(5), Dias AI(6),
Oliveira G(7), Cabral P(8), Temudo T(9), Calado E(6), Cruz IF(10), Vieira JP(6), 
Oliveira R(5), Esteves S(1), Sauer S(11), Jonasson I(3), Syvänen AC(12),
Gyllensten U(3), Pinto D(13), Maciel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate
Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. (2)Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences, The Mindich Child Health & Development Institute, The Seaver Autism
Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, USA Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. (3)Science for Life 
Laboratory Uppsala, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. (4)Center for Medical Genetics Dr. Jacinto
Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)Serviço de Genética
Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal. (6)Serviço de Neurologia Pediátrica, Hospital D. Estefânia,
Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal. (7)Unidade de
Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança e Centro de 
Investigação e Formação Clínica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Faculty of Medicine, University
Clinic of Pediatrics and Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Science,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (8)Department of Neurology, Egas Moniz 
Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal. (9)Department of Neuropediatrics, Centro Hospitalar
do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (10)Centro de Desenvolvimento Luís Borges, Hospital
Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(11)Otto-Warburg-Laboratory, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany CU Systems Medicine, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(12)Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (13)Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, The Mindich Child Health & Development Institute, The Seaver
Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this work was to identify new genetic causes of Rett-like 
phenotypes using array comparative genomic hybridisation and a whole exome
sequencing approach.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied a cohort of 19 Portuguese patients (16 girls, 3
boys) with a clinical presentation significantly overlapping Rett syndrome (RTT).
Genetic analysis included filtering of the single nucleotide variants and indels 
with preference for de novo, homozygous/compound heterozygous, or maternally
inherited X linked variants. Examination by MRI and muscle biopsies was also
performed. Pathogenic genomic imbalances were found in two patients (10.5%): an
18q21.2 deletion encompassing four exons of the TCF4 gene and a mosaic UPD of
chromosome 3. Variants in genes previously implicated in neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDD) were identified in six patients (32%): de novo variants in
EEF1A2, STXBP1 and ZNF238 were found in three patients, maternally inherited X
linked variants in SLC35A2, ZFX and SHROOM4 were detected in two male patients
and one homozygous variant in EIF2B2 was detected in one patient. Variants were
also detected in five novel NDD candidate genes (26%): we identified de novo
variants in the RHOBTB2, SMARCA1 and GABBR2 genes; a homozygous variant in
EIF4G1; compound heterozygous variant in HTT.
CONCLUSIONS: Network analysis reveals that these genes interact by means of
protein interactions with each other and with the known RTT genes. These findings
expand the phenotypical spectrum of previously known NDD genes to encompass
RTT-like clinical presentations and identify new candidate genes for RTT-like
phenotypes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26740508  [PubMed - in process]


28. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2016 Mar 15;310(6):F569-79. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00520.2015. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Muc1 enhances the ß-catenin protective pathway during ischemia-reperfusion
injury.

Al-Bataineh MM(1), Kinlough CL(1), Poland PA(1), Pastor-Soler NM(2), Sutton
TA(3), Mang HE(3), Bastacky SI(4), Gendler SJ(5), Madsen CS(4), Singh S(6), Monga
SP(6), Hughey RP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Renal-Electrolyte Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; (2)Division of Nephrology and
Hypertension, Department of Medicine, University of Southern California/UKRO
Kidney Research Center, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; (3)Division of Nephrology, Department of
Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana;
(4)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; (5)Department of
Immunology and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic in Arizona,
Scottsdale, Arizona. (6)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of
Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
(7)Renal-Electrolyte Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania; and Department of Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania hugheyr@pitt.edu.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 and ß-catenin protective pathways represent 
the two most significant cellular responses that are activated in response to
acute kidney injury. We previously reported that murine mucin (Muc)1 protects
kidney function and morphology in a mouse model of ischemia-reperfusion injury
(IRI) by stabilizing HIF-1a, enhancing HIF-1 downstream signaling, and thereby
preventing metabolic stress (Pastor-Soler et al. Muc1 is protective during kidney
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 308: F1452-F1462, 2015). 
We asked if Muc1 regulates the ß-catenin protective pathway during IRI as 1)
ß-catenin nuclear targeting is MUC1 dependent in cultured human cells, 2)
ß-catenin is found in coimmunoprecipitates with human MUC1 in extracts of both
cultured cells and tissues, and 3) MUC1 prevents ß-catenin phosphorylation by
glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)3ß and thereby ß-catenin degradation. Using the
same mouse model of IRI, we found that levels of active GSK3ß were significantly 
lower in kidneys of control mice compared with Muc1 knockout (KO) mice.
Consequently, ß-catenin was significantly upregulated at 24 and 72 h of recovery 
and appeared in the nuclear fraction at 72 h in control mouse kidneys. Both
ß-catenin induction and nuclear targeting were absent in Muc1 KO mice. We also
found downstream induction of ß-catenin prosurvival factors (activated Akt,
survivin, transcription factor T cell factor 4 (TCF4), and its downstream target 
cyclin D1) and repression of proapoptotic factors (p53, active Bax, and cleaved
caspase-3) in control mouse kidneys that were absent or aberrant in kidneys of
Muc1 KO mice. Altogether, the data clearly indicate that Muc1 protection during
acute kidney injury proceeds by enhancing both the HIF-1 and ß-catenin protective
pathways.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4796271 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26739894  [PubMed - in process]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec 28;36(6):923-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01074-15.

A Switch in Akt Isoforms Is Required for Notch-Induced Snail1 Expression and
Protection from Cell Death.

Frías A(1), Lambies G(2), Viñas-Castells R(2), Martínez-Guillamon C(2), Dave
N(2), García de Herreros A(3), Díaz VM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions
Mèdiques, Barcelona, Spain Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Programa de Recerca en Càncer,
Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions
Mèdiques, Barcelona, Spain Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain agarcia@imim.es victor.diaz@upf.edu.

Notch activation in aortic endothelial cells (ECs) takes place at embryonic
stages during cardiac valve formation and induces endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EndMT). Using aortic ECs, we show here that active Notch expression
promotes EndMT, resulting in downregulation of vascular endothelial cadherin
(VE-cadherin) and upregulation of mesenchymal genes such as those for fibronectin
and Snail1/2. In these cells, transforming growth factor ß1 exacerbates Notch
effects by increasing Snail1 and fibronectin activation. When Notch-downstream
pathways were analyzed, we detected an increase in glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK-3ß) phosphorylation and inactivation that facilitates Snail1 nuclear
retention and protein stabilization. However, the total activity of Akt was
downregulated. The discrepancy between Akt activity and GSK-3ß phosphorylation is
explained by a Notch-induced switch in the Akt isoforms, whereby Akt1, the
predominant isoform expressed in ECs, is decreased and Akt2 transcription is
upregulated. Mechanistically, Akt2 induction requires the stimulation of the
ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional complex, which activates the Akt2 promoter.
Active, phosphorylated Akt2 translocates to the nucleus in Notch-expressing
cells, resulting in GSK-3ß inactivation in this compartment. Akt2, but not Akt1, 
colocalizes in the nucleus with lamin B in the nuclear envelope. In addition to
promoting GSK-3ß inactivation, Notch downregulates Forkhead box O1 (FoxO1),
another Akt2 nuclear substrate. Moreover, Notch protects ECs from oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis through an Akt2- and Snail1-dependent mechanism.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26711268  [PubMed - in process]


30. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;32(4):854-61.

[T Cell Factor 4, beta-catenin and SFRP1 Expression of Wnt Signaling Pathway in
Colorectal Carcinoma and the Prognosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Ou Y, Jing G, Liu J, Gao S, Cheng Z, Dong X.

Abnormal activation of Wnt signaling pathway is closely related to the occurrence
of tumor, and T cell factor 4 (Tcf4 ) and beta-catenin are important signal
transmission factors of this pathway. The aim of the present study is to explore 
the significance and correlation between expression of Tcf4, beta-catenin and
secreted frizzled related protein 1(SFRP1), suppressor gene of Wnt signaling
pathway, in colorectal carcinoma and their correlations to the
clinicopathological factors. The expressions of Tcf4, beta-catenin and SFRP1 were
performed with immunohistochemistry staining in 97 cases of primary colorectal
carcinoma and 40 cases of normal colorectal mucosa tissues. The results showed
that the abnormal expression rates of Tcf4 and beta-catenin in colorectal
carcinoma were significantly higher than those in the control groups (P<0.01).
The positive rate of SFRP1 was significantly lower than those in the control
groups (P<0.01). The abnormal expression rates of Tcf4 and beta-catenin were also
related to the lymph node metastasis and Dukes stage (P<0.05). A significant
correlation was found between the expressions of SFRP1 and Tcf4, beta-catenin
(P<0.05). Overexpression of Tcf4 and beta-catenin was related to poor prognosis
(P<0.05). But the survival rates of the group with SFRP1 expressions were higher 
than those in group without SFRP1 expressions (P<0.05). Cox multifactor
regression analysis indicated that Dukes stage, expression of beta-catenin and
SFRP1 were independent risk factors of colorectal carcinoma (P<0.05). The results
suggested that the abnormal expression of Tcf4 and beta-catenin in colorectal
cancer may be related to the reduced or absent expression of SFRP1. beta-catenin 
accumulation in the nuclei formed complexes with Tcf4 is one of the important
molecular switch maintaining colorectal malignant phenotype. The combined
detection of these indexes may perform an important role in predicting the
progression and prognosis of colorectal cancer, and could provide new molecular
targets for gene treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 26710459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2016 01-02;13(1):31-45.

WNT/ß-catenin Signaling Pathway and Downstream Modulators in Low- and High-grade 
Glioma.

Denysenko T(1), Annovazzi L(2), Cassoni P(3), Melcarne A(4), Mellai M(5),
Schiffer D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Polyclinic of Monza Foundation, Vercelli, Italy Department of
Neurosurgery, CTO Hospital/Health and Science City, Turin, Italy. (2)Research
Center, Polyclinic of Monza Foundation, Vercelli, Italy. (3)Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Turin/Health and Science City, Turin, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, CTO Hospital/Health and Science City, Turin,
Italy. (5)Research Center, Polyclinic of Monza Foundation, Vercelli, Italy
marta.mellai@cnbo.it.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the canonical Wingless-type MMTV integration
site family (WNT)/ß-catenin signaling pathway is critical for gliomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 74 gliomas of different histological grade and in 24
glioblastoma cell lines, protein expression of WNT member 3a (WNT3a), ß-catenin
and transcription factor 4 (TCF4) was investigated by immunohistochemistry,
western blotting, immunofluorescence and immunocytochemistry. In tumors and cell 
lines, WNT3A expression was assessed at the mRNA level by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: WNT3a was overexpressed at the protein and mRNA levels in malignant
astrocytic tumors and cell lines. Cytoplasmic expression of ß-catenin was
detected in high-grade gliomas and cell lines, with evidence of nuclear
translocation on fractionated protein extracts. Activating mutations in the
ß-catenin encoding gene (CTNNB1) were excluded by direct sequencing. TCF4 was
statistically correlated with Ki-67/MIB-1 and cyclin D1 labeling indices.
CONCLUSION: Expression of WNT3a, cytoplasmic ß-catenin and TCF4 was significantly
associated with the histological malignancy grade and with a worse prognosis for 
patients with glioma.

Copyright© 2016, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708597  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Glia. 2016 Apr;64(4):583-602. doi: 10.1002/glia.22950. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

IL-1ß induces hypomyelination in the periventricular white matter through
inhibition of oligodendrocyte progenitor cell maturation via FYN/MEK/ERK
signaling pathway in septic neonatal rats.

Xie D(1), Shen F(1,)(2), He S(3), Chen M(1,)(2), Han Q(1), Fang M(1), Zeng H(1), 
Chen C(1), Deng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care and Emergency, Guangdong General Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shantou University Medical College (FCS), Shantou, Guangdong, People's
Republic of China. 515063. (3)Department of Neonatology, Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Neuroinflammation elicited by microglia plays a key role in periventricular white
matter (PWM) damage (PWMD) induced by infectious exposure. This study aimed to
determine if microglia-derived interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) would induce
hypomyelination through suppression of maturation of oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells (OPCs) in the developing PWM. Sprague-Dawley rats (1-day old) were injected
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (1 mg/kg) intraperitoneally, following which
upregulated expression of IL-1ß and IL-1 receptor 1 (IL-1R1 ) was observed. This 
was coupled with enhanced apoptosis and suppressed proliferation of OPCs in the
PWM. The number of PDGFR-a and NG2-positive OPCs was significantly decreased in
the PWM at 24 h and 3 days after injection of LPS, whereas it was increased at 14
days and 28 days. The protein expression of Olig1, Olig2, and Nkx2.2 was
significantly reduced, and mRNA expression of Tcf4 and Axin2 was upregulated in
the developing PWM after LPS injection. The expression of myelin basic protein
(MBP) and 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 3"-phosphodiesterase (CNPase) was downregulated
in the PWM at 14 days and 28 days after LPS injection; this was linked to
reduction of the proportion of myelinated axons and thinner myelin sheath as
revealed by electron microscopy. Primary cultured OPCs treated with IL-1ß showed 
the failure of maturation and proliferation. Furthermore, FYN/MEK/ERK signaling
pathway was involved in suppression of maturation of primary OPCs induced by
IL-1ß administration. Our results suggest that following LPS injection, microglia
are activated and produce IL-1ß in the PWM in the neonatal rats. Excess IL-1ß
inhibits the maturation of OPCs via suppression of FYN/MEK/ERK phosphorylation
thereby leading to axonal hypomyelination. GLIA 2016;64:583-602.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26678483  [PubMed - in process]


33. Wound Repair Regen. 2015 Dec 9. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12392. [Epub ahead of print]

Master regulators in primary skin fibroblast fate reprogramming in a human
ex-vivo model of chronic wounds.

Noizet M(1), Lagoutte E(1), Gratigny M(2), Bouschbacher M(3), Lazareth I(4),
Roest Crollius H(2), Darzacq X(1), Dugast-Darzacq C(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Imaging of Transcription, CNRS UMR8197, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Paris, 75005, France. (2)Dyogen Group, CNRS
UMR8197, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Paris,
75005, France. (3)SDRI-URGO, Chenôve, France. (4)Institut de la cicatrisation
Jean-Paul Belmondo, service de médecine vasculaire, groupe hospitalier Paris
Saint Joseph, Paris, France. (5)Univ. Paris Diderot, Paris Cité Sorbonne, Paris, 
France.

Fibroblasts are important players in regulating tissue homeostasis. In the
dermis, they are involved in wound healing where they differentiate into
contractile myofibroblasts leading to wound closure. In non-healing chronic
wounds, fibroblasts fail to undertake differentiation. We established and used a 
human ex-vivo model of chronic wounds where fibroblasts can undergo normal
myofibroblast differentiation, or take on a non differentiable pathological
state. At the whole genome scale, we identified the genes that are differentially
regulated in these two cell fates. By coupling the search of evolutionary
conserved regulatory elements with global gene network expression changes, we
identified transcription factors potentially involved in myofibroblast
differentiation, and constructed a network of relationship between these key
factors. Among these, we found that TCF4, SOX9, EGR2 and FOXS1 are major
regulators of fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation. Conversely,
downregulation of MEOX2, SIX2 and MAF causes reprogramming of fibroblasts to
myofibroblasts even in absence of TGFbeta, the natural inducer of myofibroblast
differentiation. These results provide insight into the fibroblast
differentiation program and reveal a transcription factor network essential for
cellular reprogramming. They could lead to the development of new therapeutics to
treat fibroblast-related human pathologies. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 by the Wound Healing Society.

PMID: 26663515  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 15;76(4):891-901. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1519. Epub
2015 Dec 8.

A Small-Molecule Antagonist of the ß-Catenin/TCF4 Interaction Blocks the
Self-Renewal of Cancer Stem Cells and Suppresses Tumorigenesis.

Fang L(1), Zhu Q(1), Neuenschwander M(2), Specker E(2), Wulf-Goldenberg A(3),
Weis WI(4), von Kries JP(2), Birchmeier W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the
Helmholtz Society, Berlin, Germany. (2)Screening Unit, Leibniz-Institut fuer
Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany. (3)Experimental Pharmacology and
Oncology, Berlin, Germany. (4)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. (5)Cancer Research Program, Max Delbrück Center
for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Society, Berlin, Germany.
wbirch@mdc-berlin.de.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is a highly conserved pathway essential for embryogenesis
and tissue homeostasis. However, deregulation of this pathway can initiate and
promote human malignancies, especially of the colon and head and neck. Therefore,
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling represents an attractive target for cancer therapy. We
performed high-throughput screening using AlphaScreen and ELISA techniques to
identify small molecules that disrupt the critical interaction between ß-catenin 
and the transcription factor TCF4 required for signal transduction. We found that
compound LF3, a 4-thioureido-benzenesulfonamide derivative, robustly inhibited
this interaction. Biochemical assays revealed clues that the core structure of
LF3 was essential for inhibition. LF3 inhibited Wnt/ß-catenin signals in cells
with exogenous reporters and in colon cancer cells with endogenously high Wnt
activity. LF3 also suppressed features of cancer cells related to Wnt signaling, 
including high cell motility, cell-cycle progression, and the overexpression of
Wnt target genes. However, LF3 did not cause cell death or interfere with
cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Remarkably, the self-renewal capacity of
cancer stem cells was blocked by LF3 in concentration-dependent manners, as
examined by sphere formation of colon and head and neck cancer stem cells under
nonadherent conditions. Finally, LF3 reduced tumor growth and induced
differentiation in a mouse xenograft model of colon cancer. Collectively, our
results strongly suggest that LF3 is a specific inhibitor of canonical Wnt
signaling with anticancer activity that warrants further development for
preclinical and clinical studies as a novel cancer therapy. Cancer Res; 76(4);
891-901. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26645562  [PubMed - in process]


35. Neuroscience. 2016 Feb 9;314:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.043. Epub 
2015 Nov 25.

OSO paradigm - A rapid behavioral screening method for acute psychosocial stress 
reactivity in mice.

Brzózka MM(1), Unterbarnscheidt T(2), Schwab MH(3), Rossner MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Nussbaumstrasse 7,
80336 Munich, Germany. Electronic address: Magdalena.Brzozka@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, 37075
Göttingen, Germany; Cellular Neurophysiology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
Unterbarnscheidt.Tilmann@mh-hannover.de. (3)Max Planck Institute of Experimental 
Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, 37075 Göttingen, Germany; Cellular
Neurophysiology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. Electronic address: Schwab.Markus@mh-hannover.de. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Nussbaumstrasse 7, 80336 Munich,
Germany; Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3,
37075 Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: Moritz.Rossner@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Chronic psychosocial stress is an important environmental risk factor for the
development of psychiatric diseases. However, studying the impact of chronic
psychosocial stress in mice is time consuming and thus not optimally suited to
'screen' increasing numbers of genetically manipulated mouse models for
psychiatric endophenotypes. Moreover, many studies focus on restraint stress, a
strong physical stressor with limited relevance for psychiatric disorders. Here, 
we describe a simple and a rapid method based on the resident-intruder paradigm
to examine acute effects of mild psychosocial stress in mice. The OSO paradigm
(open field - social defeat - open field) compares behavioral consequences on
locomotor activity, anxiety and curiosity before and after exposure to acute
social defeat stress. We first evaluated OSO in male C57Bl/6 wildtype mice where 
a single episode of social defeat reduced locomotor activity, increased anxiety
and diminished exploratory behavior. Subsequently, we applied the OSO paradigm to
mouse models of two schizophrenia (SZ) risk genes. Transgenic mice with neuronal 
overexpression of Neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) type III showed increased risk-taking
behavior after acute stress exposure suggesting that NRG1 dysfunction is
associated with altered affective behavior. In contrast, Tcf4 transgenic mice
displayed a normal stress response which is in line with the postulated
predominant contribution of TCF4 to cognitive deficits of SZ. In conclusion, the 
OSO paradigm allows for rapid screening of selected psychosocial stress-induced
behavioral endophenotypes in mouse models of psychiatric diseases.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26628400  [PubMed - in process]


36. Mol Vis. 2015 Oct 30;21:1252-60. eCollection 2015.

Association of ZEB1 and TCF4 rs613872 changes with late onset Fuchs endothelial
corneal dystrophy in patients from northern India.

Gupta R(1), Kumawat BL(2), Paliwal P(1), Tandon R(2), Sharma N(2), Sen S(2),
Kashyap S(2), Nag TC(1), Vajpayee RB(3), Sharma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, AIIMS, New Delhi, India. (2)Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre
for Ophthalmic Sciences, AIIMS, New Delhi, India. (3)Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre
for Ophthalmic Sciences, AIIMS, New Delhi, India ; Center for Eye Research,
Australia, Northwest Academic Centre, University of Melbourne, Australia.

PURPOSE: Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) results in loss of vision
associated with progressive corneal edema and loss of corneal transparency. The
aim of the study was to evaluate changes in ZEB1, COL8A2, SLC4A11, and TCF4
rs613872 and correlate them with clinical findings.
METHODS: Eighty-two patients with clinically diagnosed FECD and 143 controls were
recruited during the period 2007-2012. Clinical details, pedigree information up 
to three generations, and 5 ml of blood samples were collected. Histopathological
and transmission electron microscopy studies were performed on host corneal
buttons from patients who underwent keratoplasty. Genomic DNA from blood was
processed for PCR amplification followed by direct sequencing to screen genetic
changes in the candidate genes. The pathogenic nature of the genetic variants was
assessed using Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) and MutationTaster.
RESULTS: The mean age at the onset of symptoms was 59.14±1.41years, the male to
female ratio was 1:1.5, and the mean specular count (endothelial cell density)
was 1629±93.62 cells/mm(2) with a mean central corneal thickness (CCT) of
617.30±15.73 µm. ZEB1 showed a novel variant IVS2+276 C/T in 14% of the cases, a 
novel nonsense p.Leu947stop mutation in one patient, two novel missense mutations
(p.Glu733Lys, p.Ala818Val) in one patient each, and one novel synonymous
variation (p.Ser234Ser) in two patients. Reported mutation p.Gln840Pro and five
polymorphisms were also identified. The TCF4 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs613872 was significantly higher in patients with FECD.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of genetic variations in ZEB1 and TCF4 SNP 
rs613872 in patients with FECD from northern India that suggests a possible role 
in disease pathogenesis and the regulation of endothelial cell density.

PMCID: PMC4638277
PMID: 26622166  [PubMed - in process]


37. Biol Open. 2015 Nov 30;4(12):1762-71. doi: 10.1242/bio.014696.

Introducing Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-associated mutations of TCF4 to Drosophila
daughterless.

Tamberg L(1), Sepp M(1), Timmusk T(1), Palgi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn
University of Technology, Akadeemia Rd.15, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (2)Laboratory 
of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of
Technology, Akadeemia Rd.15, Tallinn 12618, Estonia mari.palgi@ttu.ee.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is caused by haploinsufficiency of Transcription
factor 4 (TCF4), one of the three human class I basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors called E-proteins. Drosophila has a single E-protein,
Daughterless (Da), homologous to all three mammalian counterparts. Here we show
that human TCF4 can rescue Da deficiency during fruit fly nervous system
development. Overexpression of Da or TCF4 specifically in adult flies
significantly decreases their survival rates, indicating that these factors are
crucial even after development has been completed. We generated da transgenic
fruit fly strains with corresponding missense mutations R578H, R580W, R582P and
A614V found in TCF4 of PTHS patients and studied the impact of these mutations in
vivo. Overexpression of wild type Da as well as human TCF4 in progenitor tissues 
induced ectopic sensory bristles and the rough eye phenotype. By contrast,
overexpression of Da(R580W) and Da(R582P) that disrupt DNA binding reduced the
number of bristles and induced the rough eye phenotype with partial lack of
pigmentation, indicating that these act dominant negatively. Compared to the wild
type, Da(R578H) and Da(A614V) were less potent in induction of ectopic bristles
and the rough eye phenotype, respectively, suggesting that these are hypomorphic.
All studied PTHS-associated mutations that we introduced into Da led to similar
effects in vivo as the same mutations in TCF4 in vitro. Consequently, our
Drosophila models of PTHS are applicable for further studies aiming to unravel
the molecular mechanisms of this disorder.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4736037
PMID: 26621827  [PubMed]


38. Gastroenterology. 2016 Mar;150(3):659-671.e16. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.11.041.
Epub 2015 Nov 24.

OVOL2, an Inhibitor of WNT Signaling, Reduces Invasive Activities of Human and
Mouse Cancer Cells and Is Down-regulated in Human Colorectal Tumors.

Ye GD(1), Sun GB(1), Jiao P(1), Chen C(1), Liu QF(1), Huang XL(1), Zhang R(2),
Cai WY(1), Li SN(1), Wu JF(1), Liu YJ(1), Wu RS(1), Xie YY(1), Chan EC(3), Liou
YC(4), Li BA(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China;
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Republic of Singapore. (3)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory
Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Biological
Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
Electronic address: bali@xmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Activation of WNT signaling promotes the invasive activities
of several types of cancer cells, but it is not clear if it regulates the same
processes in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, or what mechanisms are involved. We
studied the expression and function of OVOL2, a member of the Ovo family of
conserved zinc-finger transcription factors regulated by the WNT signaling
pathway, in intestinal tumors of mice and human beings.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of OVOL2 protein and messenger RNA in CRC
cell lines and tissue arrays, as well as CRC samples from patients who underwent 
surgery at Xiamen University in China from 2009 to 2012; clinical information
also was collected. CRC cell lines (SW620) were infected with lentivirus
expressing OVOL2, analyzed in migration and invasion assays, and injected into
nude mice to assess tumor growth and metastasis. Tandem affinity purification was
used to purify the OVOL2-containing complex from CRC cells; the complex was
analyzed by liquid chromatography, tandem mass spectrometry, and
immunoprecipitation experiments. Gene promoter activities were measured in
luciferase reporter assays. We analyzed mice with an intestine-specific
disruption of Ovol2 (Ovol2(flox/+) transgenic mice), as well as Apc(min/+) mice; 
these mice were crossed and analyzed.
RESULTS: Analysis of data from patients indicated that the levels of OVOL2
messenger RNA were significantly lower in colon carcinomas than adenomas, and
decreased significantly as carcinomas progressed from grades 2 to 4.
Immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue array of 275 CRC samples showed a
negative association between tumor stage and OVOL2 level. Overexpression of OVOL2
in SW620 cells decreased their migration and invasion, reduced markers of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and suppressed their metastasis as
xenograft tumors in nude mice; knockdown of OVOL2 caused LS174T cells to
transition from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotypes. OVOL2 bound T-cell factor
(TCF)4 and ß-catenin, facilitating recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 to the
TCF4-ß-catenin complex; this inhibited expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition-related genes regulated by WNT, such as SLUG, in CRC cell lines. OVOL2
was a downstream target of WNT signaling in LS174T and SW480 cells. The OVOL2
promoter was hypermethylated in late-stage CRC specimens from patients and
in SW620 cells; hypermethylation resulted in OVOL2 down-regulation and an
inability to inhibit WNT signaling. Disruption of Ovol2 in Apc(min/+) mice
increased WNT activity in intestinal tissues and the formation of invasive
intestinal tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: OVOL2 is a colorectal tumor suppressor that blocks WNT signaling by 
facilitating the recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 to the TCF4-ß-catenin
complex. Strategies to increase levels of OVOL2 might be developed to reduce
colorectal tumor progression and metastasis.

Copyright © 2016 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26619963  [PubMed - in process]


39. Oncoimmunology. 2015 Jun 26;4(12):e1052932. eCollection 2015.

Tumors induce immune tolerance through activation of ß-catenin/TCF4 signaling in 
dendritic cells: A novel therapeutic target for cancer immunotherapy.

Suryawanshi A(1), Manicassamy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology; Inflammation, and Tolerance Program; GRU Cancer Center;
Georgia Regents University ; Augusta, GA USA.

Tumors promote immune suppression and dendritic cells (DCs) play a key role in
this. However, signaling networks that program DCs to induce immune suppression
are unknown. In our recent study, we showed that tumors activate ß-catenin/TCF4
in DCs programming them to a regulatory state, which promotes T regulatory
responses while suppresses effector T cell responses. Thus, targeting
DCs-ß-catenin pathway represents a promising target for anticancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4635893
PMID: 26587326  [PubMed]


40. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:468627. doi: 10.1155/2015/468627. Epub 2015 Oct 4.

The Protective Effect of Transcription Factor 7-Like 2 Risk Allele rs7903146
against Elevated Fasting Plasma Triglyceride in Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analysis.

Wang S(1), Song K(2), Srivastava R(3), Fathzadeh M(3), Li N(3), Mani A(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Geriatric Cardiology Department, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China ; Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. (2)The
Geriatric Cardiology Department, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China ; Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, No. 28, Fuxing
Road, Beijing 100853, China. (3)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511,
USA. (4)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA ; Department of
Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

BACKGROUND: The results from published studies regarding association of
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variant rs7903146 with dyslipidemia have
been conflicting and inconclusive.
METHODS: We carried out a meta-analysis that aimed to investigate the association
of the rs7903146 variant with plasma lipid levels using electronic database and
published studies. Data was extracted by a standard algorithm. Dominant,
recessive, homozygote, and heterozygote comparison models were utilized.
RESULTS: 24 studies incorporating 52,785 subjects were included in this
meta-analysis. Overall, the minor allele (T) was associated with lower risk for
hypertriglyceridemia in subjects with type 2 diabetes (dominant model: SMD =
-0.04, 95% CI (-0.08, 0.00), P = 0.048, P heterogeneity = 0.47; recessive model: 
SMD = -0.10, 95% CI (-0.18, -0.02), P = 0.01, P heterogeneity = 0.56). No
association was found between minor (T) allele and plasma TC, LDL-c, or HDL-c
levels in subjects with type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome (MetS) and no
association was found between minor (T) allele and plasma TG levels in
nondiabetic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis indicated the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and low plasma triglyceride (TG) level in subjects with type 2
diabetes. No association was found between rs7903146 variant and plasma lipids in
nondiabetic subjects.

PMCID: PMC4631899
PMID: 26576435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Placenta. 2015 Dec;36(12):1412-8. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.10.013. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

Differentiation of first trimester cytotrophoblast to extravillous trophoblast
involves an epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

DaSilva-Arnold S(1), James JL(2), Al-Khan A(1), Zamudio S(1), Illsley NP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Abnormal Placentation,
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Abnormal Placentation,
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
nillsley@hackensackumc.org.

The transformation of cytotrophoblast (CTB) to extravillous trophoblast (EVT) is 
an essential process for placental implantation. EVT generated at the tips of the
anchoring villi migrate away from the placenta and invade the endometrium and
maternal spiral arteries, where they modulate maternal immune responses and
remodel the arteries into high-volume conduits to facilitate uteroplacental blood
flow. The process of EVT differentiation has several factors in common with the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) observed in embryonic development,
wound healing and cancer metastasis. We hypothesized that the generation of
invasive EVT from CTB was a form of EMT. We isolated paired CTB and EVT from
first trimester placentae, and compared their gene expression using a PCR array
comprising probes for genes involved in EMT. Out of 84 genes, 24 were
down-regulated in EVT compared to CTB, including epithelial markers such as
E-cadherin (-11-fold) and occludin (-75-fold). Another 30 genes were up-regulated
in EVT compared to CTB including mesenchymal markers such as vimentin (235-fold) 
and fibronectin (107-fold) as well as the matrix metalloproteinases, MMP2 and
MMP9 (357-fold, 129-fold). These alterations also included major increases in the
ZEB2 (zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2, 198-fold) and TCF4 (transcription
factor 4, 18-fold) transcription factors, suggesting possible stimulatory
mechanisms. There was substantial up-regulation of the genes encoding TGFß1 and
TGFß2 (48-fold, 115-fold), which may contribute to the maintenance of the
mesenchymal-like phenotype. We conclude that transformation of CTB to EVT is
consistent with an EMT, although the differences with other types of EMT suggest 
this may be a unique form.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545962  [PubMed - in process]


42. Mol Oncol. 2016 Feb;10(2):224-39. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.10.005. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

The canonical Wnt pathway regulates the metastasis-promoting mucin MUC4 in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Pai P(1), Rachagani S(1), Lakshmanan I(1), Macha MA(1), Sheinin Y(2), Smith
LM(3), Ponnusamy MP(4), Batra SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and 
Microbiology, UNMC, Omaha, NE 68198-5900, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
UNMC College of Public Health, UNMC, Omaha, NE 68198-4375, USA. (4)Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC),
Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA; Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, UNMC, Omaha, NE
68198, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA; Eppley Institute for
Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, UNMC, Omaha, NE 68198-5950, USA; Fred and
Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, UNMC, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. Electronic address:
sbatra@unmc.edu.

Aberrant Wnt signaling frequently occurs in pancreatic cancer (PC) and
contributes to disease progression/metastases. Likewise, the transmembrane-mucin 
MUC4 is expressed de novo in early pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanINs) 
and incrementally increases with PC progression, contributing to metastasis. To
determine the mechanism of MUC4 upregulation in PC, we examined factors
deregulated in early PC progression, such as Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. MUC4
promoter analysis revealed the presence of three putative TCF/LEF-binding sites, 
leading us to hypothesize that MUC4 can be regulated by ß-catenin.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of rapid autopsy PC tissues showed a
correlation between MUC4 and cytosolic/nuclear ß-catenin expression. Knock down
(KD) of ß-catenin in CD18/HPAF and T3M4 cell lines resulted in decreased MUC4
transcript and protein. Three MUC4 promoter luciferase constructs, p3778, p3000, 
and p2700, were generated. The construct p3778, encompassing the entire MUC4
promoter, elicited increased luciferase activity in the presence of stabilized
ß-catenin. Mutation of the TCF/LEF site closest to the transcription start site
(i.e., -2629/-2612) and furthest from the start site (i.e., -3425/-3408) reduced 
MUC4 promoter luciferase activity. Transfection with dominant negative TCF4
decreased MUC4 transcript and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
confirmed enrichment of ß-catenin on -2629/-2612 and -3425/-3408 of the MUC4
promoter in CD18/HPAF. Functionally, CD18/HPAF and T3M4 ß-catenin KD cells showed
decreased migration and decreased Vimentin, N-cadherin, and pERK1/2 expression.
Tumorigenicity studies in athymic nude mice showed CD18/HPAF ß-catenin KD cells
significantly reduced primary tumor sizes and metastases compared to scrambled
control cells. We show for the first time that ß-catenin directly governs MUC4 in
PC.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4740200 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26526617  [PubMed - in process]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 28;10(10):e0141589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141589.
eCollection 2015.

Divergent Androgen Receptor and Beta-Catenin Signaling in Prostate Cancer Cells.

Lee E(1), Ha S(2), Logan SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America; Stem Cell Biology
Program, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of
America. (2)Department of Urology New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, United States of America. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States
of America; Department of Urology New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, United States of America; Stem Cell Biology Program, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America.

Despite decades of effort to develop effective therapy and to identify promising 
new drugs, prostate cancer is lethal once it progresses to castration-resistant
disease. Studies show mis-regulation of multiple pathways in castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), reflecting the heterogeneity of the tumors and also
hinting that targeting androgen receptor (AR) pathway alone might not be
sufficient to treat CRPC. In this study, we present evidence that the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway might be activated in prostate cancer cells after
androgen-deprivation to promote androgen-independent growth, partly through
enhanced interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4. Androgen-independent prostate cancer
cells were more prone to activate a Wnt-reporter, and inhibition of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway increased sensitivity of these cells to the
second-generation antiandrogen, enzalutamide. Combined treatment of enzalutamide 
and Wnt/ß-catenin inhibitor showed increased growth repression in both
androgen-dependent and -independent prostate cancer cells, suggesting therapeutic
potential for this approach.

PMCID: PMC4624871
PMID: 26509262  [PubMed - in process]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):629-37. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.103. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Rock2 stabilizes ß-catenin to promote tumor invasion and metastasis in colorectal
cancer.

Qiu Y(1), Yuan R(1), Zhang S(2), Chen L(1), Huang D(1), Hao H(1), Shao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center 
of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, 330006, China. (2)Department of General
Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006,
China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center 
of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Key
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang, 330006, China. Electronic address:
shao5022@163.com.

Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 2 (Rock2) is an effector for
the small GTPase Rho and plays an important role in tumor progression and
metastasis. However, the effect of Rock2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) still remains
unclear. In this study, we found that Rock2 expression was markedly increased in 
clinical CRC tissues compared with adjacent non-cancerous tissues. High
expression of Rock2 was correlated with tumor metastasis and poor prognosis in
CRC. In addition, the knockdown of Rock2 suppressed the invasion and metastasis
of CRC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we found that the
ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway contributed to the effects of Rock2 in CRC cells, and
Rock2 stabilized ß-catenin by preventing its ubiquitination and degradation.
Taken together, this novel pathway for ß-catenin control plays a biologically
relevant role in CRC metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26505794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Front Oncol. 2015 Oct 8;5:218. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00218. eCollection 2015.

Decreased RXRa is Associated with Increased ß-Catenin/TCF4 in (56)Fe-Induced
Intestinal Tumors.

Suman S(1), Kumar S(1), Fornace AJ Jr(2), Datta K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University , Washington, DC , USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University , Washington, DC , USA ;
Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz
University , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia.

Although it is known that accumulation of oncogenic ß-catenin is critical for
intestinal tumorigenesis, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been fully
explored. Post-translational ß-catenin level is regulated via the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC)-dependent as well as the APC-independent
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP). Employing an APC-mutant mouse model
(APC(Min/+)) the present study aimed to investigate the status of RXRa, an
APC-independent factor involved in targeting ß-catenin to UPP for degradation, in
tumor-bearing and tumor-free areas of intestine after exposure to energetic
(56)Fe ions. APC(Min/+) mice were exposed to energetic (56)Fe ions (4 or 1.6<U+2009>Gy) 
and intestinal tumor samples and tumor-free normal intestinal samples were
collected 100-110<U+2009>days after exposure. The status of TCF4, ß-catenin, cyclin D1, 
and RXRa was examined using immunohistochemistry and immunoblots. We observed
increased accumulation of the transcription factor TCF4 and its co-activator
ß-catenin as well as their downstream oncogenic target protein cyclin-D1 in
(56)Fe ion-induced intestinal tumors. Further, decreased expression of RXRa in
tumors as well as in adjacent normal epithelium was indicative of perturbations
in ß-catenin proteasomal-targeting machinery. This indicates that decreased UPP
targeting of ß-catenin due to downregulation of RXRa can contribute to further
accumulation of ß-catenin and to (56)Fe-induced tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4597120
PMID: 26500891  [PubMed]


46. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jan;1862(1):121-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.10.012.
Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Comparative effects of diet and carcinogen on microRNA expression in the stem
cell niche of the mouse colonic crypt.

Shah MS(1), Kim E(2), Davidson LA(3), Knight JM(4), Zoh RS(5), Goldsby JS(6),
Callaway ES(3), Zhou B(7), Ivanov I(8), Chapkin RS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Integrative Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, United States; Intercollegiate Faculty of Genetics, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, United States; Divison of Endocrinology,
Boston Children's Hospital, United States; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. (2)Program in Integrative Nutrition & 
Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States;
Departments of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, United States. (3)Program in Integrative Nutrition & Complex
Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States. (4)Program in
Integrative Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, United States; Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX, United States; Center for Translational Environmental Health Research, Texas 
A&M University, College Station, TX, United States. (5)Program in Integrative
Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United
States; Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States.
(6)Program in Integrative Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, United States; Center for Translational Environmental Health
Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States. (7)Veterinary
Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United
States; Center for Translational Environmental Health Research, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, United States. (8)Program in Integrative
Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United
States; Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, United States; Center for Translational Environmental Health
Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States. (9)Program in
Integrative Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, United States; Intercollegiate Faculty of Genetics, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, United States; Center for Translational Environmental Health
Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States. Electronic
address: r-chapkin@tamu.edu.

There is mounting evidence that noncoding microRNAs (miRNA) are modulated by
select chemoprotective dietary agents. For example, recently we demonstrated that
the unique combination of dietary fish oil (containing n-3 fatty acids) plus
pectin (fermented to butyrate in the colon) (FPA) up-regulates a subset of
putative tumor suppressor miRNAs in intestinal mucosa, and down-regulates their
predicted target genes following carcinogen exposure as compared to control (corn
oil plus cellulose (CCA)) diet. To further elucidate the biological effects of
diet and carcinogen modulated miR's in the colon, we verified that miR-26b and
miR-203 directly target PDE4B and TCF4, respectively. Since perturbations in
adult stem cell dynamics are generally believed to represent an early step in
colon tumorigenesis and to better understand how the colonic stem cell population
responds to environmental factors such as diet and carcinogen, we additionally
determined the effects of the chemoprotective FPA diet on miRNAs and mRNAs in
colonic stem cells obtained from Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-creER(T2) knock-in mice.
Following global miRNA profiling, 26 miRNAs (P<0.05) were differentially
expressed in Lgr5(high) stem cells as compared to Lgr5(negative) differentiated
cells. FPA treatment up-regulated miR-19b, miR-26b and miR-203 expression as
compared to CCA specifically in Lgr5(high) cells. In contrast, in Lgr5(negative) 
cells, only miR-19b and its indirect target PTK2B were modulated by the FPA diet.
These data indicate for the first time that select dietary cues can impact stem
cell regulatory networks, in part, by modulating the steady-state levels of
miRNAs. To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize Lgr5(+) reporter
mice to determine the impact of diet and carcinogen on miRNA expression in
colonic stem cells and their progeny.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4674324 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26493444  [PubMed - in process]


47. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 19. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.382. [Epub ahead of print]

N-cadherin functions as a growth suppressor in a model of K-ras-induced PanIN.

Su Y(1), Li J(1), Shi C(2,)(3), Hruban RH(3), Radice GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Translational Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and 
Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology and Oncology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer
Research Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Cadherin subtype switching from E-cadherin to N-cadherin is associated with the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process required for invasion and
dissemination of carcinoma cells. We found that N-cadherin is expressed in human 
and mouse pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN), suggesting that
N-cadherin may also have a role in early-stage pancreatic cancer. To investigate 
the role of N-cadherin in mouse PanIN (mPanIN), we simultaneously activated
oncogenic K-ras(G12D) and deleted the N-cadherin (Cdh2) gene in the murine
pancreas. Genetic ablation of N-cadherin (N-cad KO) caused hyperproliferation,
accelerated mPanIN progression, and early tumor development in K-ras(G12D) mice. 
Decreased E-cadherin and redistribution of ß-catenin accompanied the loss of
N-cadherin in pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (PDEC). Nuclear accumulation of 
ß-catenin and its transcription co-activator Tcf4 led to activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin target genes. Unexpectedly, loss of N-cadherin in the K-ras(G12D)
model resulted in increased mPanIN progression and tumor incidence. These in vivo
results demonstrate for the first time that N-cadherin functions as a growth
suppressor in the context of oncogenic K-ras.Oncogene advance online publication,
19 October 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.382.

PMID: 26477318  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Nov 16;43(20):9680-93. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1056. Epub
2015 Oct 17.

Epigenetic program and transcription factor circuitry of dendritic cell
development.

Lin Q(1), Chauvistré H(2), Costa IG(3), Gusmao EG(4), Mitzka S(1), Hänzelmann
S(4), Baying B(5), Klisch T(1), Moriggl R(6), Hennuy B(7), Smeets H(8), Hoffmann 
K(9), Benes V(5), Seré K(1), Zenke M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Cell Biology, RWTH Aachen 
University Medical School, 52074 Aachen, Germany Helmholtz Institute for
Biomedical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Cell Biology, RWTH Aachen 
University Medical School, 52074 Aachen, Germany Helmholtz Institute for
Biomedical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany Department 
of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany. (3)IZKF
Computational Biology Research Group, RWTH Aachen University Medical School,
52074 Aachen, Germany Aachen Institute for Advanced Study in Computational
Engineering Science (AICES), RWTH Aachen University, 52062 Aachen, Germany.
(4)IZKF Computational Biology Research Group, RWTH Aachen University Medical
School, 52074 Aachen, Germany. (5)Genomics Core Facilities GeneCore, European
Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, University of Veterinary Medicine,
Medical University Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (7)GIGA-Genomics, University of 
Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium. (8)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands
Research Schools CARIM and GROW, Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands. (9)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen
University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. (10)Institute for Biomedical Engineering,
Department of Cell Biology, RWTH Aachen University Medical School, 52074 Aachen, 
Germany Helmholtz Institute for Biomedical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University,
52074 Aachen, Germany martin.zenke@rwth-aachen.de.

Dendritic cells (DC) are professional antigen presenting cells that develop from 
hematopoietic stem cells through successive steps of lineage commitment and
differentiation. Multipotent progenitors (MPP) are committed to DC restricted
common DC progenitors (CDP), which differentiate into specific DC subsets,
classical DC (cDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). To determine epigenetic states and 
regulatory circuitries during DC differentiation, we measured consecutive changes
of genome-wide gene expression, histone modification and transcription factor
occupancy during the sequel MPP-CDP-cDC/pDC. Specific histone marks in CDP reveal
a DC-primed epigenetic signature, which is maintained and reinforced during DC
differentiation. Epigenetic marks and transcription factor PU.1 occupancy
increasingly coincide upon DC differentiation. By integrating PU.1 occupancy and 
gene expression we devised a transcription factor regulatory circuitry for DC
commitment and subset specification. The circuitry provides the transcription
factor hierarchy that drives the sequel MPP-CDP-cDC/pDC, including Irf4, Irf8,
Tcf4, Spib and Stat factors. The circuitry also includes feedback loops inferred 
for individual or multiple factors, which stabilize distinct stages of DC
development and DC subsets. In summary, here we describe the basic regulatory
circuitry of transcription factors that drives DC development.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4787753
PMID: 26476451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Food Chem Toxicol. 2015 Dec;86:154-62. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2015.10.005. Epub 2015 
Oct 22.

Aluminum trichloride impairs bone and downregulates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway in young growing rats.

Sun X(1), Cao Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Liu S(2), Xu F(1), Che J(1), Zhu Y(3), Li Y(4),
Pan C(5), Liang W(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin
150030, China. (2)School of Animal Biology, The University of Western Australia, 
35 Stirling Highway Crawley, WA 6009, Australia. (3)Institute of Special Animal
and Plant Sciences of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun 130112,
China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University,
Harbin 150030, China. Electronic address: liyanfei@neau.edu.cn. (5)College of
Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China;
Harbin Pharmaceutical Group Bio-vaccine Limited Liability Company, Harbin 150069,
China.

Aluminum (Al) can accumulate in bone and cause bone diseases. Few studies have
investigated molecular mechanism of Al-induced bone diseases. Thus, in this
study, rats were orally exposed to 0 (control group) and 0.4 g/L aluminum
trichloride (AlCl3) (treatment group) for 30, 60, 90 or 120 days, respectively.
The Al content of femora and serum, bone histological structure, bone mineral
density (BMD) of the distal and proximal femoral metaphysis and Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway (the mRNA expressions of Wnt3a, Fzd2, LRP-5, ß-catenin, Tcf4,
cyclin D1 and c-Myc, the protein levels of Wnt3a and ß-catenin, the activities of
Fzd2 and LRP-5) in rat femora were determined on day 30, 60, 90 or 120,
respectively. The results showed that the Al contents of femora and serum were
increased, the BMD of the distal and proximal femoral metaphysis were decreased, 
the femora histological structure were disrupted, the mRNA expressions of Wnt3a, 
Fzd2, LRP-5, ß-catenin, Tcf4, cyclin D1 and c-Myc, the protein levels of Wnt3a
and ß-catenin, the activities of Fzd2 and LRP-5 were all decreased in the
treatment group compared with the control group with time prolonged. These
results indicated that AlCl3 impaired femora by inhibiting the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway in young growing rats.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26474975  [PubMed - in process]


50. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:640234. doi: 10.1155/2015/640234. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy: Strong Association with rs613872 Not
Paralleled by Changes in Corneal Endothelial TCF4 mRNA Level.

Oldak M(1), Ruszkowska E(2), Udziela M(3), Ozieblo D(4), Binczyk E(3), Sciezynska
A(5), Ploski R(6), Szaflik JP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, World Hearing Center, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland ; Department of Histology and Embryology,
Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Genetics, World
Hearing Center, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland 
; Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw,
Poland ; Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Genetics, World Hearing Center, Institute of
Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Department of Histology
and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. (6)Department of
Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a common corneal endotheliopathy
with a complex and heterogeneous genetic background. Different variants in the
TCF4 gene have been strongly associated with the development of FECD. TCF4
encodes the E2-2 transcription factor but the link between the strong
susceptibility locus and disease mechanism remains elusive. Here, we confirm a
strong positive association between TCF4 single nucleotide polymorphism rs613872 
and FECD in Polish patients (OR = 12.95, 95% CI: 8.63-19.42, <U+03C7> (2) = 189.5, p <
0.0001). We show that TCF4 expression at the mRNA level in corneal endothelium (n
= 63) does not differ significantly between individuals with a particular TCF4
genotype. It is also not altered in FECD patients as compared to control samples.
The data suggest that changes in the transcript level containing constitutive
TCF4 exon encoding the amino-terminal part of the protein seem not to contribute 
to disease pathogenesis. However, considering the strong association of TCF4
allelic variants with FECD, genotyping of TCF4 risk alleles may be important in
the clinical practice.

PMCID: PMC4588027
PMID: 26451375  [PubMed - in process]


51. Oncoimmunology. 2015 Jul 9;4(11):e1044712. eCollection 2015.

COX-2 promotes metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by mediating interactions
between cancer cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells.

Li ZL(1), Ye SB(1), OuYang LY(1), Zhang H(1), Chen YS(2), He J(1), Chen QY(3),
Qian CN(3), Zhang XS(1), Cui J(4), Zeng YX(5), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China; Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine; Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center (SYSUCC) ;
Guangzhou, China ; Department of Biotherapy; Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center
(SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China; 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine; Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center (SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China ; Department of Radiotherapy; Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center (SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine; Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center (SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China ;
Department of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma; Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center
(SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the
Ministry of Education; State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol; College of Life
Sciences; Sun Yat-sen University ; Guangzhou, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of
Oncology in South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine; Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center (SYSUCC) ; Guangzhou, China.

The expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) is a common feature of 
cancer, but its biological roles and molecular mechanism remain unclear. Here, we
investigated a molecular link between MDSC expansion and tumor cell metastasis in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). We demonstrated that MDSCs expanded and were
positively correlated with the elevated tumor COX-2 expression and serum IL-6
levels in NPC patients. Importantly, COX-2 and MDSCs were poor predictors of
patient disease-free survival (DFS). Knocking down tumor COX-2 expression
hampered functional TW03-mediated-MDSC cell (T-MDSC) induction with IL-6
blocking. We identified that T-MDSCs promoted NPC cell migration and invasion by 
triggering the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) on cell-to-cell contact,
and T-MDSCs enhanced tumor experimental lung metastasis in vivo. Interestingly,
the contact between T-MDSCs and NPC cells enhanced tumor COX-2 expression, which 
subsequently activated the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway, resulting in EMT of the cancer
cells. Blocking transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) or inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) significantly abolished the T-MDSC-induced upregulation of COX-2 
and EMT scores in NPC cells, whereas the administration of TGFß or L-arginine
supplements upregulated COX-2 expression and EMT scores in NPC cells. These
findings reveal that COX-2 is a key factor mediating the interaction between
MDSCs and tumor cells, suggesting that the inhibition of COX-2 or MDSCs has the
potential to suppress NPC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4590030 [Available on 2016-07-09]
PMID: 26451317  [PubMed]


52. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 8;5:14983. doi: 10.1038/srep14983.

Epigenetic changes and alternate promoter usage by human colon cancers for
expressing DCLK1-isoforms: Clinical Implications.

O'Connell MR(1), Sarkar S(1), Luthra GK(2), Okugawa Y(3,)(4), Toiyama Y(4),
Gajjar AH(5), Qiu S(6), Goel A(3), Singh P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX.
(2)Gastroenterology Division in Internal Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX.
(3)Gastrointestinal Cancer Research Laboratory, Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Charles A. Sammons Cancer Center and Baylor
Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Gastrointestinal and Pediatric Surgery, Division of Reparative
Medicine, Institute of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie
University, Mie 514-8507, Japan. (5)Surgery, UTMB, Galveston, TX. (6)Pathology,
UTMB, Galveston, TX.

DCLK1 specifically marks colon/pancreatic cancers in mice, and is expressed by
human colon adenocarcinomas (hCRCs). Down-regulation of DCLK1 results in loss of 
cancer-stem-cells (CSCs), and inhibits spheroidal/xenograft growths from
hCRC-cells. The 5'-promoter of DCLK1-gene is reportedly hypermethylated in hCRCs,
resulting in loss of expression of DCLK1-transcripts, originating from
5'(a)-promoter (termed DCLK1-L, in here). However, in mouse colon-tumors,
5'-promoter of DCLK1-gene remains unchanged, and DCLK1-L, originating from
5'(a)-promoter, is expressed. We hypothesized that elevated levels of
DCLK1-protein in hCRC-cells, may be transcribed/translated from an
alternate-promoter. Several in silico and molecular biology approaches were used 
to test our hypothesis. We report for the first time that majority of hCRCs
express short-transcripts of DCLK1 (termed DCLK1-S, in here) from an alternate
ß-promoter in IntronV of the gene, while normal-colons mainly express DCLK1-L
from 5'(a)-promoter. We additionally report an important role of ß-catenin and
TCF4/LEF binding-sites for activating (a)-promoter, while activated NF-<U+03BA>Bp65
(bound to NF-<U+03BA>B-cis-element), activates (ß)-promoter in cancer-cells. DCLK1-S
expression was examined in a cohort of 92 CRC patients; high-expressors had
significantly worse overall-survival compared to low-expressors. Our novel
findings' regarding usage of alternate (ß)-promoter by hCRCs, suggests that
DCLK1-S may represent an important target for preventing/inhibiting
colon-cancers, and for eliminating colon-CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4597220
PMID: 26447334  [PubMed - in process]


53. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 8;44(1):387-401. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1023. Epub 2015 
Oct 7.

Mechanism of Wnt signaling induced down regulation of mrhl long non-coding RNA in
mouse spermatogonial cells.

Akhade VS(1), Dighe SN(1), Kataruka S(1), Rao MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur P.O., Bangalore 560064, India. (2)From the
Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur P.O., Bangalore 560064, India mrsrao@jncasr.ac.in.

Long non coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as important regulators of various
biological processes. LncRNAs also behave as response elements or targets of
signaling pathway(s) mediating cellular function. Wnt signaling is important in
regulating mammalian spermatogenesis. Mrhl RNA negatively regulates canonical Wnt
pathway and gets down regulated upon Wnt signaling activation in mouse
spermatogonial cells. Also, mrhl RNA regulates expression of genes pertaining to 
Wnt pathway and spermatogenesis by binding to chromatin. In the present study, we
delineate the detailed molecular mechanism of Wnt signaling induced mrhl RNA down
regulation in mouse spermatogonial cells. Mrhl RNA has an independent
transcription unit and our various experiments like Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
(in cell line as well as mouse testis) and shRNA mediated down regulation
convincingly show that ß-catenin and TCF4, which are the key effector proteins of
the Wnt signaling pathway are required for down regulation of mrhl RNA. We have
identified Ctbp1 as the co-repressor and its occupancy on mrhl RNA promoter
depends on both ß-catenin and TCF4. Upon Wnt signaling activation, Ctbp1 mediated
histone repression marks increase at the mrhl RNA promoter. We also demonstrate
that Wnt signaling induced mrhl RNA down regulation results in an up regulation
of various meiotic differentiation marker genes.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4705645
PMID: 26446991  [PubMed - in process]


54. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(15):6549-56.

Mechanism of Chemoprevention against Colon Cancer Cells Using Combined Gelam
Honey and Ginger Extract via mTOR and Wnt/ß-catenin Pathways.

Wee LH(1), Morad NA, Aan GJ, Makpol S, Wan Ngah WZ, Mohd Yusof YA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Malaysia E-mail : anum@medic.ukm.my;
rahmatyasmin@yahoo.com.

The PI3K-Akt-mTOR, Wnt/ß-catenin and apoptosis signaling pathways have been shown
to be involved in genesis of colorectal cancer (CRC). The aim of this study was
to elucidate whether combination of Gelam honey and ginger might have
chemopreventive properties in HT29 colon cancer cells by modulating the mTOR,
Wnt/ß-catenin and apoptosis signaling pathways. Treatment with Gelam honey and
ginger reduced the viability of the HT29 cells dose dependently with IC50 values 
of 88 mg/ml and 2.15 mg/ml respectively, their while the combined treatment of 2 
mg/ml of ginger with 31 mg/ml of Gelam honey inhibited growth of most HT29 cells.
Gelam honey, ginger and combination induced apoptosis in a dose dependent manner 
with the combined treatment exhibiting the highest apoptosis rate. The combined
treatment downregulated the gene expressions of Akt, mTOR, Raptor, Rictor,
ß-catenin, Gsk3ß, Tcf4 and cyclin D1 while cytochrome C and caspase 3 genes were 
shown to be upregulated. In conclusion, the combination of Gelam honey and ginger
may serve as a potential therapy in the treatment of colorectal cancer through
inhibiton of mTOR, Wnt/ß catenin signaling pathways and induction of apoptosis
pathway.

PMID: 26434873  [PubMed - in process]


55. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2015 Sep 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Tcf4 transgenic female mice display delayed adaptation in an auditory latent
inhibition paradigm.

Brzózka MM(1), Rossner MJ(2,)(3), de Hoz L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Nussbaumstr. 7, 80336, Munich, Germany.
(2)Molecular and Behavioral Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Nussbaumstr. 7, 80336, Munich, Germany.
Moritz.Rossner@med.uni-muenchen.de. (3)Department of Neurogenetics,
Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Str. 3, 37075,
Göttingen, Germany. Moritz.Rossner@med.uni-muenchen.de. (4)Department of
Neurogenetics, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Str.
3, 37075, Göttingen, Germany. de_Hoz@em.mpg.de.

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a severe mental disorder affecting about 1 % of the human
population. Patients show severe deficits in cognitive processing often
characterized by an improper filtering of environmental stimuli. Independent
genome-wide association studies confirmed a number of risk variants for SZ
including several associated with the gene encoding the transcription factor 4
(TCF4). TCF4 is widely expressed in the central nervous system of mice and humans
and seems to be important for brain development. Transgenic mice overexpressing
murine Tcf4 (Tcf4tg) in the adult brain display cognitive impairments and
sensorimotor gating disturbances. To address the question of whether increased
Tcf4 gene dosage may affect cognitive flexibility in an auditory associative
task, we tested latent inhibition (LI) in female Tcf4tg mice. LI is a widely
accepted translational endophenotype of SZ and results from a maladaptive delay
in switching a response to a previously unconditioned stimulus when this becomes 
conditioned. Using an Audiobox, we pre-exposed Tcf4tg mice and their wild-type
littermates to either a 3- or a 12-kHz tone before conditioning them to a 12-kHz 
tone. Tcf4tg animals pre-exposed to a 12-kHz tone showed significantly delayed
conditioning when the previously unconditioned tone became associated with an air
puff. These results support findings that associate TCF4 dysfunction with
cognitive inflexibility and improper filtering of sensory stimuli observed in SZ 
patients.

PMID: 26404636  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015 Dec;133(12):1386-91. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2015.3430.

Correlation of Severity of Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy With Triplet
Repeat Expansion in TCF4.

Soliman AZ(1), Xing C(2), Radwan SH(3), Gong X(4), Mootha VV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt2Department of
Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(2)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt4Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas. (5)Department of Ophthalmology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas3McDermott Center for
Human Growth and Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas.

Comment in
    JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015 Dec;133(12):1392.

IMPORTANCE: The CTG18.1 triplet repeat expansion in TCF4 has recently been found 
to be a common functional variant contributing significant risk to the
development of Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in Eurasian
populations.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of the expanded CTG18.1 allele of TCF4 on
FECD severity and to correlate CTG triplet repeat allele length to the severity
of FECD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In a cross-sectional analysis, we studied 139 
index cases (probands and unrelated individuals) with FECD recruited from a
cornea referral practice at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, from April 2010 through February 2015. The triplet repeat polymorphism
CTG18.1 was genotyped using a combination of short tandem repeat analysis,
triplet repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction assay, and Southern blot
analysis. Severity of FECD was graded using a modified Krachmer grading system
(severity scale of 0-6 based on extent of confluent guttae).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The CTG triplet repeat length of the largest allele
was compared with the Krachmer grade of FECD severity, keratoplasty proportion,
and central corneal thickness in the white subset.
RESULTS: Eighty-five of 122 white index cases with FECD (69.7%) harbored the
triplet repeat expansion. The mean (SD) Krachmer grade was 5.61 (0.76) in the
group with the repeat expansion compared with 5.11 (1.05) in the group without
the expanded repeats (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.01). Forty-seven participants with the repeat
expansion (55.3%) had undergone keratoplasty at the time of recruitment, compared
with 13 (35.1%) of those without the expansion (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0497). There was a positive 
correlation of Krachmer grade to triplet repeat number (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.002) and a nominal
association of the keratoplasty proportion with triplet repeat number (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.04). 
The mean (SD) central corneal thickness was 605.9 (50.5) µm in the group with the
expanded repeats compared with 581.3 (50.5) µm in the group without the expansion
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.04).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The Krachmer grade of disease severity was greater in 
FECD cases with the CTG18.1 triplet repeat expansion in TCF4 than in those
without the expansion. The CTG triplet repeat allele length was positively
correlated with the Krachmer grade of severity. The TCF4 triplet repeat expansion
resulted in a more severe form of FECD, with clinical and surgical therapeutic
implications.

PMID: 26401622  [PubMed - in process]


57. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 12;34(46):5760-70. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.352. Epub 2015 Sep
21.

ZEB1 and TCF4 reciprocally modulate their transcriptional activities to regulate 
Wnt target gene expression.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O(1), Valls E(1), Darling DS(2), Castells
A(3,)(4), Postigo A(1,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Oral Immunology and
Infectious Diseases and Center for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. (3)Institute of Metabolic and Digestive
Diseases, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic
Oncology Team, Biomedical Research Networking Centers in Hepatic and Digestive
Diseases (CIBERehd), Carlos III Health Institute (ISCIII), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Louisville, KY, USA. (6)ICREA, Barcelona,
Spain.

The canonical Wnt pathway (TCF4/ß-catenin) has important roles during normal
differentiation and in disease. Some Wnt functions depend on signaling gradients 
requiring the pathway to be tightly regulated. A key Wnt target is the
transcription factor ZEB1 whose expression by cancer cells promotes tumor
invasiveness by repressing the expression of epithelial specification markers and
activating mesenchymal genes, including a number of Wnt targets such as LAMC2 and
uPA. The ability of ZEB1 to activate/repress its target genes depends on its
recruitment of corepressors (CtBP, BRG1) or coactivators (p300) although
conditions under which ZEB1 binds these cofactors are not elucidated. Here, we
show that TCF4 and ZEB1 reciprocally modulate each other's transcriptional
activity: ZEB1 enhances TCF4/ß-catenin-mediated transcription and, in turn, Wnt
signaling switches ZEB1 from a repressor into an activator. In colorectal cancer 
(CRC) cells with active Wnt signaling, ZEB1 enhances transcriptional activation
of LAMC2 and uPA by TCF4/ß-catenin. However, in CRC cells with inactive Wnt, ZEB1
represses both genes. Reciprocal modulation of ZEB1 and TCF4 activities involves 
their binding to DNA and mutual interaction. Wnt signaling turns ZEB1 into an
activator by replacing binding of CtBP/BRG1 in favor of p300. Using a mouse model
of Wnt-induced intestinal tumorigenesis, we found that downregulation of ZEB1
reduces the expression of LAMC2 in vivo. These results identify a mechanism
through which Wnt and ZEB1 transcriptional activities are modulated, offering new
approaches in cancer therapy.

PMID: 26387539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 10;10(9):e0137579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137579.
eCollection 2015.

The Human Homolog of Drosophila Headcase Acts as a Tumor Suppressor through Its
Blocking Effect on the Cell Cycle in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Wang J(1), Gong L(1), Zhu SJ(1), Zhu Q(1), Yao L(1), Han XJ(1), Zhang JR(1), Li
YH(2), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Helmholtz Sino-German Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of
Pathology, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
Shaanxi, China. (2)The Helmholtz Sino-German Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Department of Pathology, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi, China; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tangdu Hospital, 
The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

The molecular pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is heterogeneous and
extremely complex. Thus, for individual molecular targeted therapy, novel
molecular markers are needed. The abnormal expression of the human homolog of
Drosophila headcase (HECA homo) has been found in pancreatic, colorectal, and
oral squamous cell carcinoma. Studies of oral squamous cell carcinoma have also
demonstrated that the HECA homo protein can be negatively controlled by the
Wnt-pathway and transcription factor 4 (TCF4) and can slow cell division by
interacting with cyclins and CDKs. However, the role of HECA in HCC has not been 
reported elsewhere. Here, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the
downregulation of HECA homo protein occurred in 71.0% (66/93) of HCC cases and
was positively correlated with a poorly differentiated grade, high serum AFP
level, liver cirrhosis and large tumor size. The expression of HECA homo was
detected in five live cell lines. In vitro, the overexpression of HECA homo in
HepG2, Huh-7 and MHCC-97H cells could inhibit cell proliferation and colony
formation and induce G1 phase arrest. In contrast, the downregulation of HECA
homo could promote cell proliferation, colony formation and the cell cycle
process. However, neither the overexpression nor downregulation of HECA homo in
the three cell lines could affect cell migration or invasion. Collectively, HECA 
homo is regularly expressed in normal live cells, and the HECA homo protein level
is heterogeneously altered in HCC, but the downregulation of HECA homo is more
common and positively correlated with several malignant phenotypes. The HECA homo
protein can slow cell proliferation to some extent primarily through its blocking
effect on the cell cycle. Hence, the HECA homo protein may act as a tumor
suppressor in HCC and might be a potential molecular marker for diagnostic
classification and targeted therapy in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4565651
PMID: 26356417  [PubMed - in process]


59. BMC Cancer. 2015 Sep 9;15:628. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1635-9.

DKK1 is a potential novel mediator of cisplatin-refractoriness in non-small cell 
lung cancer cell lines.

Salim H(1), Zong D(2), Hååg P(3), Novak M(4), Mörk B(5), Lewensohn R(6), Lundholm
L(7), Viktorsson K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. Hogir.Salim@ki.se. (2)Karolinska
Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171
76, Stockholm, Sweden. Dali.Zong@nih.gov. (3)Karolinska Biomics Center,
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm,
Sweden. Petra.Haag@ki.se. (4)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Metka.Novak@ki.se. (5)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Birgitta.Mork@ki.se. (6)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Rolf.Lewensohn@ki.se. (7)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Lovisa.Lundholm@su.se. (8)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Kristina.Viktorsson@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Platinum compounds are the mainstay of chemotherapy for lung cancer. 
Unfortunately treatment failure remains a critical issue since about 60% of all
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients display intrinsic platinum
resistance.
METHODS: We analyzed global gene expression profiles of NSCLC clones surviving a 
pulse treatment with cisplatin and mapped deregulated signaling networks in
silico by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Further validation was done using
siRNA.
RESULTS: The pooled cisplatin-surviving NSCLC clones from each of the biological 
replicates demonstrated heterogeneous gene expression patterns both in terms of
the number and the identity of the altered genes. Genes involved in Wnt signaling
pathway (Dickkopf-1, DKK1), DNA repair machinery (XRCC2) and
cell-cell/cell-matrix interaction (FMN1, LGALS9) were among the top deregulated
genes by microarray in these replicates and were validated by q-RT-PCR. We
focused on DKK1 which previously was reported to be overexpressed in NSCLC
patients. IPA network analysis revealed coordinate up-regulation of several DKK1 
transcriptional regulators (TCF4, EZH2, DNAJB6 and HDAC2) in cisplatin-surviving 
clones from that biological replicate. Knockdown of DKK1 by siRNA sensitized for 
cisplatin in two different NSCLC cell lines and in ovarian A2780 cells, but not
in the A2780 cis subline made resistant to cisplatin by chronic exposure,
suggesting a role of DKK1 in intrinsic but not acquired platinum refractoriness.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified DKK1 as a possible marker of a cisplatin-refractory
phenotype and as a potential novel therapeutic target to improve platinum
response of NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4565013
PMID: 26353782  [PubMed - in process]


60. Sci Signal. 2015 Sep 8;8(393):ra90. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aac6757.

The E3 ligase RNF43 inhibits Wnt signaling downstream of mutated ß-catenin by
sequestering TCF4 to the nuclear membrane.

Loregger A(1), Grandl M(1), Mejías-Luque R(1), Allgäuer M(2), Degenhart K(1),
Haselmann V(3), Oikonomou C(4), Hatzis P(4), Janssen KP(5), Nitsche U(5), Gradl
D(6), van den Broek O(7), Destree O(7), Ulm K(8), Neumaier M(3), Kalali B(1),
Jung A(9), Varela I(10), Schmid RM(11), Rad R(11), Busch DH(1), Gerhard M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene, Technische
Universität München, Munich 81675, Germany. (2)Institut für Medizinische
Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene, Technische Universität München, Munich
81675, Germany. Medical Department II, Technische Universität München, Munich
81675, Germany. (3)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Centre
Mannheim, Mannheim 68167, Germany. (4)Division of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming," Vari 16672, Greece.
(5)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, Munich 81675, Germany. 
(6)Zoologisches Institut II, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe 76131, 
Germany. (7)Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht 3508, the Netherlands. (8)Institute of
Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, Technische Universität München, Munich
81675, Germany. (9)Institute of Pathology, University of Munich, Munich 80337,
Germany. (10)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria, Santander
39011, Spain. (11)Medical Department II, Technische Universität München, Munich
81675, Germany. (12)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und
Hygiene, Technische Universität München, Munich 81675, Germany.
markus.gerhard@tum.de.

Given its fundamental role in development and cancer, the Wnt-ß-catenin signaling
pathway is tightly controlled at multiple levels. RING finger protein 43 (RNF43) 
is an E3 ubiquitin ligase originally found in stem cells and proposed to inhibit 
Wnt signaling by interacting with the Wnt receptors of the Frizzled family. We
detected endogenous RNF43 in the nucleus of human intestinal crypt and colon
cancer cells. We found that RNF43 physically interacted with T cell factor 4
(TCF4) in cells and tethered TCF4 to the nuclear membrane, thus silencing TCF4
transcriptional activity even in the presence of constitutively active mutants of
ß-catenin. This inhibitory mechanism was disrupted by the expression of RNF43
bearing mutations found in human gastrointestinal tumors, and transactivation of 
the Wnt pathway was observed in various cells and in Xenopus embryos when the
RING domain of RNF43 was mutated. Our findings indicate that RNF43 inhibits the
Wnt pathway downstream of oncogenic mutations that activate the pathway.
Mimicking or enhancing this inhibitory activity of RNF43 may be useful to treat
cancers arising from aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26350900  [PubMed - in process]


61. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb;40(2):121-30. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10543. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Hyperlipidemia induces vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation involving
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Zhuang Y(1), Mao JQ(1), Yu M(1), Dong LY(1), Fan YL(1), Lv ZQ(2), Xiao MD(1),
Yuan ZX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, PR China.
(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200233, PR China.

Hyperlipidemia has been shown to stimulate vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)
proliferation. Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in embryonic
development and cell proliferation. In this study, Sprague-Dawley rats fed with
high-fat or normal diet for 12 weeks were sacrificed, and the thoracic aorta was 
harvested to determine wnt3a, ß-catenin, T-cell factor 4 (TCF4), and cyclin D1
expressions. VSMC proliferation within thoracic aorta and lipid accumulation
within VSMCs were detected. Rat aortic VSMCs were cultured in serum from rats
with hyperlipidemia or DKK-1; Wnt3a, ß-catenin, TCF4, and cyclin D1 expressions, 
and cell cycle distribution were determined. The findings demonstrated that
increased number of VSMCs, lipid droplets, and vacuoles within thoracic aorta in 
the high-fat-fed group. Compared with controls, VSMCs from high-fat-fed rats
showed higher mRNA expressions of wnt3a, ß-catenin, TCF4, and cyclin D1, as well 
as in VSMCs cultured with hyperlipidemic serum. After 24<U+2009>h, VSMCs stimulated with
hyperlipidemic serum showed significantly increased cell number and S-phase entry
compared with cells exposed to normolipidemic serum. These effects were blocked
by DKK-1. These results suggest that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays an important
role in hyperlipidemia-induced VSMC proliferation.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26346812  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Oct;69:95-101. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.07.022. Epub 
2015 Jul 22.

TCF4 gene polymorphism is associated with cognition in patients with
schizophrenia and healthy controls.

Hui L(1), Rao WW(2), Yu Q(2), Kou C(2), Wu JQ(3), He JC(4), Ye MJ(1), Liu JH(1), 
Xu XJ(1), Zheng K(1), Ruan LN(1), Liu HY(1), Hu WM(1), Shao TN(4), AngRabanes
MB(5), Soares JC(5), Zhang XY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Wenzhou Kangning Mental Health, Wenzhou Kangning Hospital,
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR China. (2)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Jilin University,
Changchun, PR China. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of
Health, The University of Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW 2308,
Australia; Biological Psychiatry Center, Beijing HuiLongGuan Hospital, Peking
University, Beijing, PR China. (4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated
of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR China. (5)Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Harris County Psychiatric Center, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Biological Psychiatry Center, Beijing HuiLongGuan Hospital, Peking University,
Beijing, PR China; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Harris
County Psychiatric Center, The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: xiang.y.zhang@uth.tmc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive deficits have been identified as an important core feature 
of schizophrenia. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the transcription factor 4
(TCF4) gene have been reported to be involved in the susceptibility to
schizophrenia and be significantly related to cognitive deficits of schizophrenia
and controls. This study examines whether the TCF4 rs2958182 polymorphism
influences cognitive functions in chronic schizophrenia and controls.
METHODS: The presence of the TCF4 rs2958182 was determined in 976 patients and
420 controls using a case-control design. We assessed all the patients'
psychopathology using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS). Cognition
was assessed in 777 patients and 399 controls by using the Repeatable Battery for
the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS).
RESULTS: There were marginally significant differences in the TCF4 rs2958182
allelic and genotypic distributions between patients and controls (<U+03C7>2 = 3.48, p =
0.062 and <U+03C7>2 = 0.036, p = 0.036, respectively). Cognitive test scores were
significantly lower in patients than in controls on all scales (all p < 0.001)
except for the visuospatial/constructional index (p > 0.05). There were
significant genotype effects on delayed memory score (p = 0.013), the RBANS total
score (p = 0.028) and language score (p = 0.034). Further analysis showed that
the language score significantly differed according to the genotypic groups
(A/A+T/A group versus T/T group) (p = 0.007) in patients but not in controls (p >
0.05), and the delayed memory score also significantly differed according to the 
genotypic groups (A/A+T/A group versus T/T group) (p = 0.021) in controls but not
in patients (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study found that the A allele of the TCF4 rs2958182
polymorphism was the risk allele of schizophrenia, and was associated with lower 
cognitive performance in language in schizophrenia and delayed memory in
controls. In contrast, the T allele of this polymorphism was found to be the
schizophrenia risk allele in another study in Han Chinese people.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26343600  [PubMed - in process]


63. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2015
Aug;40(8):843-50.DOI:10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2015.08.004.

[Fibroblast growth factor-1 inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin pathway during adipogenesis].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Luo X(1), Jia R(1), Li K(1), Zhu X(1), Zhao D(1), P Whitehead J(2), Yan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Environment
and Genes Related to Diseases, Ministry of Education, Xi'an Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Metabolic Program, Mater Research
Institute - University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane 
Queensland 4102, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the time course and potential mechanism of fibroblast
growth factor-1 (FGF-1) in the regulation of adipogenesis.<U+2029>
METHODS: We cultured human Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) pre-adipocytes
with recombinant FGF-1 and harvested cells at various stages prior to and during 
differentiation; at cell proliferation (D-3), confluence (D0), early (D3), middle
(D7) and mature (D14) stages of differentiation. We determined lipid accumulation
in mature adipocytes by morphological observation and quantitative measurement of
oil red O staining. We also examined the expression of adipogenic genes and
related markers involved in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway using quantitative
Real-time PCR and Western blot.<U+2029>
RESULTS: Compared to control SGBS cells, treatment with FGF-1 increased lipid
accumulation; induced a sustained increase in the mRNA for peroxisome
proliferater-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G3PDH), adiponectin and glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4); and
promoted a sustained decrease in expression of markers of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway, ß-catenin and transcription factor 4 (TCF4).<U+2029>
CONCLUSION: The adipogenic effects of FGF-1 are apparent throughout the whole
priming and differentiation period in human SGBS pre-adipocytes. Furthermore, our
results suggest that FGF-1 <U+2028>promotes adipogenesis, at least in part, via a
sustained decrease in activity of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26333491  [PubMed - in process]


64. Lab Invest. 2016 Feb;96(2):218-29. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.101. Epub 2015 Aug
31.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling regulates cigarette smoke-induced airway inflammation via
the PPARd/p38 pathway.

Guo L(1), Wang T(1), Wu Y(1), Yuan Z(2), Dong J(1), Li X(1), An J(1), Liao Z(1), 
Zhang X(1), Xu D(1), Wen FQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, Department of Respiratory Medicine, State Key 
Laboratory of Biotherapy of China, West China Hospital, West China Medical
School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. (2)Department of Biological Science, 
College of Life Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

The mechanisms of WNT/ß-catenin signaling involved in airway inflammation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remain unknown, although recent
observations have suggested an important contribution of the pathway in pulmonary
parenchymal tissue repair and airway epithelium differentiation. We investigated 
the role of WNT/ß-catenin signaling in cigarette smoke (CS)-related airway
inflammation using patient lung tissues, human bronchial epithelial cells
(16HBECs), and mouse models. Reduced activity of WNT/ß-catenin signaling was
observed in the airway epithelium of smokers with or without COPD. The mRNA
expression of WNT transcription factor TCF4 negatively correlated with the pack
year. The mRNA levels of WNT receptor FZD4 negatively correlated with the mRNA
levels of IL-1ß. CS exposure decreased the activity of WNT/ß-catenin signaling in
both 16HBECs and mice. In vitro studies demonstrated the upregulation of
inflammatory cytokines TNF-a and IL-1ß secretion induced by CS extract (CSE)
could be attenuated by ß-catenin activator SB216763 and be exacerbated by
ß-catenin small-interfering RNA (siRNA), respectively. Furthermore, the decrease 
in the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARd) induced
by CSE stimulation could be rescued by SB216763. SB216763 also attenuated the
upregulation of phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
stimulated by CSE. Both PPARd agonist and p38 MAPK inhibitor could suppress the
TNF-a and IL-1ß release induced by CSE treatment. In addition, PPARd activation
could abolish ß-catenin siRNA-mediated aggravation of phosphorylated p38 MAPK in 
response to CSE. Finally, SB216763 treatment significantly ameliorated
peribronchial inflammatory cell infiltration, leukocyte influx, and the release
of TNF-a and IL-1ß in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of CS-exposed mice. Taken 
together, our findings indicate that the reduced activity of WNT/ß-catenin
signaling induced by CS may promote inflammatory cytokine production in airway
epithelium and have an essential role in airway inflammation in COPD by PPARd/p38
MAPK pathway.

PMID: 26322419  [PubMed - in process]


65. World J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 26;6(3):95-109. doi: 10.4331/wjbc.v6.i3.95.

Role of ZAC1 in transient neonatal diabetes mellitus and glucose metabolism.

Hoffmann A(1), Spengler D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anke Hoffmann, Dietmar Spengler, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry,
Translational Research, 80804 Munich, Germany.

Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus 1 (TNDM1) is a rare genetic disorder
representing with severe neonatal hyperglycaemia followed by remission within one
and a half year and adolescent relapse with type 2 diabetes in half of the
patients. Genetic defects in TNDM1 comprise uniparental isodisomy of chromosome
6, duplication of the minimal TNDM1 locus at 6q24, or relaxation of genomically
imprinted ZAC1/HYMAI. Whereas the function of HYMAI, a non-coding mRNA, is still 
unidentified, biochemical and molecular studies show that zinc finger protein 1
regulating apoptosis and cell cycle arrest (ZAC1) behaves as a factor with
versatile transcriptional functions dependent on binding to specific GC-rich DNA 
motives and interconnected regulation of recruited coactivator activities.
Genome-wide expression profiling enabled the isolation of a number of Zac1 target
genes known to regulate different aspects of ß-cell function and peripheral
insulin sensitivity. Among these, upregulation of Ppar<U+03B3> and Tcf4 impairs
insulin-secretion and ß-cell proliferation. Similarly, Zac1-mediated upregulation
of Socs3 may attenuate ß-cell proliferation and survival by inhibition of growth 
factor signalling. Additionally, Zac1 directly represses Pac1 and Rasgrf1 with
roles in insulin secretion and ß-cell proliferation. Collectively, concerted
dysregulation of these target genes could contribute to the onset and course of
TNDM1. Interestingly, Zac1 overexpression in ß-cells spares the effects of
stimulatory G-protein signaling on insulin secretion and raises the prospect for 
tailored treatments in relapsed TNDM1 patients. Overall, these results suggest
that progress on the molecular and cellular foundations of monogenetic forms of
diabetes can advance personalized therapy in addition to deepening the
understanding of insulin and glucose metabolism in general.

PMCID: PMC4549774
PMID: 26322169  [PubMed]


66. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28312-26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4873.

Identification of the DEAD box RNA helicase DDX3 as a therapeutic target in
colorectal cancer.

Heerma van Voss MR(1,)(2), Vesuna F(1), Trumpi K(3), Brilliant J(1), Berlinicke
C(4), de Leng W(2), Kranenburg O(3), Offerhaus GJ(2), Bürger H(5), van der Wall
E(6), van Diest PJ(2), Raman V(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University,
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Surgery,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Wilmer Eye
Institute, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Paderborn, Germany. (6)Department of Internal
Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Identifying druggable targets in the Wnt-signaling pathway can optimize
colorectal cancer treatment. Recent studies have identified a member of the RNA
helicase family DDX3 (DDX3X) as a multilevel activator of Wnt signaling in cells 
without activating mutations in the Wnt-signaling pathway. In this study, we
evaluated whether DDX3 plays a role in the constitutively active Wnt pathway that
drives colorectal cancer. We determined DDX3 expression levels in 303 colorectal 
cancers by immunohistochemistry. 39% of tumors overexpressed DDX3. High
cytoplasmic DDX3 expression correlated with nuclear ß-catenin expression, a
marker of activated Wnt signaling. Functionally, we validated this finding in
vitro and found that inhibition of DDX3 with siRNA resulted in reduced
TCF4-reporter activity and lowered the mRNA expression levels of downstream
TCF4-regulated genes. In addition, DDX3 knockdown in colorectal cancer cell lines
reduced proliferation and caused a G1 arrest, supporting a potential oncogenic
role of DDX3 in colorectal cancer. RK-33 is a small molecule inhibitor designed
to bind to the ATP-binding site of DDX3. Treatment of colorectal cancer cell
lines and patient-derived 3D cultures with RK-33 inhibited growth and promoted
cell death with IC50 values ranging from 2.5 to 8 µM. The highest RK-33
sensitivity was observed in tumors with wild-type APC-status and a mutation in
CTNNB1. Based on these results, we conclude that DDX3 has an oncogenic role in
colorectal cancer. Inhibition of DDX3 with the small molecule inhibitor RK-33
causes inhibition of Wnt signaling and may therefore be a promising future
treatment strategy for a subset of colorectal cancers.

PMCID: PMC4695062
PMID: 26311743  [PubMed - in process]


67. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2015;134:79-97. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2015.04.005. Epub
2015 Jul 15.

Fuchs Corneal Dystrophy.

Eghrari AO(1), Riazuddin SA(1), Gottsch JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA. (2)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Electronic address: jgottsch@jhmi.edu.

Fuchs corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a hereditary, progressive disease of the
posterior cornea which results in excrescences of Descemet membrane, endothelial 
cell loss, corneal edema, and, in late stages, bullous keratopathy. Structural
changes are noted principally in Descemet membrane and the endothelium, with
thickening of Descemet membrane, loss of barrier function, and increased corneal 
hydration, although secondary effects occur throughout all layers. Multiple
chromosomal loci and, more recently, causal genetic mutations have been
identified for this complex disorder, including in TCF8, SLC4A11, LOXHD1, and
AGBL1. A trinucleotide repeat in TCF4 correlates strongly with disease status and
interacts in common pathways with previously identified genes. Dysregulation of
pathways involving oxidative stress and apoptosis, epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, microRNA, mitochondrial genes, and unfolded protein response has been
implicated in FCD pathogenesis.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26310151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;226(3):135-43. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0725.

Enhanced intestinal epithelial cell proliferation in diabetic rats correlates
with ß-catenin accumulation.

Dorfman T(1), Pollak Y(1), Sohotnik R(1), Coran AG(1), Bejar J(1), Sukhotnik
I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Intestinal Adaptation and RecoveryThe Ruth and Bruce Rappaport
Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
IsraelDepartments of Pediatric Surgery BPathologyBnai Zion Medical Center, 47
Golomb Street, PO Box 4940, Haifa 31048, IsraelSection of Pediatric SurgeryC.S.
Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. (2)Laboratory of Intestinal Adaptation and RecoveryThe Ruth and
Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, IsraelDepartments of Pediatric Surgery BPathologyBnai Zion Medical Center,
47 Golomb Street, PO Box 4940, Haifa 31048, IsraelSection of Pediatric
SurgeryC.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA Laboratory of Intestinal Adaptation and RecoveryThe Ruth and
Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, IsraelDepartments of Pediatric Surgery BPathologyBnai Zion Medical Center,
47 Golomb Street, PO Box 4940, Haifa 31048, IsraelSection of Pediatric
SurgeryC.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA igor-dr@internet-zahav.net.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling cascade is implicated in the control of stem cell
activity, cell proliferation, and cell survival of the gastrointestinal
epithelium. Recent evidence indicates that the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is activated
under diabetic conditions. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling during diabetes-induced enteropathy in a rat model. Male 
rats were divided into three groups: control rats received injections of vehicle;
diabetic rats received injections of one dose of streptozotocin (STZ); and
diabetic-insulin rats received injections of STZ and were treated with insulin
given subcutaneously at a dose of 1<U+200A>U/kg twice daily. Rats were killed on day 7. 
Wnt/ß-catenin-related genes and expression of proteins was determined using
real-time PCR, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. Among 13 genes
identified by real-time PCR, seven genes were upregulated in diabetic rats
compared with control animals including the target genes c-Myc and Tcf4. Diabetic
rats also showed a significant increase in ß-catenin protein compared with
control animals. Treatment of diabetic rats attenuated the stimulating effect of 
diabetes on intestinal cell proliferation and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. In
conclusion, enhanced intestinal epithelial cell proliferation in diabetic rats
correlates with ß-catenin accumulation.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26297291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2016 Feb;233(2):187-94. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1546138. Epub
2015 Aug 17.

[TGC Repeats in Intron 2 of the TCF4 Gene have a Good Predictive Power Regarding 
to Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy].

[Article in German]

Luther M(1), Grünauer-Kloevekorn C(2), Weidle E(3), Passarge E(4), Rupprecht
A(2), Hoffmann K(1), Foja S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg.
(2)Augenärzte am Markt, Praxisklinik Halle. (3)Augenklinik, Katharinenhospital
Stuttgart. (4)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Leipzig.

BACKGROUND: Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is one of the most common 
indications for corneal transplants. FECD is associated with various genes, e.g.,
COL8A2 or SLC4A11. Among other things a TGC trinucleotide repeat expansion in
intron 2 of the TCF4 gene has been characterised in FECD patients and the allele 
G of the polymorphism rs613872 in intron 3 of the same gene has been associated
with this disease. Our intention was to investigate sources in molecular genetics
in the German population and to calculate the odds ratio as indicator for the
chance to suffer from FECD.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: 42 unrelated FECD patients, 93 unrelated controls and 17
members of a family with four FECD affected patients have been examined for the
described changes in the TCF4 gene. After amplification of the TGC repeats with
specific PCR the obtained products were electrophoretically divided according to 
their length and investigated with a triplet-primed PCR. Polymorphism rs613872
was analysed by Sanger sequencing. All coding exons of the adjacent genes TCF4
and LOXHD1 were sequenced in six patients in order to exclude potential disease
associated mutations.
RESULTS: 33 out of 42 unrelated analysed patients (79<U+200A>%) had a TGC repeat
expansion (><U+2009>50<U+2009>TGC repeats) in intron 2 of the TCF4 gene. Out of 93 controls
only 10 (10.8<U+200A>%) showed an expanded allele. In the family the four diseased and
four healthy subjects of the 17 examined family members had an expanded allele.
Analysis of the polymorphism rs613872 in intron 3 of the TCF4 gene exhibited 33
of 42 unrelated patients (78.6<U+200A>%) heterozygous TG and four homozygous GG (9.5<U+200A>%).
65 of 93 controls were homozygous TT (69.9<U+200A>%) and only 21 heterozygous TG
(22.6<U+200A>%). Of the 17 family members nine had the genotype TG, including the four
FECD patients. Sequencing of the coding exons of TCF4 and LOXHD1 in six patients 
showed no variant described with FECD. The odds ratio as indicator for being
affected by FECD in our data for the expanded TGC allele is 30. The chance of
being affected is thus 30 times higher when someone exhibits the expanded allele.
For a carrier of the risk allele G the chance is 16.5 times higher.
DISCUSSION: An expanded TGC allele with more than 50<U+2009>TGC repeats in intron 2 and 
the described risk allele G of the polymorphism rs613872 in intron 3 of the TCF4 
gene appear as an association to FECD. The chance to be affected by FECD is up to
30 times higher. With molecular genetics also donors with clinically unknown FECD
may be detected.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26280645  [PubMed - in process]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):374-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.007. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

MiR-30a-5p is induced by Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and promotes glioma cell invasion 
by repressing NCAM.

Wang Z(1), Dai X(1), Chen Y(1), Sun C(1), Zhu Q(1), Zhao H(2), Liu G(1), Huang
Q(1), Lan Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004,
China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004, China. Electronic address:
szlanqing1@163.com.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is frequently dysregulated in human tumors and
plays a critical role in tumorigenesis; however, the roles of microRNAs in
mediating Wnt/ß-catenin pathway are not well understood. Herein, we show that
miR-30a-5p is activated by Wnt/ß-catenin pathway through direct binding of
ß-catenin/TCF4 to two sites in the promoter region of miR-30a-5p. We also found
that miR-30a-5p represses neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) expression by
directly targeting two sites in the 3' untranslated region (3'-UTR) of NCAM mRNA.
Moreover, Wnt/ß-catenin pathway represses NCAM expression in glioma cells, which 
depends on miR-30a-5p. Finally, we found that miR-30a-5p promotes glioma cell
growth invasion by repressing NCAM. Our findings demonstrate a novel
Wnt/ß-catenin-miR-30a-5p-NCAM regulatory axis which plays important roles in
controlling glioma cell invasion and tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26255203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2015 Aug;70(8):593-9. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2015(08)10.

The association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism of the TCF7L2 gene and
type 2 diabetes in the Chinese Han population: a meta-analysis.

Ma E(1), Wang H(2), Guo J(1), Tian R(3), Wei L(1).

Author information: 
(1)General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of
Nursing, Xi'an International University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Nursing, 
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 has been shown to be associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus in multiple ethnic groups in recent years. In the Chinese Han
population in particular, numerous studies have evaluated the association between
the rs11196218A/G polymorphism of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene and type
2 diabetes mellitus. However, the results have been inconsistent, so we performed
a meta-analysis to assess the association. Odds ratio and 95% confidence interval
values were calculated using a random-effects model or a fixed-effects model
based on heterogeneity analysis. The quality of the included studies was
evaluated using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Subgroup analyses were conducted
based on conformity with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group as well 
as on other variables, such as age, sex and body mass index. Sensitivity analysis
was also performed to detect heterogeneity and to assess the stability of the
results. In total, 10 case-control studies comprising 7,491 cases and 12,968
controls were included in this meta-analysis. The combined analysis indicated
that the rs11196218A/G polymorphism was not associated with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (G vs. A, OR=1.04, 95% CI=0.97-1.13, p=0.28). The subgroup analyses also
did not show any association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism and the risk 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Furthermore, the results of the subgroup analyses
indicated that the absence of an association was not influenced by age, sex or
body mass index. The results of the sensitivity analysis verified the reliability
and stability of this meta-analysis. In conclusion, this study indicated that
there is no significant association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism and
the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC4518842
PMID: 26247673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(20):3471-90. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00030-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
3.

Differential Effects of Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4a Isoforms on Tumor Growth and
T-Cell Factor 4/AP-1 Interactions in Human Colorectal Cancer Cells.

Vuong LM(1), Chellappa K(1), Dhahbi JM(2), Deans JR(1), Fang B(1), Bolotin E(1), 
Titova NV(1), Hoverter NP(3), Spindler SR(2), Waterman ML(3), Sladek FM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, Riverside, California, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University 
of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of
California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA frances.sladek@ucr.edu.

The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is tumor suppressive in
the liver but amplified in colon cancer, suggesting that it also might be
oncogenic. To investigate whether this discrepancy is due to different HNF4a
isoforms derived from its two promoters (P1 and P2), we generated
Tet-On-inducible human colon cancer (HCT116) cell lines that express either the
P1-driven (HNF4a2) or P2-driven (HNF4a8) isoform and analyzed them for tumor
growth and global changes in gene expression (transcriptome sequencing [RNA-seq] 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing [ChIP-seq]). The results show that
while HNF4a2 acts as a tumor suppressor in the HCT116 tumor xenograft model,
HNF4a8 does not. Each isoform regulates the expression of distinct sets of genes 
and recruits, colocalizes, and competes in a distinct fashion with the
Wnt/ß-catenin mediator T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) at CTTTG motifs as well as at AP-1 
motifs (TGAXTCA). Protein binding microarrays (PBMs) show that HNF4a and TCF4
share some but not all binding motifs and that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in sites bound by both HNF4a and TCF4 can alter binding affinity in vitro,
suggesting that they could play a role in cancer susceptibility in vivo. Thus,
the HNF4a isoforms play distinct roles in colon cancer, which could be due to
differential interactions with the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 and AP-1 pathways.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573706
PMID: 26240283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Jul 14;9:266. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00266.
eCollection 2015.

The Utility of Next-Generation Sequencing in Gene Discovery for Mutation-Negative
Patients with Rett Syndrome.

Gold WA(1), Christodoulou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Western Sydney Genetics Program, New South Wales Centre for Rett Syndrome
Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead , Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Discipline 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Sydney , Sydney, NSW , Australia. 
(2)Western Sydney Genetics Program, New South Wales Centre for Rett Syndrome
Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead , Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Discipline 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Sydney , Sydney, NSW , Australia ;
Discipline of Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney ,
Sydney, NSW , Australia.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a rare, severe disorder of neuronal plasticity that
predominantly affects girls. Girls with RTT usually appear asymptomatic in the
first 6-18<U+2009>months of life, but gradually develop severe motor, cognitive, and
behavioral abnormalities that persist for life. A predominance of neuronal and
synaptic dysfunction, with altered excitatory-inhibitory neuronal synaptic
transmission and synaptic plasticity, are overarching features of RTT in children
and in mouse models. Over 90% of patients with classical RTT have mutations in
the X-linked methyl-CpG-binding (MECP2) gene, while other genes, including
cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5), Forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1),
myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C), and transcription factor 4 (TCF4),
have been associated with phenotypes overlapping with RTT. However, there remain 
a proportion of patients who carry a clinical diagnosis of RTT, but who are
mutation negative. In recent years, next-generation sequencing technologies have 
revolutionized approaches to genetic studies, making whole-exome and even
whole-genome sequencing possible strategies for the detection of rare and de novo
mutations, aiding the discovery of novel disease genes. Here, we review the
recent progress that is emerging in identifying pathogenic variations,
specifically from exome sequencing in RTT patients, and emphasize the need for
the use of this technology to identify known and new disease genes in RTT
patients.

PMCID: PMC4500929
PMID: 26236194  [PubMed]


74. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jul;56(8):4865-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-17082.

Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion in the TCF4 Gene in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal
Dystrophy in Japanese.

Nakano M(1), Okumura N(2), Nakagawa H(3), Koizumi N(4), Ikeda Y(3), Ueno M(3),
Yoshii K(5), Adachi H(1), Aleff RA(6), Butz ML(7), Highsmith WE(7), Tashiro K(1),
Wieben ED(6), Kinoshita S(3), Baratz KH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomic Medical Sciences Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life 
and Medical Sciences, Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan 3Department of
Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan. (4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life and Medical
Sciences, Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan. (5)Department of Medical
Statistics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (6)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United 
States. (7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States. (8)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the association between the
intronic expansion of a trinucleotide repeat (TNR) in the TCF4 gene and Fuchs'
endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in a Japanese population.
METHODS: Forty-seven Japanese FECD patients and 96 age-matched controls were
recruited. FECD patients and controls were examined by slit-lamp and noncontact
specular microscopy. The repeat length was determined by direct sequencing and
short tandem repeat assay of PCR-amplified DNA and Southern blotting of
unamplified DNA.
RESULTS: A TNR expansion, defined as >50 CTG repeats in the TCF4 gene was
identified in 12 of 47 FECD cases (26%) and 0 of 96 controls (0%; P < 0.001).
Sensitivity and specificity in this study were 26% and 100%, respectively. The
clinical characteristics of FECD patients with TNR expansion were not distinct
from those without TNR expansion.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show for the first time in a Japanese population the 
association of the TNR expansion in TCF4 with FECD. In contrast to Caucasian
cohorts in whom the TNR expansion is present in most patients with FECD, a CTG
expansion is present in a minority of Japanese subjects, indicating other genetic
variants as common causes of phenotypically identical disease in this population.

PMID: 26218914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Clin Oral Investig. 2016 Apr;20(3):533-40. doi: 10.1007/s00784-015-1536-y. Epub
2015 Jul 24.

Daxx and TCF4 interaction links to oral squamous cell carcinoma growth by
promoting cell cycle progression via induction of cyclin D1 expression.

Lin GJ(1), Huang YS(2), Lin CK(3), Huang SH(1,)(4), Shih HM(2), Sytwu HK(5), Chen
YW(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Anatomy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Taipei Tzu Chi general Hospital, New Taipei City,
Taiwan. (4)Department of General Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, National 
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department and Graduate Institute of
Microbiology and Immunology, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. H6183@yahoo.com.tw. (7)School of Dentistry, National Defense
Medical Center, 325 Cheng-Kung Road, Section 2, Nei-Hu, Taipei, 11490, Taiwan.
H6183@yahoo.com.tw.

OBJECTIVES: Death domain-associated protein (Daxx) has been recently implicated
as a positive factor in ovarian cancer and prostate cancer, but the role of Daxx 
in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has never been addressed. Herein, we
investigate the expression and function of Daxx in OSCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RT-quantitative PCR, Western blotting, and
immunohistochemistry were used to evaluation of the expression of Daxx in human
OSCC cell lines and clinical surgical specimens. Short hairpin RNA targeting Daxx
was transduced by lentivirus infection to knockdown the expression of Daxx in SAS
and SCC25 cell lines, and the influence of this knockdown was evaluated by
analyzing the growth and the cell cycle in transduced cells. Immunoprecipitation 
and sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR were used to
analyze the associations between Daxx, TCF4, and cyclin D1 promoter. Xenograft
tumor model was used to evaluate the in vivo tumorigenicity of Daxx in OSCC.
RESULTS: Daxx mRNA and protein expression are elevated in several OSCC cell lines
and human OSCC samples in comparison to those in normal tissue. We further find
that depletion of Daxx decreases OSCC cell growth activity through G1 cell cycle 
arrest. Daxx silencing reduces cyclin D1 expression via a Daxx-TCF4 interaction, 
whereas the Daxx depletion-mediated G1 arrest can be relieved by ectopic
expression of cyclin D1. Moreover, we show that in OSCC clinical samples, the
expression of Daxx is significantly correlated with that of cyclin D1.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate the importance of Daxx in regulation of cyclin
D1 expression and provide the first evidence that Daxx exhibits tumor-promoting
activity in OSCC.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Daxx plays an important role in malignant transformation of
OSCC and may serves as a target for cancer prevention and treatment.

PMID: 26205068  [PubMed - in process]


76. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jul;56(8):4531-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16122.

Expansion of CTG18.1 Trinucleotide Repeat in TCF4 Is a Potent Driver of Fuchs'
Corneal Dystrophy.

Vasanth S(1), Eghrari AO(1), Gapsis BC(1), Wang J(2), Haller NF(1), Stark WJ(1), 
Katsanis N(3), Riazuddin SA(1), Gottsch JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States. (3)Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, United States.

PURPOSE: To analyze the expansion of CTG18.1 allele associated with Fuchs'
corneal dystrophy (FCD) in our large cohort of late-onset FCD cases.
METHODS: CTG repeats within the CTG18.1 allele were estimated by short tandem
repeat (STR) and triplet primed PCR (TP-PCR) assays in our large cohort of 574
late-onset FCD cases and 354 controls and large multigeneration familial cases.
The age versus severity relationships were analyzed in FCD genotypes, namely,
nonexpanded (N/N), monoallelic expansion (N/X), and biallelic expansion (X/X)
with N = 40 CTG monomers. The threshold for causality conferred by an expansion
of CTG18.1 was identified by excluding the population of FCD cases who harbored
an allele length equivalent to the maximum CTG monomers observed in the controls.
RESULTS: The expanded CTG18.1 for (CTG)n>40 showed a strong association (P = 1.56
× 10(-82)) with FCD. Importantly, we delineated the threshold of expansion to 103
CTG repeats above which the allele confers causality in 17.8% of FCD cases.
Regression analyses demonstrated a significant correlation between disease
severity and age in individuals who harbor either a monoallelic expansion or a
biallelic expansion at (CTG) n > 40. These analyses helped predict FCD in two
previously unaffected individuals based on their CTG18.1 expansion genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: A monoallelic expansion of CTG18.1 contributes to increased disease 
severity and is causal at (CTG)n>103, whereas a biallelic expansion is sufficient
to be causal for FCD at (CTG)n>40. This study highlights the largest contributory
causal allele for FCD.

PMCID: PMC4515948
PMID: 26200491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Hum Genet. 2015 Oct;134(10):1037-53. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1584-z. Epub 2015
Jul 21.

Investigation of genes important in neurodevelopment disorders in adult human
brain.

Maussion G(1,)(2), Diallo AB(1,)(2), Gigek CO(2,)(3), Chen ES(2,)(3), Crapper
L(1,)(2), Théroux JF(1,)(2), Chen GG(1,)(2), Vasuta C(1,)(2), Ernst
C(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada.
(2)McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3,
Canada. (3)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina/Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada.
carl.ernst@mcgill.ca. (5)McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital,
Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca. (6)Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca.
(7)Douglas Hospital Research Institute, 6875 LaSalle Boulevard, Frank Common
Building, Room 2101.2, Verdun, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca.

Several neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are caused by mutations in genes
expressed in fetal brain, but little is known about these same genes in adult
human brain. Here, we test the hypothesis that genes associated with NDDs
continue to have a role in adult human brain to explore the idea that NDD
symptoms may be partially a result of their adult function rather than just their
neurodevelopmental function. To demonstrate adult brain function, we performed
expression analyses and ChIPseq in human neural stem cell(NSC) lines at different
developmental stages and adult human brain, targeting two genes associated with
NDDs, SATB2 and EHMT1, and the WNT signaling gene TCF7L2, which has not been
associated with NDDs. Analysis of DNA interaction sites in neural stem cells
reveals high (40-50 %) overlap between proliferating and differentiating cells
for each gene in temporal space. Studies in adult brain demonstrate that
consensus sites are similar to NSCs but occur at different genomic locations. We 
also performed expression analyses using BrainSpan data for NDD-associated genes 
SATB2, EHMT1, FMR1, MECP2, MBD5, CTNND2, RAI1, CHD8, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, TCF4, SCN2A,
and DYRK1A and find high expression of these genes in adult brain, at least
comparable to developing human brain, confirming that genes associated with NDDs 
likely have a role in adult tissue. Adult function of genes associated with NDDs 
might be important in clinical disease presentation and may be suitable targets
for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 26194112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Jun;19(12):2246-53.

Predicting transcription factors in human alcoholic hepatitis from gene
regulatory network.

Mohammadnia A(1), Yaqubi M, Fallahi H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran,
Iran. h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir.

OBJECTIVE: Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is a type of alcoholic liver disorder caused 
by overconsumption of alcohol. The involvement of several transcription factors
(TF), as the main regulators of disease related gene expression has been
documented previously. However, despite the importance of analysis of gene
regulatory network for understanding the molecular basis in any disease, so far, 
there is no report on construction of such network for AH in human.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we used microarray analysis to construct a rather
complete gene regulatory network and used it to predict TFs and pathways that
affected by this disease.
RESULTS: Ten TFs were shown to undergo significant alteration in AH. These TFs
are AR, EGR1, MYC, TCF4, ATF3, JUN, FOXO3, STAT1, HIF1A and EOMES, where ATF3,
TCF4 and MYC are the new TFs with a role in AH. Comparisons of gene expression
profile of patients with those of healthy persons indicates 820 differentially
expressed (DE) genes. Network analysis indicates that, these ten TFs regulate
expression of 516 DE genes (out of 820 genes), by 1057 interactions. Furthermore,
we report pathways that significantly affected by these ten TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may contribute to our limited understanding of the
molecular basis of AH.

PMID: 26166650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 31;35(13):1679-91. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.232. Epub 2015 Jul
13.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling regulated SATB1 promotes colorectal cancer tumorigenesis 
and progression.

Mir R(1), Pradhan SJ(1), Patil P(2), Mulherkar R(3), Galande S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pashan, Pune, India.
(2)Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India. (3)Advanced Centre for Treatment
Research and Education in Cancer, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, India. (4)National
Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India.

The chromatin organizer SATB1 has been implicated in the development and
progression of multiple cancers including breast and colorectal cancers. However,
the regulation and role of SATB1 in colorectal cancers is poorly understood.
Here, we demonstrate that expression of SATB1 is induced upon hyperactivation of 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and repressed upon depletion of TCF7L2 (TCF4) and
ß-catenin. Using several colorectal cancer cell line models and the APC min
mutant zebrafish in vivo model, we established that SATB1 is a novel target of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We show that direct binding of TCF7L2/ß-catenin complex 
on Satb1 promoter is required for the regulation of SATB1. Moreover, SATB1 is
sufficient to regulate the expression of ß-catenin, members of TCF family,
multiple downstream effectors and mediators of Wnt pathway. SATB1 potentiates the
cellular changes and expression of key cancer-associated genes in non-aggressive 
colorectal cells, promotes their aggressive phenotype and tumorigenesis in vivo. 
Conversely, depletion of SATB1 from aggressive cells reprograms the expression of
cancer-associated genes, reverses their cancer phenotype and reduces the
potential of these cells to develop tumors in vivo. We also show that SATB1 and
ß-catenin bind to the promoters of TCF7L2 and the downstream targets of Wnt
signaling and regulate their expression. Our findings suggest that SATB1 shares a
feedback regulatory network with TCF7L2/ß-catenin signaling and is required for
Wnt signaling-dependent regulation of ß-catenin. Collectively, these results
provide unequivocal evidence to establish that SATB1 reprograms the expression of
tumor growth- and metastasis-associated genes to promote tumorigenesis and
functionally overlaps with Wnt signaling critical for colorectal cancer
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26165840  [PubMed - in process]


80. Gut. 2015 Jul 8. pii: gutjnl-2014-307900. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307900. [Epub 
ahead of print]

New Wnt/ß-catenin target genes promote experimental metastasis and migration of
colorectal cancer cells through different signals.

Qi J(1), Yu Y(1), Akilli Öztürk Ö(1), Holland JD(1), Besser D(1), Fritzmann J(2),
Wulf-Goldenberg A(3), Eckert K(3), Fichtner I(3), Birchmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany. (2)Klinik
für Viszeral-, Thorax- und Gefäßchirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus
an der TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (3)Experimental Pharmacology & Oncology
(EPO), Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: We have previously identified a 115-gene signature that characterises
the metastatic potential of human primary colon cancers. The signature included
the canonical Wnt target gene BAMBI, which promoted experimental metastasis in
mice. Here, we identified three new direct Wnt target genes from the signature,
and studied their functions in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), cell
migration and experimental metastasis.
DESIGN: We examined experimental liver metastases following injection of selected
tumour cells into spleens of NOD/SCID mice. Molecular and cellular techniques
were used to identify direct transcription target genes of Wnt/ß-catenin signals.
Microarray analyses and experiments that interfered with cell migration through
inhibitors were performed to characterise downstream signalling systems.
RESULTS: Three new genes from the colorectal cancer (CRC) metastasis signature,
BOP1, CKS2 and NFIL3, were identified as direct transcription targets of
ß-catenin/TCF4. Overexpression and knocking down of these genes in CRC cells
promoted and inhibited, respectively, experimental metastasis in mice, EMT and
cell motility in culture. Cell migration was repressed by interfering with
distinct signalling systems through inhibitors of PI3K, JNK, p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase and/or mTOR. Gene expression profiling
identified a series of migration-promoting genes, which were induced by BOP1,
CKS2 and NFIL3, and could be repressed by inhibitors that are specific to these
pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified new direct Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, BOP1, CKS2 and 
NFIL3, which induced EMT, cell migration and experimental metastasis of CRC
cells. These genes crosstalk with different downstream signalling systems, and
activate migration-promoting genes. These pathways and downstream genes may serve
as therapeutic targets in the treatment of CRC metastasis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26156959  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jul 2;6:e1805. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.171.

Metabolic stress induces a Wnt-dependent cancer stem cell-like state transition.

Lee E(1), Yang J(2), Ku M(3), Kim NH(4), Park Y(5), Park CB(4), Suh JS(6), Park
ES(7), Yook JI(4), Mills GB(8), Huh YM(6), Cheong JH(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Radiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Republic of Korea [2] Nanomedical National Core Research Center, Yonsei 
University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea. (2)1] Department of Radiology,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea [2]
Yonsei-KRIBB Medical Convergence Research Institute, Yonsei University Health
System, Seoul, Korea. (3)1] Department of Radiology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea [2] Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for
Medical Science, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Oral pathology, Oral Cancer Research Institute, Yonsei
University College of Dentistry, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (5)Department 
of Radiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of
Korea. (6)1] Department of Radiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea [2] Yonsei-KRIBB Medical Convergence Research
Institute, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea [3] Severance Biomedical
Science Institute (SBSI), Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (7)Yonsei-KRIBB
Medical Convergence Research Institute, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul,
Korea. (8)Department of Systems Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
USA. (9)1] Severance Biomedical Science Institute (SBSI), Seoul 120-752, Republic
of Korea [2] Department of Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Republic of Korea [3] Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea.

Reciprocal interactions between cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment drive
multiple clinically significant behaviors including dormancy, invasion, and
metastasis as well as therapy resistance. These microenvironment-dependent
phenotypes share typical characteristics with cancer stem cells (CSC). However,
it is poorly understood how metabolic stress in the confined tumor
microenvironment contributes to the emergence and maintenance of CSC-like
phenotypes. Here, we demonstrate that chronic metabolic stress (CMS) in a
long-term nutrient deprivation induces a Wnt-dependent phenoconversion of
non-stem cancer cells toward stem-like state and this is reflected in the
transcriptome analysis. Addition of Wnt3a as well as transfection of
dominant-negative Tcf4 establishes an obligatory role for the Wnt pathway in the 
acquisition of CSC-like characteristics in response to metabolic stress.
Furthermore, systematic characterization for multiple single cell-derived clones 
and negative enrichment of CD44+/ESA+ stem-like cancer cells, all of which
recapitulate stem-like cancer characteristics, suggest stochastic adaptation
rather than selection of pre-existing subclones. Finally, CMS in the tumor
microenvironment can drive a CSC-like phenoconversion of non-stem cancer cells
through stochastic state transition dependent on the Wnt pathway. These findings 
contribute to an understanding of the metabolic stress-driven dynamic transition 
of non-stem cancer cells to a stem-like state in the tumor metabolic
microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4650724
PMID: 26136078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 31;117(4):364-75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306829. Epub
2015 Jun 29.

Bach1 Represses Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling and Angiogenesis.

Jiang L(1), Yin M(1), Wei X(1), Liu J(1), Wang X(1), Niu C(1), Kang X(1), Xu
J(1), Zhou Z(1), Sun S(1), Wang X(1), Zheng X(1), Duan S(1), Yao K(1), Qian R(1),
Sun N(1), Chen A(1), Wang R(1), Zhang J(1), Chen S(1), Meng D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology (L.J., Xiangxiang Wei,
J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S., A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.)
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (S.S., Xu Wang), School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key Laboratory of
Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China (X.Z.,
S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (K.Y.); Center for Vascular
Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of Biology, Laurentian University,
Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis (J.Z.). (2)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology
(L.J., Xiangxiang Wei, J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S.,
A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.) and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(S.S., Xu Wang), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China (X.Z., S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
(K.Y.); Center for Vascular Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of
Biology, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of 
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis (J.Z.). dmeng@fudan.edu.cn chen1216@fudan.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e79.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e75-6.

RATIONALE: Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has an important role in the angiogenic
activity of endothelial cells (ECs). Bach1 is a transcription factor and is
expressed in ECs, but whether Bach1 regulates angiogenesis is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the role of Bach1 in angiogenesis and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hind-limb ischemia was surgically induced in Bach1(-/-) mice
and their wild-type littermates and in C57BL/6J mice treated with adenoviruses
coding for Bach1 or GFP. Lack of Bach1 expression was associated with significant
increases in perfusion and vascular density and in the expression of
proangiogenic cytokines in the ischemic hindlimb of mice, with enhancement of the
angiogenic activity of ECs (eg, tube formation, migration, and proliferation).
Bach1 overexpression impaired angiogenesis in mice with hind-limb ischemia and
inhibited Wnt3a-stimulated angiogenic response and the expression of
Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, such as interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial growth
factor, in human umbilical vein ECs. Interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial
growth factor were responsible for the antiangiogenic response of Bach1.
Immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assessments indicated that Bach1 binds
directly to TCF4 and reduces the interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4. Bach1
overexpression reduces the interaction between p300/CBP and ß-catenin, as well as
ß-catenin acetylation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed
that Bach1 occupies the TCF4-binding site of the interleukin-8 promoter and
recruits histone deacetylase 1 to the interleukin-8 promoter in human umbilical
vein ECs.
CONCLUSIONS: Bach1 suppresses angiogenesis after ischemic injury and impairs
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by disrupting the interaction between ß-catenin and TCF4 
and by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 to the promoter of TCF4-targeted genes.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4676728
PMID: 26123998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 15;75(16):3398-410. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3265. Epub
2015 Jun 29.

Diverse Targets of ß-Catenin during the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Define 
Cancer Stem Cells and Predict Disease Relapse.

Chang YW(1), Su YJ(1), Hsiao M(2), Wei KC(3), Lin WH(4), Liang CL(1), Chen SC(5),
Lee JL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan. (2)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou,
Taiwan. (4)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Department of Orthopedics, National Taiwan
University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (5)Department of Surgery,
Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Department of
Medical Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
jllee@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Wnt signaling contributes to the reprogramming and maintenance of cancer stem
cell (CSC) states that are activated by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). 
However, the mechanistic relationship between EMT and the Wnt pathway in CSC is
not entirely clear. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing
(ChIP-seq) indicated that EMT induces a switch from the
ß-catenin/E-cadherin/Sox15 complex to the ß-catenin/Twist1/TCF4 complex, the
latter of which then binds to CSC-related gene promoters. Tandem
coimmunoprecipitation and re-ChIP experiments with epithelial-type cells further 
revealed that Sox15 associates with the ß-catenin/E-cadherin complex, which then 
binds to the proximal promoter region of CASP3. Through this mechanism, Twist1
cleavage is triggered to regulate a ß-catenin-elicited promotion of the CSC
phenotype. During EMT, we documented that Twist1 binding to ß-catenin enhanced
the transcriptional activity of the ß-catenin/TCF4 complex, including by binding 
to the proximal promoter region of ABCG2, a CSC marker. In terms of clinical
application, our definition of a five-gene CSC signature (nuclear
ß-catenin(High)/nuclear Twist1(High)/E-cadherin(Low)/Sox15(Low)/CD133(High)) may 
provide a useful prognostic marker for human lung cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26122848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. BMC Ophthalmol. 2015 Jun 19;15:61. doi: 10.1186/s12886-015-0055-6.

Association of TCF4 polymorphisms and Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy: a
meta-analysis.

Li D(1,)(2), Peng X(3), Sun H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijng Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Key Lab, 
Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, 1 Dong Jiao Min Xiang, Dong
Cheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. 2770688345@qq.com. (2)Department of
Ophthalmology, Beijng di tan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing,
China. 2770688345@qq.com. (3)Beijng Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences Key Lab, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, 1 
Dong Jiao Min Xiang, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, 100730, China.
drpengxy@163.com. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijng di tan Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China. sunhuiyu123@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Studies investigating the associations between transcription factor 4
(TCF4) genetic polymorphisms and Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy (FED) have reported
controversial results. Therefore, this meta-analysis aims to clarify the effects 
of TCF4 polymorphisms on FED risk.
METHODS: A meta-analysis was conducted to assess the association between four
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) inTCF4 and the risk of FED. Relevant
studies were selected through an extensive search of PubMed, EMBASE, and the Web 
of Science databases. Pooled odds ratio (OR) and 95 % confidence interval (CI)
were calculated using the random-effects model.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies were included in this systematic review and
meta-analysis. The pooled results showed that there was a strong positive
association between the TCF4 rs613872 polymorphism and FED risk in all the
genetic models tested (G allele vs. T allele: OR = 4.19, 95 % CI = 3.53-4.97; GG 
vs.
GT/TT: OR = 4.27, 95 % CI = 2.54-7.19; GG/GT vs. TT: OR = 6.29, 95 % CI =
4.23-8.93; GG VS. TT: OR = 10.64, 95 % CI = 5.28-21.41; GT VS. TT: OR = 6.08, 95 
% CI = 4.28-8.64). Statistic evidence was also detected for a significant
association between three other SNPs and the risk of FED.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested a genetic association between four TCF4
polymorphisms (rs613872, rs2286812, rs17595731, and rs9954153) and the risk of
FED.

PMCID: PMC4474332
PMID: 26087656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogenesis. 2015 Jun 15;4:e157. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.17.

An aberrant nuclear localization of E-cadherin is a potent inhibitor of
Wnt/ß-catenin-elicited promotion of the cancer stem cell phenotype.

Su YJ(1), Chang YW(1), Lin WH(2), Liang CL(1), Lee JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan. (2)1] Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National
Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan [2] Department of Orthopedics, National
Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (3)1] Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
[2] Department of Medical Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.

Several studies suggest that Wnt signaling contributes to reprogramming and
maintenance of cancer stem cell (CSC) states activated by loss of membranous
E-cadherin expression. However, E-cadherin's exact role in Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated
promotion of the CSC phenotype remains unclear. Recently, a significant positive 
correlation has been observed between the expression of nuclear (an aberrant
nuclear localization) E-cadherin and ß-catenin in gastric and colorectal
carcinomas. Here we conducted a series of in-vitro and in-vivo studies to show
that the ß-catenin/TCF4 interaction was abolished by E-cadherin and was
correlated with its nuclear localization, and consequently decreased
ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity. Nuclear E-cadherin was a negative
regulator of Wnt/ß-Catenin-elicited promotion of the CSC phenotype. Using
immunohistochemistry on lung cancer tissue microarrays, we found that changes in 
subcellular location of E-cadherin may be described by tumor grade and stage,
suggesting cellular redistribution during lung tumorigenesis. Furthermore,
nuclear E-cadherin expression was more significantly inversely correlated with
CD133 (a lung CSC marker) expression (P<0.005) than total E-cadherin expression
(P<0.05), suggesting that lung cancer as defined by nuclear
E-cadherin(Low)/nuclear ß-catenin(High)/CD133(High) biomarkers has superior
prognostic value over total E-cadherin(Low)/nuclear ß-catenin(High)/CD133(High).

PMCID: PMC4491612
PMID: 26075748  [PubMed]


86. Cartilage. 2014 Jul;5(3):181-9. doi: 10.1177/1947603514525036.

Distinct Effect of TCF4 on the NF<U+03BA>B Pathway in Human Primary Chondrocytes and the
C20/A4 Chondrocyte Cell Line.

Landman EB(1), Periyasamy PC(1), van Blitterswijk CA(2), Post JN(1), Karperien
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, MIRA Institute for Biomedical
Technology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Tissue Regeneration, MIRA Institute for Biomedical Technology
and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies indicated a difference in crosstalk between canonical
WNT pathway and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B) signaling in human and animal
chondrocytes. To assess whether the differences found were dependent on cell
types used, we tested the effect of WNT modulation on NF<U+03BA>B signaling in human
primary articular chondrocytes in comparison with the immortalized human costal
chondrocyte cell line C20/A4.
DESIGN: We used gene expression analysis to study the effect of WNT modulation on
IL1ß-induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression as well as on WNT and NF<U+03BA>B
target gene expression. In addition, we tested the involvement of RelA and TCF4
on activation of the WNT and NF<U+03BA>B pathway by TCF/LEF and NF<U+03BA>B reporter
experiments, respectively.
RESULTS: We found an inhibitory effect of both induction and inhibition of WNT
signaling on IL1ß-induced MMP mRNA expression in primary chondrocytes, whereas
WNT modulation did not affect MMP expression in C20/A4 cells. Furthermore,
TCF/LEF and NF<U+03BA>B reporter activation and WNT and NF<U+03BA>B target gene expression were
regulated differentially by TCF4 and RelA in a cell type-dependent manner.
Additionally, we found significantly higher mRNA and protein expression of TCF4
and RelA in C20/A4 cells in comparison with primary chondrocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that WNT modulation of NF<U+03BA>B is, at least in part, cell
type dependent and that the observed differences are likely because of impaired
sensitivity of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway in C20/A4 cells to modulations in WNT signaling. 
This might be caused by higher basal levels of TCF4 and RelA in C20/A4 cells
compared to primary chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC4297180
PMID: 26069697  [PubMed]


87. Arch Iran Med. 2015 Jun;18(6):376-8. doi: 015186/AIM.0010.

Association of rs12255372 (TCF7L2) and D76N (PDX-1) Polymorphisms with Type 2
Diabetes in a Population Living in Northeast Iran.

Rafati R(1), Jalal R(2), Asoodeh A(3), Matin MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad,
Mashhad, Iran. (2)1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. 2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research
Group, Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad,
Iran.razieh@um.ac.ir. (3)1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. 2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research
Group, Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research Group, Institute of Biotechnology,
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.3)Department of Biology, Faculty of
Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the rs12255372 (TCF7L2) and D76N
(PDX-1) polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in
Mashhad, northeast Iran. A hundred twenty seven patients with T2DM and 71
non-diabetic controls in Mashhad were genotyped by PCR-RFLP and ARMS-PCR methods.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were confirmed by sequencing in some
samples and allelic and genotypic frequencies were then analyzed in each group.
The T-allele of the SNP rs12255372 of TCF7L2 (OR = 2.70, 95% CI = 1.12-6.49, P = 
0.027) and the A-allele of PDX-1 D76N (OR = 3.93, 95% CI = 1.60-7.68, P = 0.002) 
were significantly associated with an increased risk of T2DM. The rs12255372 SNP 
of TCF7L2 and D76N of PDX-1 genes may confer susceptibility to T2DM in the
population living in Mashhad.

PMID: 26058934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 16;11(10):1549-63. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.011. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Somatic Cell Fusions Reveal Extensive Heterogeneity in Basal-like Breast Cancer.

Su Y(1), Subedee A(2), Bloushtain-Qimron N(3), Savova V(4), Krzystanek M(5), Li
L(6), Marusyk A(1), Tabassum DP(2), Zak A(7), Flacker MJ(8), Li M(3), Lin JJ(1), 
Sukumar S(8), Suzuki H(9), Long H(6), Szallasi Z(10), Gimelbrant A(4), Maruyama
R(11), Polyak K(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark. (6)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (8)Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (9)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan. (10)Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark;
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (11)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Molecular Biology,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
Electronic address: reomaru@sapmed.ac.jp. (12)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, 
USA; The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
kornelia_polyak@dfci.harvard.edu.

Basal-like and luminal breast tumors have distinct clinical behavior and
molecular profiles, yet the underlying mechanisms are poorly defined. To
interrogate processes that determine these distinct phenotypes and their
inheritance pattern, we generated somatic cell fusions and performed integrated
genetic and epigenetic (DNA methylation and chromatin) profiling. We found that
the basal-like trait is generally dominant and is largely defined by epigenetic
repression of luminal transcription factors. Definition of super-enhancers
highlighted a core program common in luminal cells but a high degree of
heterogeneity in basal-like breast cancers that correlates with clinical outcome.
We also found that protein extracts of basal-like cells are sufficient to induce 
a luminal-to-basal phenotypic switch, implying a trigger of basal-like
autoregulatory circuits. We determined that KDM6A might be required for
luminal-basal fusions, and we identified EN1, TBX18, and TCF4 as candidate
transcriptional regulators of the luminal-to-basal switch. Our findings highlight
the remarkable epigenetic plasticity of breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26051943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jun 6;8:63. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0161-1.

Targeting Wnt pathway in mantle cell lymphoma-initiating cells.

Mathur R(1), Sehgal L(2), Braun FK(3), Berkova Z(4), Romaguerra J(5), Wang M(6), 
Rodriguez MA(7), Fayad L(8), Neelapu SS(9), Samaniego F(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. rmathur@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. lsehgal@mdanderson.org.
(3)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. fkbraun@outlook.com.
(4)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. zberkova@mdanderson.org.
(5)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. jromague@mdanderson.org.
(6)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. miwang@mdanderson.org.
(7)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. marodriguez@mdanderson.org.
(8)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. lefayad@mdanderson.org.
(9)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. sneelapu@mdanderson.org.
(10)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
fsamaniego@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive and incurable form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Despite initial intense chemotherapy, up to 50% of cases 
of MCL relapse often in a chemoresistant form. We hypothesized that the recently 
identified MCL-initiating cells (MCL-ICs) are the main reason for relapse and
chemoresistance of MCL. Cancer stem cell-related pathways such as Wnt could be
responsible for their maintenance and survival.
METHODS: We isolated MCL-ICs from primary MCL cells on the basis of a defined
marker expression pattern (CD34-CD3-CD45+CD19-) and investigated Wnt pathway
expression. We also tested the potential of Wnt pathway inhibitors in elimination
of MCL-ICs.
RESULTS: We showed that MCL-ICs are resistant to genotoxic agents vincristine,
doxorubicin, and the newly approved Burton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor
ibrutinib. We confirmed the differential up-regulation of Wnt pathway in MCL-ICs.
Indeed, MCL-ICs were particularly sensitive to Wnt pathway inhibitors. Targeting 
ß-catenin-TCF4 interaction with CCT036477, iCRT14, or PKF118-310 preferentially
eliminated the MCL-ICs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that Wnt signaling is critical for the
maintenance and survival of MCL-ICs, and effective MCL therapy should aim to
eliminate MCL-ICs through Wnt signaling inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4460883
PMID: 26048374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):E1160-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1172. Epub
2015 Jun 5.

Glucose Metabolism in High-Risk Subjects for Type 2 Diabetes Carrying the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 Gene Variant.

Daniele G(1), Gaggini M(1), Comassi M(1), Bianchi C(1), Basta G(1), Dardano A(1),
Miccoli R(1), Mari A(1), Gastaldelli A(1), Del Prato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (G.D., M.C., C.B., A.D.,
R.M., S.D.P.), University of Pisa, and Institute of Clinical Physiology (M.G.,
G.B., A.G.), 56124 Pisa, Italy; and Metabolic Unit (A.M.), Institute of
Neuroscience, National Research Council, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127 Padova,
Italy.

CONTEXT: The mechanisms responsible for contribution of variants in the gene
TFC7L2 to the risk for type 2 diabetes (T2DM) remains far from being completely
understood, and available studies have generated nonunivocal results.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the postprandial glucose metabolism in subjects at
risk for T2DM carrying the TCF7L2 risk allele.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-three subjects carrying the
risk-conferring TCF7L2 genotypes (11 TT and 12 CT at rs7901346) and 13 subjects
with wild-type genotype (CC) underwent a standard mixed-meal test (MMT) in
combination with stable isotope tracers.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: We evaluated endogenous and exogenous glucose fluxes and
hormonal responses.
RESULTS: Fasting plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, glycated hemoglobin,
endogenous glucose production, and plasma glucose clearance were similar in the
three groups, whereas plasma glucagon levels were lower in both CT and TT than in
CC (64 ± 20, 63 ± 18 and 90 ± 29 pg/mL, respectively; both P = .01). In response 
to the MMT, TT subjects had lower plasma glucose levels than CC subjects [mean
area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) 6.1 ± 3.9 vs 7.1 ± 12.0 mmol/L, P =
.04] and lower insulin secretion rate (mean AUC 385 ± 95 vs 530 ± 159 pmol/m(2) ·
min, P = .02). Initial (0-60 min) rate of appearance (Ra) of oral glucose was
lower in TT compared with CT/CC (AUC 2.7 ± 1.1 vs 3.8 ± 1.2 µmol/kg · min, P =
.02) with no difference among the three groups in endogenous glucose production. 
The AUC0-60min for Ra of exogenous glucose (Raex) was positively correlated with 
the plasma glucose AUC0-60min. Total Raex AUC0-120min was correlated with total
AUC0-120min of plasma glucose (r = 0.45, P < .01). Plasma glucagon-like peptide-1
and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide levels in response to the MMT were
not affected by genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: In subjects at risk for T2DM, the TCF7L2 polymorphisms were
associated with reduced Raex into systemic circulation, causing reduced
postprandial blood glucose increase and, in turn, lower insulin secretion rate
with no impairment in ß-cell function. The reduced Raex is likely due to greater 
glucose retention in the splanchnic area.

PMID: 26046964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0128683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128683.
eCollection 2015.

Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling Regulates the Expression of the Ammonium Permease Gene
RHBG in Human Cancer Cells.

Merhi A(1), De Mees C(1), Abdo R(1), Victoria Alberola J(1), Marini AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Membrane Transport Laboratory, IBMM, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Gosselies, Belgium.

Ammonium is a metabolic waste product mainly detoxified by the liver. Hepatic
dysfunction can lead to cytotoxic accumulation of circulating ammonium and to
subsequent encephalopathy. Transmembrane ammonium transport is a widely spread
process ensured by the highly conserved proteins of the Mep-Amt-Rh superfamily,
including the mammalian Rhesus (Rh) factors. The regulatory mechanisms involved
in the control of RH genes expression remain poorly studied. Here we addressed
the expression regulation of one of these factors, RHBG. We identify HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma cells and SW480 colon adenocarcinoma cells as expressing
RHBG and show that its expression relies on ß-catenin signaling. siRNA-mediated
ß-catenin knockdown resulted in significant reduction of RHBG mRNA in both cell
lines. Pharmaceutical inhibition of the TCF4/ß-catenin interaction or knockdown
of the transcription factor TCF4 also downregulated RHBG expression. We identify 
a minimal RHBG regulatory sequence displaying a promoter activity and show that
ß-catenin and TCF4 bind to this fragment in vivo. We finally characterize the
role of potential TCF4 binding sites in RHBG regulation. Taken together, our
results indicate RHBG expression as a direct target of ß-catenin regulation, a
pathway frequently deregulated in many cancers and associated with tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4452261
PMID: 26029888  [PubMed - in process]


92. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Jul;168B(5):354-62. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32318. Epub 2015 May 22.

Investigation of the role of TCF4 rare sequence variants in schizophrenia.

Basmanav FB(1,)(2), Forstner AJ(1,)(2), Fier H(1,)(2,)(3), Herms S(2,)(4), Meier 
S(5,)(6), Degenhardt F(1,)(2), Hoffmann P(1,)(2,)(4,)(7), Barth S(1,)(2), Fricker
N(1,)(2), Strohmaier J(5), Witt SH(5), Ludwig M(8), Schmael C(1,)(5), Moebus
S(9), Maier W(10), Mössner R(10,)(11), Rujescu D(12), Rietschel M(5), Lange
C(3,)(13,)(14), Nöthen MM(1,)(2), Cichon S(1,)(2,)(4,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany. (3)Department of Genomic
Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (4)Division of Medical Genetics, 
University Hospital Basel and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (5)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central 
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University,
Mannheim, Germany. (6)National Center for Register-Based Research, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark. (7)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1,
Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany. (8)Department of Clinical Chemistry
and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (9)Centre of Urban 
Epidemiology, Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Essen,
Germany. (10)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany. (11)Department of Psychiatry, University of Tübingen.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, University of Halle, Halle, Germany. (13)German
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. (14)Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.

Transcription factor 4 (TCF4) is one of the most robust of all reported
schizophrenia risk loci and is supported by several genetic and functional lines 
of evidence. While numerous studies have implicated common genetic variation at
TCF4 in schizophrenia risk, the role of rare, small-sized variants at this
locus-such as single nucleotide variants and short indels which are below the
resolution of chip-based arrays requires further exploration. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the association between rare TCF4 sequence
variants and schizophrenia. Exon-targeted resequencing was performed in 190
German schizophrenia patients. Six rare variants at the coding exons and flanking
sequences of the TCF4 gene were identified, including two missense variants and
one splice site variant. These six variants were then pooled with nine additional
rare variants identified in 379 European participants of the 1000 Genomes
Project, and all 15 variants were genotyped in an independent German sample
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,808 patients; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2,261 controls). These data were then analyzed using six
statistical methods developed for the association analysis of rare variants. No
significant association (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) was found. However, the results from our
association and power analyses suggest that further research into the possible
involvement of rare TCF4 sequence variants in schizophrenia risk is warranted by 
the assessment of larger cohorts with higher statistical power to identify rare
variant associations.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26010163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(10-11-12):443-451.

Direct regulation of siamois by VegT is required for axis formation in Xenopus
embryo.

Li HY(1), El Yakoubi W, Shi DL.

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine
(IBPS), UMR 7622, Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Paris, France.

The homeobox gene siamois is one of the earliest genes expressed in the Spemann
organizer and plays a critical role in the formation of the dorsoventral axis. It
is directly regulated by maternal Wnt signalling and functions as an essential
zygotic intermediary between maternal factors and the formation of the Spemann
organizer. The maternal T domain transcription factor VegT interacts with Wnt
signalling and is also involved in the formation of the Spemann organizer.
However, the molecular mechanism of this functional interaction is not fully
understood. Here we show that VegT is required for siamois expression through
direct binding to the T-box binding sites in the siamois promoter. Mutational
analysis of each of the five consensus T-box binding sites suggests that the
proximal site close to the transcription start site is essential for activation
of siamois promoter by VegT, while individual mutation of the four distal sites
has no effect. VegT and Wnt signalling also functionally interact and are
mutually required for siamois expression. In particular, VegT synergizes with
Tcf1, but not Tcf3 and Tcf4, to induce siamois expression, and this is
independent of Tcf/Lef-binding sites or the proximal T-box binding site in the
siamois promoter. We further extend previous observations by showing that VegT
cooperates with maternal Wnt signalling in the formation of the dorsoventral
axis. These results demonstrate that maternal VegT directly regulates siamois
gene transcription in the formation of the Spemann organizer, and provide further
insight into the mechanism underlying the functional interaction between VegT and
Wnt signalling during development.

PMID: 26009239  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


94. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 May 22;6:101. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0092-3.

Expression of Wnt and Notch signaling pathways in inflammatory bowel disease
treated with mesenchymal stem cell transplantation: evaluation in a rat model.

Xing Y(1,)(2), Chen X(3,)(4), Cao Y(5,)(6), Huang J(7,)(8), Xie X(9,)(10), Wei
Y(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou 
Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province,
China. 398340944@qq.com. (2)Guangdong Key laboratory of Clinical Molecular
Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province, China.
398340944@qq.com. (3)Department of Blood Transfusion, Guangzhou First People's
Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180,
Guangdong Province, China. chenxiao_j@163.com. (4)Guangdong Key laboratory of
Clinical Molecular Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People's Hospital,
Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong
Province, China. chenxiao_j@163.com. (5)Guangdong Key laboratory of Clinical
Molecular Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou 
Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province,
China. caoyanwen2007@163.com. (6)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou First 
People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou,
510180, Guangdong Province, China. caoyanwen2007@163.com. (7)Department of Blood 
Transfusion, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No.
1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province, China.
jianyunhuang@126.com. (8)Guangdong Key laboratory of Clinical Molecular Medicine 
and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University,
No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province, China.
jianyunhuang@126.com. (9)Department of Blood Transfusion, Guangzhou First
People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou,
510180, Guangdong Province, China. gdpueducn@126.com. (10)Guangdong Key
laboratory of Clinical Molecular Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First
People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou,
510180, Guangdong Province, China. gdpueducn@126.com. (11)Department of Blood
Transfusion, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No.
1. Panfu Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province, China. weiyaming@163.com.
(12)Guangdong Key laboratory of Clinical Molecular Medicine and Diagnostics,
Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, No. 1. Panfu
Road, Guangzhou, 510180, Guangdong Province, China. weiyaming@163.com.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression of Wnt 
and Notch signaling pathway-related genes in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
treated with mesenchymal stem cell transplantation (MSCT).
METHODS: TNBS (2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid) was used to establish IBD in 
a rat model. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were transplanted via tail vein
transfusion. Saline water was used in a control group. The expression of Wnt and 
Notch main signaling molecules was screened by gene chips and verified by
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in the IBD rat model
on day 14 and day 28 after transplantation.
RESULTS: The IBD rat models were successfully established and MSCs were
transplanted into those models. Genome-wide expression profile chips identified a
total of 388 differentially expressive genes, of which 191 were upregulated and
197 were downregulated in the MSC-transplanted group in comparison with the IBD
control group. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction results showed
that the level of Olfm4 mRNA expression in the IBD group (2.54±0.20) was
significantly increased compared with the MSCT group (1.39±0.54) and the normal
group (1.62±0.25) (P <0.05). The Wnt3a mRNA was more highly expressed in IBD rats
(2.92±0.94) and decreased in MSCT rats (0.17±0.63, P <0.05). The expression of
GSK-3ß mRNA was decreased in the setting of inflammation (0.65±0.04 versus
1.00±0.01 in normal group, P <0.05) but returned to normal levels after MSCT
(0.81±0.17). The expression of ß-catenin was observed to increase in IBD tissues 
(1.76±0.44) compared with normal tissues (1.00±0.01, P <0.05), but no difference 
was found in the MSCT group (1.12±0.36). Wnt11 declined at 14 days and returned
to normal levels at 28 days in the IBD group; in comparison, a significantly
lower expression was found in MSCT rats. There were no differences in the
expression of Fzd3, c-myc, TCF4, and Wnt5a in inflammation, but all of those
genes declined after MSCT treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The canonical Wnt and Notch signaling pathways are activated in IBD 
and may be suppressed by stem cell transplantation to differentiate into
intestinal epithelium after MSCT. Moreover, the non-canonical Wnt signaling may
be inhibited by canonical Wnt signaling in the setting of inflammation and may
also be suppressed by MSCT.

PMCID: PMC4487973
PMID: 25998108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Aug;36(8):914-24. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv069. Epub 2015 May 
19.

Cyclin A2 modulates EMT via ß-catenin and phospholipase C pathways.

Cheung CT(1), Bendris N(2), Paul C(1), Hamieh A(3), Anouar Y(3), Hahne M(1),
Blanchard JM(4), Lemmers B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS, France-Université
Montpellier 2, France-Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France. (2)Institut 
de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS, France-Université Montpellier 2,
France-Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Department of Cell Biology, Dallas, TX, USA and. (3)INSERM U982, Neuronal
and Neuroendocrine Differentiation and Communication, Université de Rouen,
Mont-Saint-Aignan, France. (4)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier,
CNRS, France-Université Montpellier 2, France-Université Montpellier 1,
Montpellier, France, benedicte.lemmers@igmm.cnrs.fr. (5)Institut de Génétique
Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS, France-Université Montpellier 2,
France-Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France,
benedicte.lemmers@igmm.cnrs.fr jean-marie.blanchard@igmm.cnrs.fr.

We have previously demonstrated that Cyclin A2 is involved in cytoskeletal
dynamics, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis. This phenotype 
was potentiated by activated oncogenic H-Ras. However, the mechanisms governing
EMT in these cells have not yet been elucidated. Here, we dissected the pathways 
that are responsible for EMT in cells deficient for Cyclin A2. In Cyclin
A2-depleted normal murine mammary gland (NMuMG) cells expressing RasV12, we found
that ß-catenin was liberated from the cell membrane and cell-cell junctions and
underwent nuclear translocation and activation. Components of the canonical
wingless (WNT) pathway, including WNT8b, WNT10a, WNT10b, frizzled 1 and 2 and
TCF4 were upregulated at the messenger RNA and protein levels following Cyclin A2
depletion. However, suppression of the WNT pathway using the acetyltransferase
porcupine inhibitor C59 did not reverse EMT whereas a dominant negative form of
TCF4 as well as inhibition of phospholipase C using U73122 were able to do so.
This suggests that a WNT-independent mechanism of ß-catenin activation via
phospholipase C is involved in the EMT induced by Cyclin A2 depletion. Our
findings will broaden our knowledge on how Cyclin A2 contributes to EMT and
metastasis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25993989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Neurochem. 2015 Sep;134(5):811-8. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13174. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Sulforaphane enhances temozolomide-induced apoptosis because of down-regulation
of miR-21 via Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in glioblastoma.

Lan F(1), Pan Q(2), Yu H(3), Yue X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Laiwu City People's Hospital, Laiwu, Shandong,
China. (3)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education), Department of radiotherapy, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijin, China. (4)Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin Neurosurgery
Institute, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cerebral Vascular and Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Tianjin, China.

Temozolomide (TMZ) has been widely used in the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM),
although inherent or acquired resistance restricts the application. This study
was aimed to evaluate the efficacy of sulforaphane (SFN) to TMZ-induced apoptosis
in GBM cells and the potential mechanism. Biochemical assays and subcutaneous
tumor establishment were used to characterize the function of SFN in TMZ-induced 
apoptosis. Our results revealed that ß-catenin and miR-21 were concordantly
expressed in GBM cell lines, and SFN significantly reduced miR-21 expression
through inhibiting the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway. Furthermore, down-regulation
of miR-21 enhanced the pro-apoptotic efficacy of TMZ in GBM cells. Finally, we
observed that SFN strengthened TMZ-mediated apoptosis in a miR-21-dependent
manner. In conclusion, SFN effectively enhances TMZ-induced apoptosis by
inhibiting miR-21 via Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in GBM cells. These findings
support the use of SFN for potential therapeutic approach to overcome TMZ
resistance in GBM treatment. Our studies indicate that sulforaphane (SFN)
enhances temozolomide (TMZ)-induced apoptosis because of down-regulation of
miR-21 through Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in glioblastoma (GBM) cells. These
findings demonstrate SFN could be considered as a potential adjuvant therapeutic 
agent in treating GBM patients combined with TMZ in the future to affect
resistance emergence. The further explorations are essential for the clinical
application of SFN in GBM patients, and our results reveal an important mechanism
of SFN chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activity. Chr17, chromosome 17.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 25991372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2015 May 14;10(5):e0126408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126408.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic determinants for gestational diabetes mellitus and related metabolic
traits in Mexican women.

Huerta-Chagoya A(1), Vázquez-Cárdenas P(1), Moreno-Macías H(2), Tapia-Maruri
L(1), Rodríguez-Guillén R(1), López-Vite E(3), García-Escalante G(4),
Escobedo-Aguirre F(5), Parra-Covarrubias A(6), Cordero-Brieño R(7),
Manzo-Carrillo L(7), Zacarías-Castillo R(7), Vargas-García C(8), Aguilar-Salinas 
C(9), Tusié-Luna T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, UNAM / Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador
Zubirán, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (2)Departamento de Economía, Universidad
Autónoma Metropolitana, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (3)Departamento de
Ginelocología y Obstetricia, Hospital General O´Horan, Mérida, Yucatán, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Yucatán,
México. (5)Departamento de Ginecología y Medicina Perinatal, Centro Médico
Nacional 20 de Noviembre, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (6)Departamento de
Endocrinología, Instituto Nacional de Perinatología, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico.
(7)Departamento de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital General Manuel Gea
González, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (8)Departamento de Ginecología y
Obstetricia, Centro de Investigación Materno Infantil GEN, D.F., Mexico City,
Mexico. (9)Departamento de Endocrinología y Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salcador Zubirán, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico.

Epidemiological and physiological similarities among Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus (GDM) and Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) suggest that both diseases, share a
common genetic background. T2D risk variants have been associated to GDM
susceptibility. However, the genetic architecture of GDM is not yet completely
understood. We analyzed 176 SNPs for 115 loci previously associated to T2D, GDM
and body mass index (BMI), as well as a set of 118 Ancestry Informative Markers
(AIMs), in 750 pregnant Mexican women. Association with GDM was found for two of 
the most frequently replicated T2D loci: a TCF7L2 haplotype (CTTC: rs7901695,
rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326; P=2.16 x 10(-06); OR=2.95) and a KCNQ1
haplotype (TTT: rs2237892, rs163184, rs2237897; P=1.98 x 10(-05); OR=0.55). In
addition, we found two loci associated to glycemic traits: CENTD2 (60' OGTT
glycemia: rs1552224, P=0.03727) and MTNR1B (HOMA B: rs1387153, P=0.05358).
Remarkably, a major susceptibility SLC16A11 locus for T2D in Mexicans was not
shown to play a role in GDM risk. The fact that two of the main T2D associated
loci also contribute to the risk of developing GDM in Mexicans, confirm that both
diseases share a common genetic background. However, lack of association with a
Native American contribution T2D risk haplotype, SLC16A11, suggests that other
genetic mechanisms may be in play for GDM.

PMCID: PMC4431878
PMID: 25973943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Transl Psychiatry. 2015 May 12;5:e565. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.56.

A molecular model for neurodevelopmental disorders.

Gigek CO(1), Chen ES(1), Ota VK(1), Maussion G(1), Peng H(1), Vaillancourt K(1), 
Diallo AB(1), Lopez JP(1), Crapper L(1), Vasuta C(1), Chen GG(1), Ernst C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill Group for Suicide Studies, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

Genes implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) important in cognition
and behavior may have convergent function and several cellular pathways have been
implicated, including protein translational control, chromatin modification, and 
synapse assembly and maintenance. Here, we test the convergent effects of
methyl-CpG binding domain 5 (MBD5) and special AT-rich binding protein 2 (SATB2) 
reduced dosage in human neural stem cells (NSCs), two genes implicated in 2q23.1 
and 2q33.1 deletion syndromes, respectively, to develop a generalized model for
NDDs. We used short hairpin RNA stably incorporated into healthy neural stem
cells to supress MBD5 and SATB2 expression, and massively parallel RNA
sequencing, DNA methylation sequencing and microRNA arrays to test the hypothesis
that a primary etiology of NDDs is the disruption of the balance of NSC
proliferation and differentiation. We show that reduced dosage of either gene
leads to significant overlap of gene-expression patterns, microRNA patterns and
DNA methylation states with control NSCs in a differentiating state, suggesting
that a unifying feature of 2q23.1 and 2q33.1 deletion syndrome may be a lack of
regulation between proliferation and differentiation in NSCs, as we observed
previously for TCF4 and EHMT1 suppression following a similar experimental
paradigm. We propose a model of NDDs whereby the balance of NSC proliferation and
differentiation is affected, but where the molecules that drive this effect are
largely specific to disease-causing genetic variation. NDDs are diverse, complex 
and unique, but the optimal balance of factors that determine when and where
neural stem cells differentiate may be a major feature underlying the diverse
phenotypic spectrum of NDDs.

PMCID: PMC4471287
PMID: 25966365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Jun;56(2):397-408. doi: 10.1007/s12031-015-0565-y. Epub 2015
May 12.

TCF4 Mediates the Maintenance of Neuropathic Pain Through Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling
Following Peripheral Nerve Injury in Rats.

Xu Z(1), Chen Y, Yu J, Yin D, Liu C, Chen X, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, 226001, China.

Neuropathic pain is elicited after a serious disorder of the nervous system and
is along with the neural damage. It is usually chronic and challenging to treat. 
Transcription factor 4 (TCF4) is a key transcription factor of Wnt signaling
system. Recent studies have shown that TCF4 interacts with ß-catenin in the Wnt
signaling pathway and coactivates downstream target genes in diverse systems.
However, it is not well elucidated in the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain. In
the present study, we investigated the role of TCF4 in the maintenance of
neuropathic pain after chronic constriction injury (CCI) in rats. CCI induced
persistent TCF4 upregulation in the dorsal root ganglion and spinal cord.
Interestingly, TCF4 was mainly colocalized with neurons in the injured dorsal
root ganglion and spinal cord on CCI day 7. Moreover, the expression patterns of 
ß-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) were parallel with that of
TCF4 in vivo studies. Intrathecal injection of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway inhibitor
IWR-1-endo and TCF4 small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly attenuated
CCI-induced mechanical allodynia and heat hyperalgesia. The results suggest that 
TCF4 in the dorsal root ganglion and spinal cord is involved in the maintenance
of CCI-induced neuropathic pain. Targeting TCF4 or Wnt/ß-catenin signaling may be
a potential treatment for chronic neuropathic pain.

PMID: 25963533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 7;16(5):10411-25. doi: 10.3390/ijms160510411.

TCF4 Is a Molecular Target of Resveratrol in the Prevention of Colorectal Cancer.

Jeong JB(1), Lee J(2), Lee SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
jjb8376@gmail.com. (2)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, College of
Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742, USA. jlee1232@umd.edu. (3)Department of Nutrition and Food Science,
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA. slee2000@umd.edu.

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway plays an essential role in the tumorigenesis of
colorectal cancer. T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) is a member of the TCF/LEF (lymphoid
enhancer factor) family of transcription factors, and dysregulation of ß-catenin 
is decisive for the initiation and progression of colorectal cancer. However, the
role of TCF4 in the transcriptional regulation of its target gene remained poorly
understood. Resveratrol is a dietary phytoalexin and present in many plants,
including grape skin, nuts and fruits. Although resveratrol has been widely
implicated in anti-tumorigenic and pro-apoptotic properties in several cancer
models, the underlying cellular mechanisms are only partially understood. The
current study was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanism of the
anti-cancer activity of resveratrol in human colorectal cancer cells. The
treatment of resveratrol and other phytochemicals decreased the expression of
TCF4. Resveratrol decreases cellular accumulation of exogenously-introduced TCF4 
protein, but did not change the TCF4 transcription. The inhibition of proteasomal
degradation using MG132 (carbobenzoxy-Leu-Leu-leucinal) and lactacystin
ameliorates resveratrol-stimulated down-regulation of TCF4. The half-life of TCF4
was decreased in the cells exposed to resveratrol. Resveratrol increased
phosphorylation of TCF4 at serine/threonine residues through ERK (extracellular
signal-regulated kinases) and p38-dependent pathways. The TCF4 knockdown
decreased TCF/ß-catenin-mediated transcriptional activity and sensitized
resveratrol-induced apoptosis. The current study provides a new mechanistic link 
between resveratrol and TCF4 down-regulation and significant benefits for further
preclinical and clinical practice.

PMCID: PMC4463653
PMID: 25961950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1746. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.107.

Geniposide promotes beta-cell regeneration and survival through regulating
ß-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway.

Yao DD(1), Yang L(1), Wang Y(2), Liu C(3), Wei YJ(1), Jia XB(1), Yin W(4), Shu
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of New Drug Delivery System of Chinese Materia Medica, Jiangsu 
Province Academy of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory
of Xenotransplantation, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department
of Endocrinology, Jiangsu Province Hospital on Integration of Chinese and Western
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China.

T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is an important transcription factor of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has critical roles in ß-cell survival and
regeneration. In preliminary screening assay, we found geniposide, a naturally
occurring compound, was able to increase TCF7L2 mRNA level in Min6 cells. Here we
aimed to investigate the role of geniposide in ß-cell and underlying mechanism
involved. Geniposide was found to promote ß-cell survival by increasing ß-cell
proliferation and decreasing ß-cell apoptosis in cultured mouse islets after
challenge with diabetic stimuli. Geniposide protected ß-cell through activating
Wnt signaling, enhanced expressions of TCF7L2 and GLP-1R, activated AKT,
inhibited GSK3ß activity, and promoted ß-catenin nuclear translocation. The
protective effect of geniposide was remarkably suppressed by siRNAs against
ß-catenin, or by ICG001 (ß-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription inhibitor).
Moreover, geniposide promoted ß-cell regeneration in vivo to normalize blood
glucose in high-fat diet and db/db mice. Increased ß-cell proliferation was
observed in pancreatic sections of geniposide-treated diabetic mice. Most
importantly, geniposide triggered small islet-like cell clusters formation as a
result of ß-cell neogenesis from ductal epithelium, which was well correlated
with the increase in TCF7L2 expression. In exocrine cells isolated from mouse
pancreas, geniposide could induce duct cell differentiation through upregulating 
TCF7L2 expression and activating JAK2/STAT3 pathway. Taken together, we
identified a novel role of geniposide in promoting ß-cell survival and
regeneration by mechanisms involving the activation of ß-catenin/TCF7L2
signaling. Our finding highlights the potential value of geniposide as a possible
treatment for type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4669687
PMID: 25950476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;23(2):345-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.02.010.

[Effects of Down-regulating PPP2R5C Expression on Expression Profile of
TAL1-related Regulating Genes in Jurkat Cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1,)(2,)(3), Liu SC(2), Yang LJ(2), Chen SH(2), Zhang T(2), Luo GX(2), Li
YQ(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Institute of Hematology, Medical collage, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, 
Guangdong Province, China. (3)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong Province, 
China. (4)Institute of Hematology, Medical collage, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, Guangdong Province, China. E-mail: jnyangqiuli@163.com. (5)Key Laboratory
for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, Guangdong Province, China. E-mail: jnyangqiuli@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Based on our previous study showing the inhibition of lenkemia T cell 
proliferation by down-regulating PPP2R5C expression, this study was aimed to
analyze the influence of down-regulating PPP2R5 expression via RNA interference
on genes relatied with TAL1 signaling pathway by using gene chip technique.
METHODS: The PPP2R5C-siRNA799 was transduced into Jurkat cells by nucleofection, 
the total RNA was isolated from treated Jurkat cells after culture for 48 hours; 
the target sequences were prepared by revevse transcription after mRNA
purification, and were hybridized with affymetrix gene expression profile chip 3'
IVT. The original image data were collected using affymetrix gene chip scanner 3 
000, and the gene expression profile was analyzed using gene spring GX 11.0
soflware.
RESULTS: The expression of all 26 genes related with TAL1 signaling pathway was
changed, out of which the expression of 15 genes were up-regulated and the
expression of 11 genes was down-regulated in PPP2R5C-siRNA 799-transfected Jurkat
cells. The genes with significantly up-regulated expression were GATA1, TCF4,
XRCC6 and TCF3, while the genes with significantly down-regulated expression were
SIN3A and RUNX1.
CONCLUSION: The down-regulation of PPP2R5C gene expression in Jurkat cells via
RNA interference to a certain degree can inhibit TAL1 signaling pathway genes,
thereby suppresses the proliferation of Jurkat cells.

PMID: 25948183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Jul;109(1):117-23. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.04.020. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated
with impaired proinsulin conversion--A meta-analysis.

Shen J(1), Fang Y(1), Ge W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of
Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of
Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu, China.
Electronic address: njglgeweihong@163.com.

AIMS: Available evidence supports the emerging hypothesis that the T-Allele of
the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 may be associated with the
risk of impaired proinsulin conversion, but no consensus was available up to now.
METHODS: A computer-based search of electronic databases (PubMed, EMBASE,
Cochrane Library) and reference lists of relevant articles was carried out, and
then 19 studies involving 15830 subjects were identified. The combined weighted
mean difference (WMD) and their corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were
calculated by a fixed or random effect.
RESULTS: In the overall analysis, the T-Allele was observed to be significantly
associated with the risk of impaired proinsulin conversion (up-regulate fasting
proinsulin concentration WMD -0.40 pM/L (95% CI -0.57 to -0.23); down-regulate
fasting insulin concentration 3.86 pM/L (95% CI 1.91 to 5.81)). Subgroup analyse 
stratified by subjects population characteristics and ethnicity were performed.
The results indicated the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with the
risk of impaired proinsulin conversion in various population characteristics
study. With only a few of subjects in Asians and Africans were available, we
failed to detect significant ethnic difference about TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and the risk of impaired proinsulin conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that the T-Allele of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 is a
significantly risk factor for impaired proinsulin conversion. Future research
should gather more data about the effect of TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism on
Asians and Africans.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMC Med Genet. 2015 Mar 24;16:18. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0161-6.

Tissue-specific patterns of gene expression in the epithelium and stroma of
normal colon in healthy individuals in an aspirin intervention trial.

Thomas SS(1), Makar KW(2), Li L(3), Zheng Y(4), Yang P(5), Levy L(6), Rudolph
RY(7), Lampe PD(8), Yan M(9), Markowitz SD(10), Bigler J(11), Lampe JW(12),
Potter JD(13).

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
ssthomas@fredhutch.org. (2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
98109, USA. kmakar@fredhutch.org. (3)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. alex_lee001@yahoo.com. (4)Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. yzheng@fredhutch.org. (5)M.D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. pyang@mdanderson.org. (6)Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. llevy@fredhutch.org. (7)Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. rrudolph7@gmail.com. 
(8)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
plampe@fredhutch.org. (9)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, 44106, USA. yanmin8@hotmail.com. (10)Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, 44106, USA. sxm10@case.edu.
(11)Amgen Corporation, Seattle, WA, 98119, USA. jbigler@amgen.com. (12)Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. jlampe@fredhutch.org.
(13)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
jpotter@fredhutch.org.

BACKGROUND: Regular aspirin use reduces colon adenoma and carcinoma incidence.
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are involved in aspirin metabolism and
clearance, and variant alleles in UGT1A6 have been shown to alter salicylic acid 
metabolism and risk of colon neoplasia.
METHODS: In a randomized, cross-over, placebo-controlled trial of 44 healthy men 
and women, homozygous for UGT1A6*1 or UGT1A6*2, we explored differences between
global epithelial and stromal expression, using Affymetrix U133<U+2009>+<U+2009>2.0 microarrays
and tested effects of 60-day aspirin supplementation (325 mg/d) on epithelial and
stromal gene expression and colon prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences in gene expression were
observed in response to aspirin or UGT1A6 genotype, but tissue PGE2 levels were
lower with aspirin compared to placebo (p <0.001). Transcripts differentially
expressed between epithelium and stroma (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>4916, P<U+2009><0.01, false discovery rate 
<0.001), included a high proportion of genes involved in cell signaling, cellular
movement, and cancer. Genes preferentially expressed in epithelium were involved 
in drug and xenobiotic metabolism, fatty acid and lipid metabolism, apoptosis
signaling, and ion transport. Genes preferentially expressed in stroma included
those involved in inflammation, cellular adhesion, and extracellular matrix
production. Wnt-Tcf4 pathway genes were expressed in both epithelium and stroma
but differed by subcellular location.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, in healthy individuals, subtle effects
of aspirin on gene expression in normal colon tissue are likely overwhelmed by
inter-individual variability in microarray analyses. Differential expression of
critical genes between colonic epithelium and stroma suggest that these tissue
types need to be considered separately.

PMCID: PMC4422425
PMID: 25927723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Apr 27;5(7):1351-60. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.018382.

Identification of Reproduction-Related Gene Polymorphisms Using Whole
Transcriptome Sequencing in the Large White Pig Population.

Fischer D(1), Laiho A(2), Gyenesei A(3), Sironen A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), Green Technology, Animal and Plant
Genomics and Breeding, FI-31600 Jokioinen, Finland. (2)The Finnish Microarray and
Sequencing Centre, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo
Akademi University, Tykistökatu 6, FI-20520 Turku, Finland. (3)Campus Science
Support Facilities, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna, Austria. (4)Natural
Resources Institute Finland (Luke), Green Technology, Animal and Plant Genomics
and Breeding, FI-31600 Jokioinen, Finland anu.sironen@luke.fi.

Recent developments in high-throughput sequencing techniques have enabled
large-scale analysis of genetic variations and gene expression in different
tissues and species, but gene expression patterns and genetic variations in
livestock are not well-characterized. In this study, we have used high-throughput
transcriptomic sequencing of the Finnish Large White to identify gene expression 
patterns and coding polymorphisms within the breed in the testis and oviduct. The
main objective of this study was to identify polymorphisms within genes that are 
highly and specifically expressed in male and/or female reproductive organs. The 
differential expression (DE) analysis underlined 1234 genes highly expressed in
the testis and 1501 in the oviduct. Furthermore, we used a novel in-house
R-package hoardeR for the identification of novel genes and their orthologs,
which underlined 55 additional DE genes based on orthologs in the human, cow, and
sheep. Identification of polymorphisms in the dataset resulted in a total of
29,973 variants, of which 10,704 were known coding variants. Fifty-seven
nonsynonymous SNPs were present among genes with high expression in the testis
and 67 were present in the oviduct, underlining possible influential genes for
reproduction traits. Seven genes (PGR, FRAS1, TCF4, ADAT1, SPAG6, PIWIL2, and
DNAH8) with polymorphisms were highlighted as reproduction-related based on their
biological function. The expression and SNPs of these genes were confirmed using 
RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing. The identified nonsynonymous mutations within genes
highly expressed in the testis or oviduct provide a list of candidate genes for
reproduction traits within the pig population and enable identification of
biomarkers for sow and boar fertility.

Copyright © 2015 Fischer et al.

PMCID: PMC4502369
PMID: 25917919  [PubMed - in process]


106. J Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Apr;127(4):446-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jphs.2015.03.005. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

Differentiation-inducing factor-3 inhibits intestinal tumor growth in vitro and
in vivo.

Kubokura N(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F(2), Arioka M(3), Yoshihara T(3), Igawa K(4),
Tomooka K(4), Morimoto S(3), Nakatsu Y(5), Tsuzuki T(5), Nakabeppu Y(6),
Matsumoto T(7), Kitazono T(8), Sasaguri T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan; Department of Medicine and Clinical
Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan; Global Medical Science Education Unit,
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
Electronic address: yanaga@clipharm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Clinical
Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan. (4)Department of Molecular and Material Science, Institute for Materials
Chemistry and Engineering, Kyushu University, Kasuga, 816-8580, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Biophysics and Radiation Biology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. (6)Division of
Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and Neuroscience, Medical
Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, 020-0023, Japan. (8)Department of
Medicine and Clinical Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) produced by Dictyostelium discoideum
strongly inhibits the proliferation of various types of cancer cells by
suppression of the Wnt/ß-catenin signal transduction pathway. In the present
study, we examined the effect of differentiation-inducing factor-3 (DIF-3), a
monochlorinated metabolite of DIF-1 that is also produced by D. discoideum, on
human colon cancer cell lines HCT-116 and DLD-1. DIF-3 strongly inhibited cell
proliferation by arresting the cell cycle at the G0/G1 phase. DIF-3 reduced the
expression levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc by facilitating their degradation via
activation of GSK-3ß in a time and dose-dependent manner. In addition, DIF-3
suppressed the expression of T-cell factor 7-like 2, a key transcription factor
in the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, thereby reducing the mRNA levels of
cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Subsequently, we examined the in vivo effects of DIF-3 in
Mutyh(-/-) mice with oxidative stress-induced intestinal cancers. Repeated oral
administration of DIF-3 markedly reduced the number and size of cancers at a
level comparable to that of DIF-1. These data suggest that DIF-3 inhibits
intestinal cancer cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo, probably by mechanisms
similar to those identified in DIF-1 actions, and that DIF-3 may be a potential
novel anti-cancer agent.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 25913757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 25;14:94. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0358-5.

Next-generation sequencing reveals novel differentially regulated mRNAs, lncRNAs,
miRNAs, sdRNAs and a piRNA in pancreatic cancer.

Müller S(1,)(2,)(3), Raulefs S(4), Bruns P(5), Afonso-Grunz F(6,)(7), Plötner
A(8), Thermann R(9), Jäger C(10), Schlitter AM(11), Kong B(12), Regel I(13), Roth
WK(14), Rotter B(15), Hoffmeier K(16), Kahl G(17), Koch I(18), Theis FJ(19,)(20),
Kleeff J(21), Winter P(22), Michalski CW(23).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de. (2)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology
Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de.
(3)Molecular Bioinformatics Group, Institute of Computer Science, Cluster of
Excellence Frankfurt 'Macromolecular Complexes' Faculty of Computer Science and
Mathematics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de.
(4)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. susanne.raulefs@tum.de. (5)Department of Surgery,
Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
philipp.bruns@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (6)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. fgrunz@stud.uni-frankfurt.de. (7)GenXPro GmbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
fgrunz@stud.uni-frankfurt.de. (8)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation
Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ploetner@genxpro.de. (9)GFE Blut mbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
rolf.thermann@gfeblut.de. (10)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
Carsten.Jaeger@lrz.tu-muenchen.de. (11)Department of Pathology, Klinikum Rechts
der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
melissa.schlitter@lrz.tu-muenchen.de. (12)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts 
der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. kongbo81@hotmail.com. 
(13)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. ivonne.regel@lrz.tum.de. (14)GFE Blut mbH, Frankfurt
Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
kurt.roth@gfeblut.de. (15)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation
Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. rotter@genxpro.de. (16)GenXPro GmbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
hoffmeier@genxpro.de. (17)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany. kahl@em.uni-frankfurt.de. (18)Molecular Bioinformatics Group,
Institute of Computer Science, Cluster of Excellence Frankfurt 'Macromolecular
Complexes' Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. ina.koch@bioinformatik.uni-frankfurt.de. (19)Institute of Computational 
Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.
fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (20)Department of Mathematics, TU Munich,
Boltzmannstrasse 3, Garching, Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(21)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. kleeff@tum.de. (22)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt
Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. pwinter@genxpro.de. 
(23)Department of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
cwmichalski@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer. 2015;14:144.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies identified microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs
with significantly different expression between normal pancreas and pancreatic
cancer (PDAC) tissues. Due to technological limitations of microarrays and
real-time PCR systems these studies focused on a fixed set of targets. Expression
of other RNA classes such as long intergenic non-coding RNAs or sno-derived RNAs 
has rarely been examined in pancreatic cancer. Here, we analysed the coding and
non-coding transcriptome of six PDAC and five control tissues using
next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: Besides the confirmation of several deregulated mRNAs and miRNAs, miRNAs
without previous implication in PDAC were detected: miR-802, miR-2114 or miR-561.
SnoRNA-derived RNAs (e.g. sno-HBII-296B) and piR-017061, a piwi-interacting RNA, 
were found to be differentially expressed between PDAC and control tissues. In
silico target analysis of miR-802 revealed potential binding sites in the 3' UTR 
of TCF4, encoding a transcription factor that controls Wnt signalling genes.
Overexpression of miR-802 in MiaPaCa pancreatic cancer cells reduced TCF4 protein
levels. Using Massive Analysis of cDNA Ends (MACE) we identified differential
expression of 43 lincRNAs, long intergenic non-coding RNAs, e.g. LINC00261 and
LINC00152 as well as several natural antisense transcripts like HNF1A-AS1 and
AFAP1-AS1. Differential expression was confirmed by qPCR on the
mRNA/miRNA/lincRNA level and by immunohistochemistry on the protein level.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report a novel lncRNA, sncRNA and mRNA signature of PDAC.
In silico prediction of ncRNA targets allowed for assigning potential functions
to differentially regulated RNAs.

PMCID: PMC4417536
PMID: 25910082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11150-61.

Combined inhibition of EGFR and c-ABL suppresses the growth of triple-negative
breast cancer growth through inhibition of HOTAIR.

Wang YL(1), Overstreet AM(1), Chen MS(1), Wang J(2), Zhao HJ(1,)(3), Ho PC(1),
Smith M(1,)(4), Wang SC(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)Department of Pathology & Lab Medicine, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (3)School of Pharmacy,
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Zhejiang, China. (4)Cancer and Cell Biology 
Graduate Program, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) does not express conventional therapeutic
targets and is the only type of malignant breast cancer for which no designated
FDA-approved targeted therapy is available. Although overexpression of epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently found in TNBC, the therapeutic effect
of EGFR inhibitors in TNBC has been underwhelming. Here we show that co-treatment
with clinically validated inhibitors of c-ABL (imatinib) and EGFR (lapatinib)
results in synergistic growth inhibition in TNBC cells. The dual treatment leads 
to synergistic repression of the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) HOTAIR (HOX
Antisense Intergenic RNA). HOTAIR has been known to induce tumor growth and
metastasis in breast cancer. Depleting HOTAIR alone phenocopies the dual
treatment in growth suppression. We show that expression of HOTAIR is regulated
by ß-catenin through a LEF1/TCF4-binding site. The dual treatment blocks nuclear 
expression of ß-catenin and prevents its recruitment to the HOTAIR promoter.
Consistently, forced expression of ß-catenin rescued HOTAIR expression and cell
viability in the presence of both drugs. Upregulation of HOTAIR is associated
with TNBC in cell lines and a cohort of primary tumors. This study elucidates a
previously unidentified mechanism in TNBC linking signaling with lncRNA
regulation which may be exploited for therapeutic gain.

PMCID: PMC4484446
PMID: 25883211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 29;461(2):249-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.009. Epub 2015 Apr 11.

Inactivation of Itf2 promotes intestinal tumorigenesis in Apc(Min/+) mice.

Grill JI(1), Herbst A(2), Brandl L(3), Kong L(2), Schneider MR(4), Kirchner T(3),
Wolf E(4), Kolligs FT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany;
Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center, University
of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany. Electronic address: grill@genzentrum.lmu.de.
(2)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University of Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center,
University of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany. (5)Department of Medicine II,
University of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, HELIOS
Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany.

Deregulation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling following inactivation of the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene is frequently found in colorectal
cancer. We have previously shown that levels of ITF-2B, encoded by the ß-catenin 
target gene ITF2 that is located on the tumor suppressor gene locus 18q21, are
increased in colonic adenomas with deregulated ß-catenin activity. However,
during tumor progression ITF-2B levels are reduced, suggesting that ITF-2B
interferes with tumor development. To investigate the role of ITF2 in intestinal 
tumorigenesis, we specifically inactivated Itf2 in the intestinal epithelium of
Apc(Min/+) mice. We found that genetic disruption of Itf2 on the Apc(Min/+)
background results in earlier death and a significant increase in tumor number
and size in the small intestine. Based on these data Itf2 acts as a tumor
suppressor gene of the intestinal tract that inhibits tumor initiation and
growth.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25869068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Mar 31;14(1):2860-7. doi: 10.4238/2015.March.31.16.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to breast cancer: a meta-analysis.

Lu XP(1), Hu GN(2), Du JQ(3), Li HQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Dongyang People's Hospital, Dong
Yang, China luxiping112@126.com. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Dongyang
People's Hospital, Dong Yang, China. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Dongyang People's Hospital, Dong Yang, China.

Numerous studies have evaluated the association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) and breast cancer risk. However, the results have been
inconsistent. Therefore, in the current study, we performed a meta-analysis. A
systematically literature search of the PubMed and EMBASE databases was conducted
in November 2013, and the reference lists of articles were retrieved. A summary
odds ratio (OR) with its 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated to evaluate
the strength of association. Publication bias was investigated using Begg's
funnel plot. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA package version 12.0. A
total of 4 case-control studies met our inclusion criteria, including 4600 cases 
and 5289 controls. Overall, TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms were significantly
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in genetic comparison models
(rs12255372 for GG vs GT: OR = 0.90, 95%CI = 0.83-0.98; rs7903146 for CC vs TT:
OR = 0.75, 95%CI = 0.63-0.90, CC vs CT: OR = 0.88, 95%CI = 0.81-0.97, dominant
model: OR = 1.16, 95%CI = 1.06-1.27, recessive model: OR = 0.79, 95%CI =
0.67-0.94). This meta-analysis demonstrated that TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) are associated with an increased susceptibility to
breast cancer. However, further studies including large sample sizes are needed
to validate this association.

PMID: 25867435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Signal. 2015 Aug;27(8):1652-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.03.025. Epub
2015 Apr 10.

Coordinated action of Axin1 and Axin2 suppresses ß-catenin to regulate muscle
stem cell function.

Figeac N(1), Zammit PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Randall Division of Cell & Molecular Biophysics, New
Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
nicolas.figeac@kcl.ac.uk. (2)King's College London, Randall Division of Cell &
Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: peter.zammit@kcl.ac.uk.

The resident stem cells of skeletal muscle are satellite cells, which are
regulated by both canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways. Canonical Wnt
signalling promotes differentiation, and is controlled at many levels, including 
via Axin1 and Axin2-mediated ß-catenin degradation. Axin1 and Axin2 are thought
equivalent suppressors of canonical Wnt signalling, although Axin2 is also a Wnt 
target gene. We show that Axin1 expression was higher in proliferating satellite 
cells, while Axin2 was up-regulated during differentiation. siRNA-mediated Axin1 
knockdown changed cell morphology, suppressed proliferation and promoted myogenic
differentiation. Simultaneous knockdown of both Axin1 and ß-catenin rescued
proliferation and partially, premature differentiation. Surprisingly,
retroviral-mediated overexpression of Axin2 was unable to compensate for
knockdown of Axin1 in satellite cells, indicating that Axin1 and Axin2 are not
fully redundant. Isolated satellite cells from Axin2-null mice also had no major 
phenotype. However, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Axin1 in Axin2-null cells
strongly inhibited proliferation, while inducing differentiation, clear nuclear
localisation of ß-catenin, up-regulation of canonical Wnt target genes (Axin2,
Lef1, Tcf4, Pitx2c and Lgr5) and activation of a TCF reporter construct. Again,
concomitant knockdown of Axin1 and ß-catenin in Axin2-null satellite cells
rescued morphology and proliferation, but only partially prevented precocious
differentiation. Thus, Axin1 and Axin2 do not have equivalent functions in
satellite cells, but are both involved in repression of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling 
to maintain proliferation and contribute to controlling timely myogenic
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25866367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Hum Immunol. 2015 May;76(5):339-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 8.

Association of LRP5, TCF7L2, and GCG variants and type 2 diabetes mellitus as
well as fasting plasma glucose and lipid metabolism indexes.

Wang J(1), Yan G(2), Zhang J(3), Gao K(4), Zhang M(5), Li L(6), Wang Y(7), Wang
Q(8), Zhai Y(9), You H(10), Ren Y(11), Wang B(12), Hu D(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, Preventive Medicine
Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Zhengzhou 450008, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
wangjinjin510@163.com. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, 
Preventive Medicine Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450008, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: 784493811@qq.com. (3)Henan Armed Police Corps Hospital, Zhengzhou
450000, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: besdwujing1@163.com.
(4)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of 
China. Electronic address: gao_kaiping@hotmail.com. (5)Shenzhen University School
of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
caroline.zhang@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public
Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: lilinlin@zzu.edu.cn. (7)Department of Epidemiology, College
of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: wangyan870828@126.com. (8)Department of Epidemiology, 
College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: zzuwq2010@163.com. (9)Department of
Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: zhaiyujiamodi@163.com.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
youhaifei1987@yahoo.com.cn. (11)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public
Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: ryc12@sina.com. (12)Department of Epidemiology, College of
Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: wangby95@163.com. (13)Shenzhen University School of
Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
dongsheng_hu@hotmail.com.

Recent data puts WNT signaling pathway in a pivotal role in regulating pancreas
development as well as islet function, insulin production and secretion. The key 
effectors in the WNT signaling pathway are low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5), transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), and
downstream-regulated glucagon (GCG). Our previous studies suggest that the WNT
signaling pathway plays a significant role in risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in Chinese population. The main purpose of the present study was to
investigate the associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in LRP5,
TCF7L2 and glucagon (GCG) and quantitative traits in a healthy population. We
used tag SNP to screen candidate SNPs for LRP5 and GCG; for TCF7L2, used the
confirmed SNP rs11196218. A total of 1842 patients with T2DM and 7777 healthy
controls underwent genotyping for the SNPs. We found a significant association of
rs3758644 in LRP5 and fasting plasma glucose (p=0.006), and rs11196218 in TCF7L2 
and triglycerides level (p=0.004). Among the SNPs in LRP5, TCF7L2, and GCG
analyzed, only rs3758644 of LRP5 and rs11196218 of TCF7L2 were significantly
associated with fasting plasma glucose and triglycerides index, respectively, in 
a healthy population.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25863010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Psychol Med. 2015 Sep;45(12):2461-80. doi: 10.1017/S0033291715000537. Epub 2015
Apr 10.

What is the impact of genome-wide supported risk variants for schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder on brain structure and function? A systematic review.

Gurung R(1), Prata DP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies,Institute of Psychiatry,King's College
London,UK. (2)Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences,Institute of Psychiatry,King's
College London,UK.

The powerful genome-wide association studies (GWAS) revealed common mutations
that increase susceptibility for schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BD),
but the vast majority were not known to be functional or associated with these
illnesses. To help fill this gap, their impact on human brain structure and
function has been examined. We systematically discuss this output to facilitate
its timely integration in the psychosis research field; and encourage reflection 
for future research. Irrespective of imaging modality, studies addressing the
effect of SZ/BD GWAS risk genes (ANK3, CACNA1C, MHC, TCF4, NRGN, DGKH, PBRM1,
NCAN and ZNF804A) were included. Most GWAS risk variations were reported to
affect neuroimaging phenotypes implicated in SZ/BD: white-matter integrity (ANK3 
and ZNF804A), volume (CACNA1C and ZNF804A) and density (ZNF804A); grey-matter
(CACNA1C, NRGN, TCF4 and ZNF804A) and ventricular (TCF4) volume; cortical folding
(NCAN) and thickness (ZNF804A); regional activation during executive tasks (ANK3,
CACNA1C, DGKH, NRGN and ZNF804A) and functional connectivity during executive
tasks (CACNA1C and ZNF804A), facial affect recognition (CACNA1C and ZNF804A) and 
theory-of-mind (ZNF804A); but inconsistencies and non-replications also exist.
Further efforts such as standardizing reporting and exploring complementary
designs, are warranted to test the reproducibility of these early findings.

PMID: 25858580  [PubMed - in process]


114. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Apr 7;16(4):7627-43. doi: 10.3390/ijms16047627.

Phenotypic and molecular convergence of 2q23.1 deletion syndrome with other
neurodevelopmental syndromes associated with autism spectrum disorder.

Mullegama SV(1), Alaimo JT(2), Chen L(3,)(4), Elsea SH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. mullegam@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. alaimo@bcm.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. li.chen@bcm.edu. (4)Department of Cellular and Genetic
Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. li.chen@bcm.edu. (5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. elsea@bcm.edu.

Roughly 20% of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are syndromic with a
well-established genetic cause. Studying the genes involved can provide insight
into the molecular and cellular mechanisms of ASD. 2q23.1 deletion syndrome
(causative gene, MBD5) is a recently identified genetic neurodevelopmental
disorder associated with ASD. Mutations in MBD5 have been found in ASD cohorts.
In this study, we provide a phenotypic update on the prevalent features of 2q23.1
deletion syndrome, which include severe intellectual disability, seizures,
significant speech impairment, sleep disturbance, and autistic-like behavioral
problems. Next, we examined the phenotypic, molecular, and network/pathway
relationships between nine neurodevelopmental disorders associated with ASD:
2q23.1 deletion Rett, Angelman, Pitt-Hopkins, 2q23.1 duplication, 5q14.3
deletion, Kleefstra, Kabuki make-up, and Smith-Magenis syndromes. We show
phenotypic overlaps consisting of intellectual disability, speech delay,
seizures, sleep disturbance, hypotonia, and autistic-like behaviors. Molecularly,
MBD5 possibly regulates the expression of UBE3A, TCF4, MEF2C, EHMT1 and RAI1.
Network analysis reveals that there could be indirect protein interactions,
further implicating function for these genes in common pathways. Further, we show
that when MBD5 and RAI1 are haploinsufficient, they perturb several common
pathways that are linked to neuronal and behavioral development. These findings
support further investigations into the molecular and pathway relationships among
genes linked to neurodevelopmental disorders and ASD, which will hopefully lead
to common points of regulation that may be targeted toward therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4425039
PMID: 25853262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2337-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2800. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

FoxM1 Drives a Feed-Forward STAT3-Activation Signaling Loop That Promotes the
Self-Renewal and Tumorigenicity of Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Gong AH(1), Wei P(2), Zhang S(3), Yao J(4), Yuan Y(5), Zhou AD(2), Lang FF(2),
Heimberger AB(2), Rao G(2), Huang S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Neurosurgery,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Program in
Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at
Houston, Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Neuro-oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Biostatistics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas. suhuang@mdanderson.org.

The growth factor PDGF controls the development of glioblastoma (GBM), but its
contribution to the function of GBM stem-like cells (GSC) has been little
studied. Here, we report that the transcription factor FoxM1 promotes PDGFA-STAT3
signaling to drive GSC self-renewal and tumorigenicity. In GBM, we found a
positive correlation between expression of FoxM1 and PDGF-A. In GSC and mouse
neural stem cells, FoxM1 bound to the PDGF-A promoter to upregulate PDGF-A
expression, acting to maintain the stem-like qualities of GSC in part through
this mechanism. Analysis of the human cancer genomic database The Cancer Genome
Atlas revealed that GBM expresses higher levels of STAT3, a PDGF-A effector
signaling molecule, as compared with normal brain. FoxM1 regulated STAT3
transcription through interactions with the ß-catenin/TCF4 complex. FoxM1
deficiency inhibited PDGF-A and STAT3 expression in neural stem cells and GSC,
abolishing their stem-like and tumorigenic properties. Further mechanistic
investigations defined a FoxM1-PDGFA-STAT3 feed-forward pathway that was
sufficient to confer stem-like properties to glioma cells. Collectively, our
findings showed how FoxM1 activates expression of PDGF-A and STAT3 in a pathway
required to maintain the self-renewal and tumorigenicity of glioma stem-like
cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4452436 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25832656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0121553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121553.
eCollection 2015.

The study to understand the genetics of the acute response to metformin and
glipizide in humans (SUGAR-MGH): design of a pharmacogenetic resource for type 2 
diabetes.

Walford GA(1), Colomo N(2), Todd JN(3), Billings LK(4), Fernandez M(5), Chamarthi
B(6), Warner AS(5), Davis J(5), Littleton KR(5), Hernandez AM(5), Fanelli RR(5), 
Lanier A(5), Barbato C(7), Ackerman RJ(5), Khan SQ(5), Bui R(7), Garber L(7),
Stolerman ES(5), Moore AF(1), Huang C(8), Kaur V(5), Harden M(9), Taylor A(5),
Chen L(5), Manning AK(5), Huang P(8), Wexler D(10), McCarthy RM(11), Lo J(8),
Thomas MK(10), Grant RW(12), Goldfine A(13), Hudson MS(11), Florez JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Diabetes Research Center, Diabetes Unit,
Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America. (2)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition. Hospital Universitario Regional de Málaga. Instituto
de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA). Málaga, Spain. (3)Center for Human 
Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America; Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Diabetes Research Center,
Diabetes Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, Illinois, United
States of America. (5)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (7)Joslin
Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (8)Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (9)Genomics
Platform, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(10)Diabetes Research Center, Diabetes Unit, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(11)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (12)Division of
Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, California, United
States of America. (13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies have uncovered a large number of
genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes or related phenotypes. In many
cases the causal gene or polymorphism has not been identified, and its impact on 
response to anti-hyperglycemic medications is unknown. The Study to Understand
the Genetics of the Acute Response to Metformin and Glipizide in Humans
(SUGAR-MGH, NCT01762046) is a novel resource of genetic and biochemical data
following glipizide and metformin administration. We describe recruitment,
enrollment, and phenotyping procedures and preliminary results for the first 668 
of our planned 1,000 participants enriched for individuals at risk of requiring
anti-diabetic therapy in the future.
METHODS: All individuals are challenged with 5 mg glipizide × 1; twice daily 500 
mg metformin × 2 days; and 75-g oral glucose tolerance test following metformin. 
Genetic variants associated with glycemic traits and blood glucose, insulin, and 
other hormones at baseline and following each intervention are measured.
RESULTS: Approximately 50% of the cohort is female and 30% belong to an ethnic
minority group. Following glipizide administration, peak insulin occurred at 60
minutes and trough glucose at 120 minutes. Thirty percent of participants
experienced non-severe symptomatic hypoglycemia and required rescue with oral
glucose. Following metformin administration, fasting glucose and insulin were
reduced. Common genetic variants were associated with fasting glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS: SUGAR-MGH represents a viable pharmacogenetic resource which, when
completed, will serve to characterize genetic influences on pharmacological
perturbations, and help establish the functional relevance of newly discovered
genetic loci to therapy of type 2 diabetes.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01762046.

PMCID: PMC4374872
PMID: 25812009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Neurosci. 2015 Mar 25;35(12):5007-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4787-14.2015.

The Wnt effector transcription factor 7-like 2 positively regulates
oligodendrocyte differentiation in a manner independent of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling.

Hammond E(1), Lang J(1), Maeda Y(1), Pleasure D(2), Angus-Hill M(3), Xu J(1),
Horiuchi M(4), Deng W(5), Guo F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for
Children, Sacramento, California 95817. (2)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative
Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento, California 95817,
Departments of Neurology. (3)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, Utah 84112. (4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, and. (5)Institute 
for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
California 95817, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, and. (6)Institute for
Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
California 95817, Departments of Neurology, fzguo@ucdavis.edu.

Genetic or pharmacological activation of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
inhibits oligodendrocyte differentiation. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7l2),
also known as TCF4, is a Wnt effector induced transiently in the oligodendroglial
lineage. A well accepted dogma is that TCF7l2 inhibits oligodendrocyte
differentiation through activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We report that
TCF7l2 is upregulated transiently in postmitotic, newly differentiated
oligodendrocytes. Using in vivo gene conditional ablation, we found surprisingly 
that TCF7l2 positively regulates neonatal and postnatal mouse oligodendrocyte
differentiation during developmental myelination and remyelination in a manner
independent of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. We also reveal a novel role
of TCF7l2 in repressing a bone morphogenetic protein signaling pathway that is
known to inhibit oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, our study provides novel 
data justifying therapeutic attempts to enhance, rather than inhibit, TCF7l2
signaling to overcome arrested oligodendroglial differentiation in multiple
sclerosis and other demyelinating diseases.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/355007-16$15.00/0.

PMID: 25810530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Glia. 2015 Oct;63(10):1671-93. doi: 10.1002/glia.22813. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Canonical Wnt signaling in the oligodendroglial lineage--puzzles remain.

Guo F(1), Lang J(1), Sohn J(1), Hammond E(1), Chang M(1), Pleasure D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, School of Medicine at UC Davis Medical Center, Institute
for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
Northern California, Sacramento, California.

The straightforward concept that accentuated Wnt signaling via the
Wnt-receptor-ß-catenin-TCF/LEF cascade (also termed canonical Wnt signaling or
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling) delays or blocks oligodendrocyte differentiation is very
appealing. According to this concept, canonical Wnt signaling is responsible for 
remyelination failure in multiple sclerosis and for persistent hypomyelination in
periventricular leukomalacia. This has given rise to the hope that
pharmacologically inhibiting this signaling will be of therapeutic potential in
these disabling neurological disorders. But current studies suggest that
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays distinct roles in oligodendrogenesis,
oligodendrocyte differentiation, and myelination in a context-dependent manner
(central nervous system regions, developmental stages), and that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling interplays with, and is subjected to regulation by, other central
nervous system factors and signaling pathways. On this basis, we propose the more
nuanced concept that endogenous Wnt/ß-catenin activity is delicately and
temporally regulated to ensure the seamless development of oligodendroglial
lineage cells in different contexts. In this review, we discuss the role
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in oligodendrocyte development, focusing on the
interpretation of disparate results, and highlighting areas where important
questions remain to be answered about oligodendroglial lineage Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25782433  [PubMed - in process]


119. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;155(Pt B):224-30. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.011. Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Effect of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 on the Wnt pathway in non-malignant colonic
cells.

Gröschel C(1), Aggarwal A(1), Tennakoon S(1), Höbaus J(1), Prinz-Wohlgenannt
M(1), Marian B(2), Heffeter P(3), Berger W(3), Kállay E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria. (2)Department of Medicine I, Institute of Cancer Research, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Borschkegasse 8a, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria. (3)Department of Medicine I, Institute of Cancer Research, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Borschkegasse 8a, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria; Research Platform ``Translational Cancer Therapy Research", Vienna,
Austria. (4)Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090
Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: enikoe.kallay@meduniwien.ac.at.

Epidemiological studies suggest a correlation between vitamin D deficiency and
colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence. The majority of sporadic tumors develop from
premalignant lesions with aberrant activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway. The adenoma cell line LT97 harbors an adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)
mutation leading to constitutively active Wnt signaling. In these cells,
expression of Wnt target genes leads to increased survival capacity. We
hypothesized that 1,25-dihydroyvitamin D3 (1,25-D3), the active form of vitamin
D3, promotes differentiation by modulating ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)
4-mediated gene transcription. The effect of dietary vitamin D on colonic Wnt
signaling was investigated in mice fed either with 100IU or 2500IU vitamin D/kg
diet. We examined the effect of 1,25-D3 on differentiation by measuring alkaline 
phosphatase activity. We analyzed mRNA expression of Wnt target genes by real
time qRT-PCR. The impact of 1,25-D3 on ß-catenin and TCF4 protein expression was 
assessed by western blot and immunohistochemistry. In LT97 cells, 1,25-D3
increased cellular differentiation and reduced nuclear ß-catenin levels. Further,
1,25-D3 decreased mRNA expression of the Wnt target genes BCL-2, Cyclin D1,
Snail1, CD44 and LGR5. In healthy colon of mice fed with high vitamin D diet, the
mRNA levels of Wnt5a and ROR2, that promote degradation of ß-catenin, were
upregulated whereas ß-catenin and TCF4 protein expression were decreased. In
conclusion, 1,25-D3 inhibits Wnt signaling even in nonmalignant cells underlining
its importance in protection against colorectal tumorigenesis and early tumor
progression. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled '17th Vitamin D
Workshop'.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25777538  [PubMed - in process]


120. J Cancer. 2015 Feb 15;6(4):333-41. doi: 10.7150/jca.10565. eCollection 2015.

Expression and Splice Variant Analysis of Human TCF4 Transcription Factor in
Esophageal Cancer.

He G(1), Guan X(1), Chen X(1), Wang Y(1), Luo C(1), Zhang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: The human T cell transcription factor-4 (TCF4) interacts functionally 
with ß-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway, whose deregulation is involved in
the tumorigenesis of various types of cancers. Recent studies showed that TCF4
mRNAs were subject to alternative splicing, which was proposed to be important in
regulating transactivational properties of the corresponding protein isoforms.
Here we investigated the splicing isoforms and the roles of TCF4 in human
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: RT-PCR and subsequent cloning and sequencing were applied to identify
the splicing isoforms. Western blotting and realtime PCR were used to analyze the
expression of TCF4. Knockdown of TCF4 was achieved with siRNA and stable
transfection of expression vectors was performed.
RESULTS: Our results showed there were a lot of different isoforms of TCF4 mRNA
both in human esophageal cancers and cell line. Further, knockdown of TCF4E
isoform expression in EC109 cells inhibited the cell growth, while overexpression
of TCF4M isoform did not alter its transcription activity. Moreover, sixteen
potential binding proteins of TCF4 were preliminarily identified by mass
spectrometry.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggested that deregulation of TCF4 isoforms may contribute
to the tumorigenesis of ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4349873
PMID: 25767603  [PubMed]


121. Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 15;75(8):1725-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2111. Epub
2015 Mar 5.

IKKß Enforces a LIN28B/TCF7L2 Positive Feedback Loop That Promotes Cancer Cell
Stemness and Metastasis.

Chen C(1), Cao F(1), Bai L(1), Liu Y(1), Xie J(1), Wang W(1), Si Q(1), Yang J(2),
Chang A(2), Liu D(3), Liu D(3), Chuang TH(4), Xiang R(2), Luo Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (2)Department of Immunology, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (3)Xuanwu 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (4)Immunology Research
Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. yunpingluo@hotmail.com.

Considerable evidence suggests that proinflammatory pathways drive self-renewal
of cancer stem-like cells (CSC), but the underlying mechanisms remain mainly
undefined. Here we report that the let7 repressor LIN28B and its regulator IKBKB 
(IKKß) sustain cancer cell stemness by interacting with the Wnt/TCF7L2 (TCF4)
signaling pathway to promote cancer progression. We found that LIN28B expression 
correlated with clinical progression and stemness marker expression in breast
cancer patients. Functional studies demonstrated that the stemness properties of 
LIN28B-expressing human breast and lung cancer cells were enhanced by IKKß,
whereas loss of LIN28B abolished stemness properties in these settings. These
phenomena were driven through interactions with TCF7L2, which enhanced LIN28B
expression by direct binding to intron 1 of the LIN28B gene, which in turn
promoted TCF7L2 mRNA translation through a positive feedback loop. Notably,
RNAi-mediated silencing of LIN28B or pharmacologic inhibition of IKKß was
sufficient to suppress primary and metastatic tumor growth in vivo. Together, our
results establish the LIN28B/TCF7L2 interaction loop as a central mediator of
cancer stemness driven by proinflammatory processes during progression and
metastasis, possibly offering a new therapeutic target for generalized
interventions in advanced cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25744721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Organ Transplant Med. 2015;6(1):14-22.

Polymorphism of Transcription Factor-7-Like 2 (TCF7L2) Gene and New-Onset
Diabetes after Liver Transplantation.

Musavi Z(1), Azarpira N(2), Sangtarash MH(1), Kordi M(3), Kazemi K(2),
Geramizadeh B(2), Malek-Hosseini SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran ; Department of Genetic, Sistan and Baluchestan University of Sciences,
Zahedan, Iran. (2)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. (3)Department of Genetic, Sistan and Baluchestan
University of Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a serious
complication in transplant recipients. Transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is 
a Wnt signaling-associated transcription factor that plays an important role in
ß-cell proliferation and insulin secretion. The association between TCF7L2 SNP
rs7903146 and NODAT was documented in renal transplant patients.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 variants and the
risk of NODAT after liver transplantation.
METHODS: This study was conducted on 140 liver transplant recipients who had
received tacrolimus-based immunosuppressive drugs. The patients were divided into
NODAT (n=70) and non-NODAT (n=70) groups and were genotyped using PCR-RFLP. In
addition, 100 normal subjects were considered as the comparison group.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference (p<0.05) between the two study groups
regarding donor and recipient age, recipient body mass index, and recipient
fasting plasma glucose before the transplantation. No significant relationship
was observed between TCF7L2 rs7903146 genotypes and development of NODAT. No
significant difference was also found between the two groups in terms of the
tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil daily dosage as well as tacrolimus blood
level. However, the prednisolone daily dosage was significantly (p=0.01) higher
in the NODAT group compared to those without NODAT. The majority of the patients 
in the NODAT group also had an episode of acute rejection. Furthermore, a
significant difference was found between the transplant recipients and the
comparison subjects regarding T allele (p<0.001, OR=1.96) and TT genotype
(p<0.001, OR=3.47) frequencies.
CONCLUSION: No correlation was found between TCF7L2 genotypes and development of 
NODAT. Acute rejection and prednisolone pulse therapy predisposed the susceptible
patients to NODAT.

PMCID: PMC4346459
PMID: 25737773  [PubMed]


123. Autism Res. 2015 Oct;8(5):629-33. doi: 10.1002/aur.1467. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Pitt-Hopkins Mouse Model has Altered Particular Gastrointestinal Transits In
Vivo.

Grubiic V(1), Kennedy AJ(1), Sweatt JD(1), Parpura V(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama. (2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder, classified as an
autism spectrum disorder that is caused by the haploinsufficiency of
Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4). The most common non-neurological symptoms in PTHS 
patients are gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances, mainly gastroesophageal reflux
and severe constipation (in about 30 and 75% of PTHS patients, respectively). We 
hypothesized that the recently recognized mouse model of PTHS will exhibit
problems with their gut function. We conducted series of in vivo tests on 15- to 
19- week old male mice, heterozygous for the TCF4 functional deletion, mimicking 
the TCF4 haploinsufficiency in PTHS patients, and their wild type littermates.
Data collection and initial analysis were performed blindly, that is, the
genotyping key was received after the mean values were calculated for each
individual animal, and then mean/median of each group was subsequently
calculated. Body weight, fecal pellet output, and fluid content were similar
between the groups, indicating normal gross growth of PTHS mice and their overall
physiological GI motility and intestinal secretion/absorption. There were no
significant differences in gut length and gross appearance pointing out that PTHS
mice have normal gut in gross anatomical terms. However, the assessment of gut
transit indicates that, while whole-gut transit velocity was similar between the 
groups, the upper GI and distal colon transit velocities were significantly
reduced in the PTHS mice. This is the first evidence of specific gut related
problems in the PTHS mice. Our study also validates the TCF4 functional knockout 
mice as an animal model to study PTHS-associated GI disturbances.

© 2015 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25728630  [PubMed - in process]


124. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Jun;13(6):1034-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0057-T.
Epub 2015 Feb 27.

The Role of Nitric Oxide Synthase Uncoupling in Tumor Progression.

Rabender CS(1), Alam A(1), Sundaresan G(2), Cardnell RJ(3), Yakovlev VA(1),
Mukhopadhyay ND(4), Graves P(5), Zweit J(2), Mikkelsen RB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
Virginia. (2)Department of Radiology and Center for Molecular Imaging, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. (3)Department of Thoracic/Head and
Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, New York Methodist Hospital, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Brooklyn, New York. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. rmikkels@vcu.edu.

Here, evidence suggests that nitric oxide synthases (NOS) of tumor cells, in
contrast with normal tissues, synthesize predominantly superoxide and
peroxynitrite. Based on high-performance liquid chromatography analysis, the
underlying mechanism for this uncoupling is a reduced
tetrahydrobiopterin:dihydrobiopterin ratio (BH4:BH2) found in breast, colorectal,
epidermoid, and head and neck tumors compared with normal tissues. Increasing
BH4:BH2 and reconstitution of coupled NOS activity in breast cancer cells with
the BH4 salvage pathway precursor, sepiapterin, causes significant shifts in
downstream signaling, including increased cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG)
activity, decreased ß-catenin expression, and TCF4 promoter activity, and reduced
NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity. Sepiapterin inhibited breast tumor cell growth in vitro 
and in vivo as measured by a clonogenic assay, Ki67 staining, and
2[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography
(FDG-PET). In summary, using diverse tumor types, it is demonstrated that the
BH4:BH2 ratio is lower in tumor tissues and, as a consequence, NOS activity
generates more peroxynitrite and superoxide anion than nitric oxide, resulting in
important tumor growth-promoting and antiapoptotic signaling
properties.IMPLICATIONS: The synthetic BH4, Kuvan, is used to elevate BH4:BH2 in 
some phenylketonuria patients and to treat diseases associated with endothelial
dysfunction, suggesting a novel, testable approach for correcting an abnormality 
of tumor metabolism to control tumor growth.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4470720 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25724429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Feb 26;56(3):2003-11. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16222.

TCF4 Triplet Repeat Expansion and Nuclear RNA Foci in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal 
Dystrophy.

Mootha VV(1), Hussain I(2), Cunnusamy K(2), Graham E(2), Gong X(2), Neelam S(2), 
Xing C(3), Kittler R(3), Petroll WM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, United States McDermott Center for Human Growth and
Development/Center for Human Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, United States. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States. (3)McDermott 
Center for Human Growth and Development/Center for Human Genetics, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States.

PURPOSE: Expansion of the intronic CTG18.1 triplet repeat locus within TCF4
contributes significant risk to the development of Fuchs' endothelial corneal
dystrophy (FECD) in Eurasian populations, but the mechanisms by which the
expanded repeats result in degeneration of the endothelium have been hitherto
unknown. The purpose of this study was to examine FECD endothelial samples for
the presence of RNA nuclear foci, the hallmark of toxic RNA, as well as evidence 
of haploinsufficiency of TCF4.
METHODS: Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we examined for the presence
of nuclear RNA foci containing expanded CUG transcripts in corneal endothelial
samples from FECD subjects with CTG18.1 expansion. We also examined for any
changes in expression levels of TCF4 by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Numerous discrete nuclear RNA foci were identified in endothelial
samples of FECD subjects (n = 8) harboring the CTG18.1 expansion, but not in
controls lacking the expansion (n = 5) (P = 7.8 × 10(-4)). Percentage of cells
with foci in expansion-positive endothelial samples ranged from 33% to 88%. RNA
foci were absent in endothelial samples from an FECD subject without CTG18.1
expansion and a subject with endothelial dysfunction without FECD. Expression of 
the constitutive TCF4 exon encoding the basic helix-loop-helix domain was
unaltered with CTG18.1 expansion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the RNA nuclear foci are pathognomonic for
CTG18.1 expansion-mediated endothelial disease. The RNA nuclear foci have been
previously found only in rare neurodegenerative disorders caused by repeat
expansions. Our detection of abundant ribonuclear foci in FECD implicates a role 
for toxic RNA in this common disease.

Copyright 2015 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4373545
PMID: 25722209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;35(4):1289-302. doi: 10.1159/000373951. Epub 2015 Feb 
11.

Wnt1 positively regulates CD36 expression via TCF4 and PPAR-<U+03B3> in macrophages.

Wang S(1), Sun Z, Zhang X, Li Z, Wu M, Zhao W, Wang H, Chen T, Yan H, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Scavenger receptors including CD36 control the phagocytosis of
oxidized low-density lipoprotein and play an important role in macrophage
physiology, but the underlying molecular mechanism by which CD36 is regulated in 
macrophages or during macrophage differentiation from monocytes remains to be
determined.
METHODS: Here, we investigated the relationship between Wnt1 and CD36 during
macrophage differentiation. CD36 was suppressed following knockdown of Wnt1 by
siRNA, while it was increased by ectopic overexpression of Wnt1 in macrophages.
Using a ß-catenin inhibitor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR-<U+03B3>) siRNA, and transcription factor 4 (TCF4) siRNA, we demonstrated that
Wnt1 regulates the expression of CD36 through TCF4 and PPAR-<U+03B3>.
Co-immunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence
experiments showed that ß-catenin interacted with PPAR-<U+03B3> and that PPAR-<U+03B3> and TCF4
colocalized in the nucleus. Furthermore, Pax3 regulated Wnt1 via binding to the
first binding site in the Wnt1 promoter.
RESULTS: Our study demonstrated that during macrophage differentiation from
monocytes, Wnt1 promotes CD36 expression via activation of PPAR-<U+03B3> and TCF4.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Wnt1 plays an important role in macrophage
physiology via activation of the canonical Wnt pathway.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25721714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 10;290(15):9701-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620872. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

p15RS/RPRD1A (p15INK4b-related sequence/regulation of nuclear pre-mRNA
domain-containing protein 1A) interacts with HDAC2 in inhibition of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Liu C(1), Zhang Y(1), Li J(2), Wang Y(1), Ren F(1), Zhou Y(3), Wu Y(4), Feng
Y(1), Zhou Y(3), Su F(3), Jia B(5), Wang D(6), Chang Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for 
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the State
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, China. (2)the Department
of Immunology, Third Military Medical School, Chongqing 610041, China. (3)From
the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of
Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor
Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)From the State Key
Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School 
of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the F. M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115. 
(5)the Departments of Surgical Oncology and Pathology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China, and. (6)From the State Key Laboratory of
Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School of Life
Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China, the State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Sichuan 610041, China, the Bioinformatics Division and Center for
Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(7)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for 
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the State
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, China,
zhijiec@tsinghua.edu.cn.

We previously reported that p15RS (p15INK4b-related sequence), a regulation of
nuclear pre-mRNA domain containing protein, inhibited Wnt signaling by
interrupting the formation of the ß-catenin·TCF4 complex. However, how p15RS
functions as an intrinsic repressor to repress transcription remains unclear. In 
this study, we show that p15RS, through a specific interaction with HDAC2
(histone deacetylase 2), a deacetylase that regulates gene transcription,
maintains histone H3 in a deacetylated state in the promoter region of
Wnt-targeted genes where ß-catenin·TCF4 is bound. We observed that histone
deacetylase inhibitors impair the ability of p15RS in inhibiting Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. Depletion of HDAC2 markedly disabled p15RS inhibition of
Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated transcription. Interestingly, overexpression of p15RS
decreases the level of acetylated histone H3 in the c-MYC promoter. Finally, we
demonstrate that p15RS significantly enhances the association of HDAC2 and TCF4
and enhances the occupancy of HDAC2 to DNA, resulting in the deacetylation of
histone H3 and the failure of ß-catenin interaction. We propose that p15RS acts
as an intrinsic transcriptional repressor for Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated gene
transcription at least partially through recruiting HDAC2 to occupy the promoter 
and maintaining deacetylated histone H3.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4392270 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25697359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Clin Genet. 2015 Feb 19. doi: 10.1111/cge.12575. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of patients referred for non-specific intellectual disability
testing: the importance of autosomal genes for diagnosis.

Tan CA(1), Topper S, Del Gaudio D, Nelakuditi V, Shchelochkov O, Nowaczyk MJ,
Zeesman S, Brady L, Russell L, Meeks N, Sastry S, Arndt K, Kobiernicki F, Shaw R,
Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Genetic testing for non-specific intellectual disability (ID) presents challenges
in daily clinical practice. Historically, the focus of the genetic elucidation of
non-specific ID has been on genes on the X chromosome, and recent research has
brought attention to the growing contribution of autosomal genes. In addition,
next-generation sequencing (NGS) has greatly improved the ability to
simultaneously analyze multiple genetic loci, making large panel testing a
practical approach to testing for non-specific ID. We performed NGS analysis of a
total of 90 genes implicated in non-specific ID. The 90 genes included 56
X-linked genes and 34 autosomal genes. Pathogenic variants were identified in 11 
of 52 (21%) patient samples. Nine of the eleven cases harbored mutations in
autosomal genes including AP4B1, STXB1, SYNGAP1, TCF4 and UBE3A. Our
mutation-positive cases provide further evidence supporting the prevalence of
autosomal mutations in patients referred for non-specific ID testing and the
utility of their inclusion in multi-gene panel analysis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25693842  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


129. Cell Signal. 2015 May;27(5):961-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.02.005. Epub 2015 
Feb 12.

Krüppel-like factor 5 incorporates into the ß-catenin/TCF complex in response to 
LPA in colon cancer cells.

Guo L(1), He P(1), No YR(1), Yun CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. (2)Division of Digestive Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA;
Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
ccyun@emory.edu.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a simple phospholipid with potent mitogenic
effects on various cells including colon cancer cells. LPA stimulates
proliferation of colon cancer cells by activation of ß-catenin or Krüppel-like
factor 5 (KLF5), but the functional relationship between these two transcription 
factors is not clear. Hence, we sought to investigate the mechanism of ß-catenin 
activation by LPA and the role of KLF5 in the regulation of ß-catenin by LPA. We 
found that LPA and Wnt3 additively activated the ß-catenin/TCF (T cell factor)
reporter activity in HCT116 cells. In addition to phosphorylating glycogen
synthase kinase 3ß (GSK-3ß) at Ser9, LPA resulted in phosphorylation of ß-catenin
at Ser552 and Ser675. Mutation of Ser552 and Ser675 ablated LPA-induced
ß-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity. Knockdown of KLF5 significantly
attenuated activation of ß-catenin/TCF reporter activity by LPA but not by Wnt3. 
However, nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin by LPA was not altered by knockdown of
KLF5. ß-catenin, TCF, and KLF5 were present in a 250-300kDa macro-complex, and
their presence was enhanced by LPA. LPA simulated the interaction of ß-catenin
with TCF4, and depletion of KLF5 decreased ß-catenin-TCF4 association and the
transcriptional activity. In summary, LPA activates ß-catenin by multiple
pathways involving phosphorylation of GSK-3 and ß-catenin, and enhancing
ß-catenin interaction with TCF4. KLF5 plays a critical role in ß-catenin
activation by increasing the ß-catenin-TCF4 interaction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4361321 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25683913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Med Sci. 2015 Feb 5;12(3):243-7. doi: 10.7150/ijms.10953. eCollection 2015.

Genetic interaction analysis of TCF7L2 for biochemical recurrence after radical
prostatectomy in localized prostate cancer.

Chen CS(1), Huang CY(2), Huang SP(3), Lin VC(4), Yu CC(5), Chang TY(6), Bao
BY(7).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)2.
Department of Urology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)3. Department of Urology,
Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan ; 4. Department of
Urology, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)5. Department of Urology, E-Da Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
; 6. School of Medicine for International Students, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (5)7. Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans
General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan ; 8. Department of Urology, School of
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan ; 9. Department of
Pharmacy, Tajen University, Pingtung, Taiwan. (6)10. Department of Occupational
Safety and Health, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (7)1. Department
of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan ; 11. Sex Hormone
Research Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan ; 12.
Department of Nursing, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Backgroud: Accumulated evidence has demonstrated a significant role of the Wnt
pathway in human prostate cancer. We hypothesize that genetic variants in the Wnt
pathway effector, Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), may influence clinical 
outcomes in prostate cancer.METHODS: We comprehensively selected 12 tagged
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to capture majority of common variants
across TCF7L2, and genotyped in 458 localized prostate cancer patients treated
with radical prostatectomy (RP). Kaplan-Meier analysis, Cox proportional hazard
model, and survival tree analyses were performed to identify significant SNPs
that correlated with biochemical recurrence (BCR) after surgery.
RESULTS: A higher-order SNP-SNP interaction profile consisting of TCF7L2
rs7094463, rs10749127, and rs11196224 was significantly associated with BCR (P
trend = 0.001). After adjusting for possible confounders, the genetic profile
remained significant (P trend = 0.007). None of the studied SNPs were
individually associated with BCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a genetic interaction in the TCF7L2 SNPs as a
predictor of disease recurrence after curative RP in localized prostate cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC4323362
PMID: 25678841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(3):323-32. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.980643.

A dynamic exchange of TCF3 and TCF4 transcription factors controls MYC expression
in colorectal cancer cells.

Shah M(1), Rennoll SA, Raup-Konsavage WM, Yochum GS.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ; The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine ; Hershey , PA USA.

Deregulated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling promotes colorectal cancer (CRC) by
activating expression of the c-MYC proto-oncogene (MYC). In the nucleus, the
ß-catenin transcriptional co-activator binds T-cell factor (TCF) transcription
factors, and together TCF/ß-catenin complexes activate MYC expression through Wnt
responsive DNA regulatory elements (WREs). The MYC 3' WRE maps 1.4-kb downstream 
from the MYC transcription stop site and binds TCF4/ß-catenin transcription
complexes to activate MYC. However, the underlying mechanisms for how this
element operates are not fully understood. Here, we report that the TCF family
member, TCF3, plays an important role in regulating MYC expression in CRCs. We
demonstrate that TCF3 binds the MYC 3' WRE to repress MYC. When TCF3 is depleted 
using shRNAs, the MYC 3' WRE is more available to bind TCF4/ß-catenin complexes. 
Stimulating downstream Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by inhibiting GSK3ß causes an
exchange of TCF3 with TCF4/ß-catenin complexes to activate MYC. Finally, this
transcription factor switch at the MYC 3' WRE controls MYC expression as
quiescent cells re-enter the cell cycle and progress to S phase. These results
indicate that a dynamic interplay of TCF transcription factors governs MYC gene
expression in CRCs.

PMCID: PMC4353228
PMID: 25659031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0116686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116686.
eCollection 2015.

Altered gene expression in schizophrenia: findings from transcriptional
signatures in fibroblasts and blood.

Cattane N(1), Minelli A(1), Milanesi E(2), Maj C(2), Bignotti S(3), Bortolomasi
M(4), Bocchio Chiavetto L(5), Gennarelli M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Biology and Genetic
Division, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (2)Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto
Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. (3)Psychiatric Unit,
IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Psychiatric Hospital "Villa Santa Chiara", Verona, Italy. (5)Genetics Unit,
IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy;
Faculty of Psychology, eCampus University, Novedrate, Como, Italy. (6)Department 
of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Biology and Genetic Division, University
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy; Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di 
Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Whole-genome expression studies in the peripheral tissues of patients
affected by schizophrenia (SCZ) can provide new insight into the molecular basis 
of the disorder and innovative biomarkers that may be of great utility in
clinical practice. Recent evidence suggests that skin fibroblasts could represent
a non-neural peripheral model useful for investigating molecular alterations in
psychiatric disorders.
METHODS: A microarray expression study was conducted comparing skin fibroblast
transcriptomic profiles from 20 SCZ patients and 20 controls. All genes strongly 
differentially expressed were validated by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)
in fibroblasts and analyzed in a sample of peripheral blood cell (PBC) RNA from
patients (n = 25) and controls (n = 22). To evaluate the specificity for SCZ,
alterations in gene expression were tested in additional samples of fibroblasts
and PBCs RNA from Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) (n = 16; n = 21, respectively) 
and Bipolar Disorder (BD) patients (n = 15; n = 20, respectively).
RESULTS: Six genes (JUN, HIST2H2BE, FOSB, FOS, EGR1, TCF4) were significantly
upregulated in SCZ compared to control fibroblasts. In blood, an increase in
expression levels was confirmed only for EGR1, whereas JUN was downregulated; no 
significant differences were observed for the other genes. EGR1 upregulation was 
specific for SCZ compared to MDD and BD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reports the upregulation of JUN, HIST2H2BE, FOSB, FOS,
EGR1 and TCF4 in the fibroblasts of SCZ patients. A significant alteration in
EGR1 expression is also present in SCZ PBCs compared to controls and to MDD and
BD patients, suggesting that this gene could be a specific biomarker helpful in
the differential diagnosis of major psychoses.

PMCID: PMC4319917
PMID: 25658856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117139.
eCollection 2015.

Unique expression pattern and functional role of periostin in human limbal stem
cells.

Qu Y(1), Chi W(2), Hua X(3), Deng R(4), Li J(4), Liu Z(5), Pflugfelder SC(4), Li 
DQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Eye Institute, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Ocular Surface Center,
Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye
Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, United States of America; Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, State Key
laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Ocular 
Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Tianjin Eye Hospital,
Tianjin Key Lab of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Clinical College of
Ophthalmology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (4)Ocular Surface
Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (5)The Eye Institute, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China.

Periostin is a non-structural matricellular protein. Little is known about
periostin in human limbal stem cells (LSCs). This study was to explore the unique
expression pattern and functional role of periostin in maintaining the properties
of human LSCs. Fresh donor corneal tissues were used to make cryosections for
evaluation of periostin expression on ex vivo tissues. Primary human limbal
epithelial cells (HLECs) were generated from limbal explant culture. In vitro
culture models for proliferation and epithelial regeneration were performed to
explore functional role of periostin in LSCs. The mRNA expression was determined 
by reverse transcription and quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR), and the
protein production and localization were detected by immunofluorescent staining
and Western blot analysis. Periostin protein was found to be exclusively
immunolocalized in the basal layer of human limbal epithelium. Periostin
localization was well matched with nuclear factor p63, but not with corneal
epithelial differentiation marker Keratin 3. Periostin transcripts was also
highly expressed in limbal than corneal epithelium. In primary HLECs, periostin
expression at mRNA and protein levels was significantly higher in 50% and 70%
confluent cultures at exponential growth stage than in 100% confluent cultures at
slow growth or quiescent condition. This expression pattern was similar to other 
stem/progenitor cell markers (p63, integrin ß1 and TCF4). Periostin expression at
transcripts, protein and immunoreactivity levels increased significantly during
epithelial regeneration in wound healing process, especially in 16-24 hours at
wound edge, which was accompanied by similar upregulation and activation of p63, 
integrin ß1 and TCF4. Our findings demonstrated that periostin is exclusively
produced by limbal basal epithelium and co-localized with p63, where limbal stem 
cells reside. Periostin promotes HLEC proliferation and regeneration with
accompanied activation of stem/progenitor cell markers p63, integrin ß1 and TCF4,
suggesting its novel role in maintaining the phenotype and functional properties 
of LSC.

PMCID: PMC4319935
PMID: 25658308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):490-9. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439410. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

Wnt-mediated protein stabilization ensures proper mitotic microtubule assembly
and chromosome segregation.

Stolz A(1), Neufeld K(1), Ertych N(1), Bastians H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cellular Oncology, Institute of Molecular Oncology, Georg-August
University Göttingen Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB) and
University Medical Center Göttingen (UMG), Göttingen, Germany. (2)Section for
Cellular Oncology, Institute of Molecular Oncology, Georg-August University
Göttingen Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB) and University
Medical Center Göttingen (UMG), Göttingen, Germany
holger.bastians@uni-goettingen.de.

Wnt signaling stimulates cell proliferation by promoting the G1/S transition of
the cell cycle through ß-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene transcription. However, Wnt
signaling peaks in mitosis and contributes to the stabilization of proteins other
than ß-catenin, a pathway recently introduced as Wnt-dependent stabilization of
proteins (Wnt/STOP). Here, we show that Wnt/STOP regulated by basal Wnt signaling
during a normal cell cycle is required for proper spindle microtubule assembly
and for faithful chromosome segregation during mitosis. Consequently, inhibition 
of basal Wnt signaling results in increased microtubule assembly rates, abnormal 
mitotic spindle formation and the induction of aneuploidy in human somatic cells.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4388615
PMID: 25656539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):4226-38.

Farnesoid X receptor associates with ß-catenin and inhibits its activity in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu X(1), Zhang X(1), Ji L(1), Gu J(1), Zhou M(2), Chen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugate Research Ministry of Public Health,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical college, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiology, Zhongshan Hospital of
Fudan University, and Shanghai Institute of Medical Imaging, Shanghai, China.

The association between the temporal activation of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and the 
spontaneous hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development in Farnesoid X receptor
(FXR) knockout mice is not well understood. We found that Huh7 cells depleted
with FXR by RNAi showed enhanced cell growth, migration and invasion in vitro and
accelerated tumor xenografts formation in nude mice. And these phenotypes were
attenuated by simultaneous knockdown of ß-catenin with RNAi. Furthermore, we
identified that FXR could bind with ß-Catenin through AF1 domain, and disrupt the
assembly of the core ß-Catenin/TCF4 complex. Activation of FXR attenuated the
DNA-binding activity of ß-Catenin/TCF4, and subsequently, its targeting
gene-cyclin D1 expression. Importantly, FXR expression was markedly reduced in
human HCC, an event which correlated with aberrant activation of ß-Catenin. These
data identified FXR as a negative regulator of HCC development through direct
suppression of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC4414185
PMID: 25650661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Sci Signal. 2015 Feb 3;8(362):ra12. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005654.

FOXP1 potentiates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Walker MP(1), Stopford CM(2), Cederlund M(3), Fang F(4), Jahn C(3), Rabinowitz
AD(1), Goldfarb D(5), Graham DM(1), Yan F(1), Deal AM(6), Fedoriw Y(7), Richards 
KL(8), Davis IJ(4), Weidinger G(3), Damania B(2), Major MB(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA. (2)Division of Microbiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (3)Institute for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081 Ulm, Germany. (4)Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (5)Department of Computer Science, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, USA. (6)UNC Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center Biostatistics Core Facility, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (8)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (9)Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. Division of Microbiology,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. benmajor@med.unc.edu.

The transcription factor FOXP1 (forkhead box protein P1) is a master regulator of
stem and progenitor cell biology. In diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), copy 
number amplifications and chromosomal translocations result in overexpression of 
FOXP1. Increased abundance of FOXP1 in DLBCL is a predictor of poor prognosis and
resistance to therapy. We developed a genome-wide, mass spectrometry-coupled,
gain-of-function genetic screen, which revealed that FOXP1 potentiates
ß-catenin-dependent, Wnt-dependent gene expression. Gain- and loss-of-function
studies in cell models and zebrafish confirmed that FOXP1 was a general and
conserved enhancer of Wnt signaling. In a Wnt-dependent fashion, FOXP1 formed a
complex with ß-catenin, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2), and the
acetyltransferase CBP [CREB (adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response
element-binding protein)-binding protein], and this complex bound the promoters
of Wnt target genes. FOXP1 promoted the acetylation of ß-catenin by CBP, and
acetylation was required for FOXP1-mediated potentiation of ß-catenin-dependent
transcription. In DLBCL, we found that FOXP1 promoted sensitivity to Wnt pathway 
inhibitors, and knockdown of FOXP1 or blocking ß-catenin transcriptional activity
slowed xenograft tumor growth. These data connect excessive FOXP1 with
ß-catenin-dependent signal transduction and provide a molecular rationale for
Wnt-directed therapy in DLBCL.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4356208
PMID: 25650440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Feb 3. doi: 10.1002/mc.22289. [Epub ahead of print]

LoVo colon cancer cells resistant to oxaliplatin overexpress c-MET and VEGFR-1
and respond to VEGF with dephosphorylation of c-MET.

Mezquita B(1), Pineda E, Mezquita J, Mezquita P, Pau M, Codony-Servat J,
Martínez-Balibrea E, Mora C, Maurel J, Mezquita C.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques I. Laboratori de Genètica Molecular,
IDIBAPS, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;
Departament de Ciències Bàsiques, Universitat Internacional de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain.

Oxaliplatin-resistant LoVo colon cancer cells overexpressing c-MET and VEGFR-1
were selected to study several signaling pathways involved in chemoresistance, as
well as the effect of increasing amounts of VEGF in the regulation of c-MET. In
comparison with chemosensitive LoVo colon cancer cells, oxaliplatin-resistant
cells (LoVoR) overexpress and phosphorylate c-MET, upregulate the expression of
transmembrane and soluble VEGFR-1 and, unexpectedly, downregulate VEGF. In
addition, LoVoR cells activate other transduction pathways involved in
chemoresistance such as Akt, ß-catenin-TCF4 and E-cadherin. While c-MET is
phosphorylated in LoVoR cells expressing low levels of VEGF, c-MET
phosphorylation decreases when recombinant VEGF is added into the culture medium.
Inhibition of c-MET by VEGF is mediated by VEGFR-1, since phosphorylation of
c-MET in the presence of VEGF is restored after silencing VEGFR-1.
Dephosphorylation of c-MET by VEGF suggests that tumors coexpressing VEGFR-1 and 
c-MET may activate c-MET as a result of anti-VEGF therapy. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25647613  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


138. Mol Carcinog. 2016 Mar;55(3):280-91. doi: 10.1002/mc.22277. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Krüppel-like factor 9 was down-regulated in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
and negatively regulated beta-catenin/TCF signaling.

Qiao F(1), Yao F(2), Chen L(1), Lu C(1), Ni Y(1), Fang W(2), Jin H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai 
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) has been found to play suppressive roles in several 
types of tumor. However, the expression pattern and biological functions of KLF9 
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) are still unknown. In this study, it
was found that the expression of KLF9 was significantly down-regulated in ESCC
compared to their adjacent normal esophageal tissues. Meanwhile, the expression
of KLF9 was inversely correlated with the clinical features of ESCC patients.
Moreover, in the biological function study, KLF9 was further validated to inhibit
the growth, migration, and metastasis of ESCC cells in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, KLF9 bind with TCF4 and suppressed the beta-catenin/TCF
signaling as well as the expression of its target gene Cyr61. Collectively, our
study clarified the function of KLF9 in both ESCC progression and the regulation 
of beta-catenin/TCF signaling. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25641762  [PubMed - in process]


139. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 2;5:8155. doi: 10.1038/srep08155.

SMK-17, a MEK1/2-specific inhibitor, selectively induces apoptosis in
ß-catenin-mutated tumors.

Kiga M(1), Nakayama A(2), Shikata Y(2), Sasazawa Y(2), Murakami R(3), Nakanishi
T(3), Tashiro E(2), Imoto M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan [2] Shinagawa R&D Center, Daiichi
Sankyo Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Biosciences and Informatics,
Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan. (3)Shinagawa
R&D Center, Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan.

Although clinical studies have evaluated several MEK1/2 inhibitors, it is
unlikely that MEK1/2 inhibitors will be studied clinically. BRAF mutations have
been proposed as a responder marker of MEK1/2 inhibitors in a preclinical study. 
However, current clinical approaches focusing on BRAF mutations have shown only
moderate sensitivity of MEK1/2 inhibitors. This has led to insufficient support
for their promoted clinical adoption. Further characterization of tumors
sensitive to MEK inhibitors holds great promise for optimizing drug therapy for
patients with these tumors. Here, we report that ß-catenin mutations accelerate
apoptosis induced by MEK1/2 inhibitor. SMK-17, a selective MEK1/2 inhibitor,
induced apoptosis in tumor cell lines harboring ß-catenin mutations at its
effective concentration. To confirm that ß-catenin mutations and mutant
ß-catenin-mediated TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4) transcriptional activity is a
predictive marker of MEK inhibitors, we evaluated the effects of
dominant-negative TCF7L2 and of active, mutated ß-catenin on apoptosis induced by
MEK inhibitor. Indeed, dominant-negative TCF7L2 reduced apoptosis induced by MEK 
inhibitor, whereas active, mutated ß-catenin accelerated it. Our findings show
that ß-catenin mutations are an important responder biomarker for MEK1/2
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4313120
PMID: 25640451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 16;34(42):5372-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.466. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Radiation promotes invasiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer cells through
granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor.

Cui YH(1), Suh Y(1), Lee HJ(2), Yoo KC(1), Uddin N(1), Jeong YJ(2), Lee JS(3),
Hwang SG(4), Nam SY(5), Kim MJ(6), Lee SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biochemisty, Department of Life Science, Research
Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Division of 
Radiation Effect, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul,
Korea. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, Korea. (4)Division of Radiation Cancer Biology, Korea
Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea. (5)Radiation Health
Institute, Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co. Ltd, Seoul, Korea. (6)Laboratory of 
Radiation Exposure and Therapeutics, National Radiation Emergency Medical Center,
Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

Despite ionizing radiation (IR) is being widely used as a standard treatment for 
lung cancer, many evidences suggest that IR paradoxically promotes cancer
malignancy. However, its molecular mechanisms underlying radiation-induced cancer
progression remain obscure. Here, we report that exposure to fractionated
radiation (2<U+2009>Gy per day for 3 days) induces the secretion of
granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) that has been commonly used in
cancer therapies to ameliorate neutropenia. Intriguingly, radiation-induced G-CSF
promoted the migratory and invasive properties by triggering the
epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition (EMT) in non-small-cell lung cancer cells 
(NSCLCs). By irradiation, G-CSF was upregulated transcriptionally by
ß-catenin/TCF4 complex that binds to the promoter region of G-CSF as a
transcription factor. Importantly, irradiation increased the stability of
ß-catenin through the activation of PI3K/AKT (phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT),
thereby upregulating the expression of G-CSF. Radiation-induced G-CSF is
recognized by G-CSFR and transduced its intracellular signaling JAK/STAT3 (Janus 
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription), thereby triggering
EMT program in NSCLCs. Taken together, our findings suggest that the application 
of G-CSF in cancer therapies to ameliorate neutropenia should be reconsidered
owing to its effect on cancer progression, and G-CSF could be a novel therapeutic
target to mitigate the harmful effect of radiotherapy for the treatment of NSCLC.

PMID: 25639867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2014 Dec;58(9):918-25. doi:
10.1590/0004-2730000003510.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism is associated with risk to type 2
diabetes mellitus in Southern-Brazil.

Assmann TS(1), Duarte GC(1), Rheinheimer J(1), Cruz LA(1), Canani LH(1), Crispim 
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Division, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the
rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes mellitus, in 
a Southern-Brazilian population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was genotyped in 953
type 2 diabetic patients and 535 non-diabetic subjects. All subjects were white. 
The polymorphism was genotyped by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan MGB probes (Life
Technologies). Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated
for additive, recessive and dominant inheritance models.
RESULTS: Genotype and allele frequencies of the rs7903146 polymorphism differed
significantly between type 2 diabetic patients and non-diabetic subjects (P =
0.001 and P = 0.0001, respectively). The frequency of the minor allele was 38% in
type 2 diabetes group and 31% in non-diabetic subjects, and this allele was
significantly associated with type 2 diabetes risk (OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.15 - 1.76
for the dominant model of inheritance). Moreover, the T/T genotype was associated
with a higher risk for type 2 diabetes (OR = 1.83, 95% CI 1.3-2.5) than the
presence of only one copy of the T allele (OR = 1.31, 95% CI 1.1-1.6). Both
results were adjusted for age and gender.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm the association between the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and increase risk for type 2 diabetes in Southern-Brazil.

PMID: 25627047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 24;10(1):e0116753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116753.
eCollection 2015.

A pathway-centric survey of somatic mutations in Chinese patients with colorectal
carcinomas.

Ling C(1), Wang L(2), Wang Z(2), Xu L(2), Sun L(2), Yang H(3), Li WD(4), Wang
K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United States of America; Laboratory of
Clinical Genetics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China;
Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,
300070, China. (2)Center for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Union 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei, 430022, China. (3)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America. (4)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, 300070, China. (5)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America; USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America; Department of Psychiatry, Keck School of Medicine, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United States of America.

Previous genetic studies on colorectal carcinomas (CRC) have identified multiple 
somatic mutations in four candidate pathways (TGF-ß, Wnt, P53 and RTK-RAS
pathways) on populations of European ancestry. However, it is under-studied
whether other populations harbor different sets of hot-spot somatic mutations in 
these pathways and other oncogenes. In this study, to evaluate the mutational
spectrum of novel somatic mutations, we assessed 41 pairs of tumor-stroma tissues
from Chinese patients with CRC, including 29 colon carcinomas and 12 rectal
carcinomas. We designed Illumina Custom Amplicon panel to target 43 genes,
including genes in the four candidate pathways, as well as several known
oncogenes for other cancers. Candidate mutations were validated by Sanger
sequencing, and we further used SIFT and PolyPhen-2 to assess potentially
functional mutations. We discovered 3 new somatic mutations in gene APC, TCF7L2, 
and PIK3CA that had never been reported in the COSMIC or NCI-60 databases.
Additionally, we confirmed 6 known somatic mutations in gene SMAD4, APC, FBXW7,
BRAF and PTEN in Chinese CRC patients. While most were previously reported in
CRC, one mutation in PTEN was reported only in malignant endometrium cancer. Our 
study confirmed the existence of known somatic mutations in the four candidate
pathways for CRC in Chinese patients. We also discovered a number of novel
somatic mutations in these pathways, which may have implications for the
pathogenesis of CRC.

PMCID: PMC4305320
PMID: 25617745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Mar;36(3):318-26. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv003. Epub 2015 Jan 
18.

A novel ent-kaurane diterpenoid executes antitumor function in colorectal cancer 
cells by inhibiting Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Ye Q(1), Yao G(1), Zhang M(1), Guo G(1), Hu Y(1), Jiang J(1), Cheng L(1), Shi
J(2), Li H(1), Zhang Y(3), Liu H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resource Evaluation,
School of Pharmacy andDepartment of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
Hubei 430030, P. R. China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P. R. China. (3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal
Chemistry and Resource Evaluation, School of Pharmacy andDepartment of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P. R. China
hudanliu@hust.edu.cn zhangyh@mails.tjmu.edu.cn. (4)Hubei Key Laboratory of
Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resource Evaluation, School of Pharmacy
andDepartment of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.
R. China hudanliu@hust.edu.cn.

Aberrant activation of Wnt signaling pathway is crucial for the onset and
progression of human colorectal cancer (CRC). Owing to the persistent dependence 
on Wnt signaling for growth and survival, inhibition of this pathway is an
attractive approach for new therapies. 11a, 12a-epoxyleukamenin E (EPLE) is a
novel ent-kaurane diterpenoid that we previously isolated from Salvia cavaleriei,
exhibiting antitumor activities in a variety of cancer cells. Herein, we found
that whereas sparing normal human colon mucosal epithelial cells, EPLE
selectively inhibited the proliferation of CRC cell lines as well as primary
tumor cells. Mechanistically, we demonstrated EPLE exerted its function through
suppressing Wnt signaling pathway, as evidenced by EPLE-mediated downregulation
of Wnt target genes such as c-Myc, Axin2 and Survivin. Consistently, luciferase
reporter assays showed that the EPLE directly blocked Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated
transcriptional activation. In combination of co-immunoprecipitation and protein 
structure-based analyses, we determined that the EPLE entered the interface of
ß-catenin/TCF4 complexes and blocked their interaction that is required for
ß-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation. Moreover, overexpression of
ß-catenin alleviated the cytotoxicity of EPLE in CRC cells, supporting Wnt
signaling is a major and specific target of EPLE. Combined treatments of EPLE and
5-fluorouracil, the first-line chemotherapy for CRC patients, achieved a
synergistic effect. More importantly, EPLE hampered tumor development in a CRC
xenograft model. Our data thus establish EPLE as a novel inhibitor of Wnt
signaling that holds great promise as a potential candidate for further
preclinical evaluation for CRC treatments.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25600769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 6;290(10):5979-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.621607. Epub 2015 
Jan 15.

RNA toxicity and missplicing in the common eye disease fuchs endothelial corneal 
dystrophy.

Du J(1), Aleff RA(2), Soragni E(1), Kalari K(3), Nie J(3), Tang X(3), Davila
J(3), Kocher JP(3), Patel SV(4), Gottesfeld JM(1), Baratz KH(4), Wieben ED(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037 and. (2)the Departments of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology. (3)Health Science Research, and. (4)Ophthalmology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (5)the Departments of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, wieben.eric@mayo.edu.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is an inherited degenerative disease
that affects the internal endothelial cell monolayer of the cornea and can result
in corneal edema and vision loss in severe cases. FECD affects ~5% of middle-aged
Caucasians in the United States and accounts for >14,000 corneal transplantations
annually. Among the several genes and loci associated with FECD, the strongest
association is with an intronic (CTG·CAG)n trinucleotide repeat expansion in the 
TCF4 gene, which is found in the majority of affected patients. Corneal
endothelial cells from FECD patients harbor a poly(CUG)n RNA that can be
visualized as RNA foci containing this condensed RNA and associated proteins.
Similar to myotonic dystrophy type 1, the poly(CUG)n RNA co-localizes with and
sequesters the mRNA-splicing factor MBNL1, leading to missplicing of essential
MBNL1-regulated mRNAs. Such foci and missplicing are not observed in similar
cells from FECD patients who lack the repeat expansion. RNA-Seq splicing data
from the corneal endothelia of FECD patients and controls reveal hundreds of
differential alternative splicing events. These include events previously
characterized in the context of myotonic dystrophy type 1 and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, as well as splicing changes in genes
related to proposed mechanisms of FECD pathogenesis. We report the first instance
of RNA toxicity and missplicing in a common non-neurological/neuromuscular
disease associated with a repeat expansion. The FECD patient population with this
(CTG·CAG)n trinucleotide repeat expansion exceeds that of the combined number of 
patients in all other microsatellite expansion disorders.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358235
PMID: 25593321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Diabetes. 2015 Jun;64(6):1923-32. doi: 10.2337/db14-1329. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Liver-specific expression of dominant-negative transcription factor 7-like 2
causes progressive impairment in glucose homeostasis.

Ip W(1), Shao W(2), Song Z(2), Chen Z(2), Wheeler MB(3), Jin T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute, University 
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Division of Advanced Diagnostics,
Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. (3)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada tianru.jin@utoronto.ca.

Investigations on the metabolic role of the Wnt signaling pathway and hepatic
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have generated opposing views. While some 
studies demonstrated a repressive effect of TCF7L2 on hepatic gluconeogenesis, a 
recent study using liver-specific Tcf7l2(-/-) mice suggested the opposite. As a
consequence of redundant and bidirectional actions of transcription factor (TCF) 
molecules and other complexities of the Wnt pathway, knockout of a single Wnt
pathway component may not effectively reveal a complete metabolic picture of this
pathway. To address this, we generated the liver-specific dominant-negative (DN) 
TCF7L2 (TCF7L2DN) transgenic mouse model LTCFDN. These mice exhibited progressive
impairment in response to pyruvate challenge. Importantly, LTCFDN hepatocytes
displayed elevated gluconeogenic gene expression, gluconeogenesis, and loss of
Wnt-3a-mediated repression of gluconeogenesis. In C57BL/6 hepatocytes,
adenovirus-mediated expression of TCF7L2DN, but not wild-type TCF7L2, increased
gluconeogenesis and gluconeogenic gene expression. Our further mechanistic
exploration suggests that TCF7L2DN-mediated inhibition of Wnt signaling causes
preferential interaction of ß-catenin (ß-cat) with FoxO1 and increased binding of
ß-cat/FoxO1 to the Pck1 FoxO binding site, resulting in the stimulation of Pck1
expression and increased gluconeogenesis. Together, our results using TCF7L2DN as
a unique tool revealed that the Wnt signaling pathway and its effector ß-cat/TCF 
serve a beneficial role in suppressing hepatic gluconeogenesis.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25576056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;75(4):656-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2377. Epub
2015 Jan 7.

ß-catenin promotes regulatory T-cell responses in tumors by inducing vitamin A
metabolism in dendritic cells.

Hong Y(1), Manoharan I(1), Suryawanshi A(1), Majumdar T(1), Angus-Hill ML(2),
Koni PA(3), Manicassamy B(4), Mellor AL(3), Munn DH(5), Manicassamy S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, GRU Cancer Center,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (2)Hunstman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. (3)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and
Tolerance Program, GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
Georgia. Department of Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. (4)Department of Microbiology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (5)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance
Program, GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, Georgia. (6)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, GRU 
Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. Department of
Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
Georgia. smanicassamy@gru.edu.

Tumors actively suppress antitumor immunity, creating formidable barriers to
successful cancer immunotherapy. The molecular mechanisms underlying
tumor-induced immune tolerance are largely unknown. In the present study, we show
that dendritic cells (DC) in the tumor microenvironment acquire the ability to
metabolize vitamin A to produce retinoic acid (RA), which drives regulatory
T-cell responses and immune tolerance. Tolerogenic responses were dependent on
induction of vitamin A-metabolizing enzymes via the ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)
pathway in DCs. Consistent with this observation, DC-specific deletion of
ß-catenin in mice markedly reduced regulatory T-cell responses and delayed
melanoma growth. Pharmacologic inhibition of either vitamin A-metabolizing
enzymes or the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway in vivo had similar effects on tumor growth
and regulatory T-cell responses. Hence, ß-catenin/TCF4 signaling induces local
regulatory DC and regulatory T-cell phenotypes via the RA pathway, identifying
this pathway as an important target for anticancer immunotherapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4333068
PMID: 25568183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Metab. 2015 Jan 6;21(1):138-49. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.12.014.

Mouse-human experimental epigenetic analysis unmasks dietary targets and genetic 
liability for diabetic phenotypes.

Multhaup ML(1), Seldin MM(2), Jaffe AE(3), Lei X(2), Kirchner H(4), Mondal P(5), 
Li Y(5), Rodriguez V(1), Drong A(6), Hussain M(5), Lindgren C(6), McCarthy M(7), 
Näslund E(8), Zierath JR(4), Wong GW(2), Feinberg AP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Epigenetics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
(2)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Metabolism and Obesity
Research, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (3)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, 855 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Mental Health, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery Karolinska
Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
(6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (7)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK; Oxford Centre for
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital,
Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LI, UK; Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre,
Churchill Hospital, Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LI, UK. (8)Department of
Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, 182 88 Stockholm,
Sweden. (9)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Epigenetics, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. Electronic address: afeinberg@jhu.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 May;11(5):261-2.

Using a functional approach to investigate the epigenetics of type 2 diabetes
(T2D), we combine three lines of evidence-diet-induced epigenetic dysregulation
in mouse, epigenetic conservation in humans, and T2D clinical risk evidence-to
identify genes implicated in T2D pathogenesis through epigenetic mechanisms
related to obesity. Beginning with dietary manipulation of genetically
homogeneous mice, we identify differentially DNA-methylated genomic regions. We
then replicate these results in adipose samples from lean and obese patients pre-
and post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, identifying regions where both the location
and direction of methylation change are conserved. These regions overlap with 27 
genetic T2D risk loci, only one of which was deemed significant by GWAS alone.
Functional analysis of genes associated with these regions revealed four genes
with roles in insulin resistance, demonstrating the potential general utility of 
this approach for complementing conventional human genetic studies by integrating
cross-species epigenomics and clinical genetic risk.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4340475
PMID: 25565211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Nov 15;7(11):4253-9. eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of TCF4 binding regions in colorectal cancer cells.

Chen C(1), Lu Y(1), Liu J(1), Li L(1), Zhao N(1), Lin B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Division and Propriumbio Research Center, Zhejiang-California 
International Nanosystems Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang University 268 Kaixuan Road,
Hangzhou 310029, China. (2)Systems Biology Division and Propriumbio Research
Center, Zhejiang-California International Nanosystems Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang 
University 268 Kaixuan Road, Hangzhou 310029, China ; Swedish Medical Center
Seattle, WA 98122, USA ; Department of Urology, University of Washington Seattle,
WA 98195, USA.

OBJECTIVE: TCF4 (transcriptional factor 4) forms a complex with its
transcriptional coactivator ß-catenin and the coactivator carries the final
signal output from the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, which is essential for
the growth of normal epithelium and also plays important roles in carcinogenesis 
of colon epithelium. We aimed to gain a better understanding of the genes bound
by TCF4 in colorectal cancer cells.
METHODS: SW620 human colorectal cancer cells were cultured. The TCF4 antibody of 
this study was confirmed in SW620 cells by Western Blot. A ChIP-seq based
genome-wide analysis of TCF4 chromatin occupancy in colorectal cancer cells was
conducted and 1506 high confidence TCF4 binding sites wereidentified.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis revealed that the binding sites harbor a consensus
sequence of C-G/C-A-G-C-T/C-C-T-T-C. Gene ontology and pathway analysis showed
that TCF4 regulated 18 genes in Wnt signaling pathway and 97 other transcription 
factors.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest TCF4 binding regions were enriched with a motif
of C-G/C-A-G-C-T/C-C-T-T-C. The gene regulation of TCF4 may be conserved in
colorectal cancer and glioma cells. TCF4 may be involved in a series of important
biological processes such as regulation of metabolic and biosynthetic (GO:
0010604, GO: 0031328, GO: 0009891, GO: 0051173, GO: 0010557, GO: 0045935),
adhesion (GO: 0007155, GO: 0022610), apoptosis (GO: 0042981, GO: 0043067, GO:
0010941), and important signaling pathways (Wnt, Chemokine, Calciu, GnRH).

PMCID: PMC4276198
PMID: 25550940  [PubMed]


149. Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):587-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.12.012. Epub 2014
Dec 27.

Acute Wnt pathway activation positively regulates leptin gene expression in
mature adipocytes.

Chen ZL(1), Shao WJ(2), Xu F(1), Liu L(2), Lin BS(1), Wei XH(1), Song ZL(2), Lu
HG(3), Fantus IG(3), Weng JP(4), Jin TR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Diabetology, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto
General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
(3)Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Diabetology, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China. Electronic address: wjianp@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (5)Division of Advanced
Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: tianru.jin@utoronot.ca.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed the implication of several
Wnt signaling pathway components, including its effector transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in diabetes and other metabolic disorders. As TCF7L2 is
expressed in adipocytes, we investigated its expression and function in rodent
fat tissue and mature adipocytes. We found that TCF7L2 mRNA expression in C57BL/6
mouse epididymal fat tissue was up-regulated by feeding but down-regulated by
intraperitoneal insulin injection. In high-fat diet (HFD) fed mice, db/db mice
and Zucker (fa/fa) rats, epididymal fat TCF7L2 mRNA levels were lower than the
corresponding controls. Treating rat adipocytes with 100nM insulin repressed
TCF7L2 mRNA and protein levels, associated with the repression of leptin mRNA
level. The treatment with 1nM insulin, however, stimulated TCF7L2 and leptin mRNA
levels. This stimulation could be attenuated by iCRT14, an inhibitor of
ß-catenin/TCF-responsive transcription. Wnt3a stimulated leptin mRNA level, which
was also blocked by iCRT14 co-treatment. Utilizing the leptin-expressing cell
line HTR8 as a tool, we defined an evolutionarily conserved CREB binding motif
that mediated Wnt3a activation. Although Wnt activation is known to repress the
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells towards mature adipocytes, short-term Wnt3a
treatment of differentiated 3T3-L1 cells stimulated leptin mRNA levels. Thus, wnt
pathway plays a dual function in adipocytes, including the well-known repressive 
effect on adipogenesis and the stimulation of leptin production in mature
adipocytes in response to nutritional status.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25550093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Klin Oczna. 2015;117(3):200-3.

[Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy and trinucleotide repeat expansion in
TCF4--implications for diagnostics and therapy].

[Article in Polish]

Ozieblo D, Szaflik JP, Oldak M.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy is the most common genetically determined
degenerative disease of the cornea. In Polish patients the dystrophy is a leading
indication for lamellar posterior keratoplasty. The genetic background of Fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy is complex and heterogeneous. A number of TCF4 gene
variants have been strongly associated with the development of this disorder with
the most important of them being the trinucleotide repeat expansion CTG18.1. The 
aim of the study is to present this novel and extraordinarily strong genetic
association with Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy. Studies on the impact of
CTG18.1 on corneal endothelial cells may help to explain the molecular mechanism 
involved in the pathogenesis of the corneal dystrophy. This could significantly
improve diagnostics and therapy of Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy patients.

PMID: 26999947  [PubMed - in process]


151. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Dec;34(12):1758-62.

[Effects of Biejiajian Pills on Wnt signal pathway signal molecules
ß-catenin/TCF4 complex activities and downstream proteins cyclin D1 and MMP-2 in 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen B(1), Sun H, He S, Cheng Y, Jia W, Fan E, Pang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 458 Hospital of PLA, Guangzhou
510602, China.E-mail: hjzwb@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Biejiajian Pills on Wnt signal pathway and the 
mechanisms underlying its action to suppress the invasiveness of hepatocellular
carcinoma.
METHODS: HepG2 cells cultured in the serum of rats fed with Biejiajian Pills for 
48 h were examined for ß-catenin expression using immunofluorescence,
ß-catenin/TCF4 complex activity with luciferase, and expressions of the
downstream proteins cyclin D1 and MMP-2 using qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: Biejiajian Pills-treated sera significantly reduced the expressions of
cytoplasmic and nuclear ß-catenin protein, cyclin D1 and MMP-2 proteins and
lowered the activities of ß-catenin/TCF4 complex.
CONCLUSION: Biejiajian Pills may serve as a potential anti-tumor agent, whose
effect might be mediated by inhibiting the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

PMID: 25537897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Biomark. 2015;15(2):181-8. doi: 10.3233/CBM-140452.

The prognostic role of TCF4 expression in locally advanced rectal cancer patients
treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy.

Dou X(1), Wang R(1), Meng X(1), Yan H(1), Jiang S(1), Zhu K(1), Xu X(1), Chen
D(1), Song X(2), Mu D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong,
China. (2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Radiation Oncology, Shandong
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, University
of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Shandong Cancer
Hospital and Institute, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, University of
Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: At present no useful factors to predict the sensitivity to
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT) have been established in patients with
locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to explore the prognostic role of T
cell factor 4 (TCF4) expression in predicting tumor response to nCRT and tumor
outcomes for patients with LARC.
METHODS: The study enrolled 96 patients who underwent nCRT followed by total
mesorectal excision (TME). The TCF4 expression of all patients' biopsies before
nCRT was evaluated by Immunohistochemical staining method.
RESULTS: After completion of nCRT, 5 cases (5.2%) achieved clinical complete
response (cCR) thus the remaining 91 patients underwent a standardized total
mesorectal excision (TME) procedure. There were 44 patients (45.8%) achieved good
tumor response (including TRG 3-4 and 5 cCR patients) while poor response (TRG
0-2) was achieved in 52 patients (54.2%). Our results demonstrated that patients 
with low expression of TCF4 were more sensitive to nCRT than those with high TCF4
expression (P=0.031). Low TCF4 expression before nCRT and good response were
significantly associated with improved 5-year disease-free survival and 5-year
overall survival (P<0.05). Multivariate analysis confirmed that the pretreatment 
TCF4 expression was an independent prognostic factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed that low TCF4 protein expression was a useful
predictive factor of good tumor response to nCRT and good outcomes in patients
with LARC.

PMID: 25519018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 17;34(38):4914-27. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.416. Epub 2014 Dec
15.

Oncogenic KRAS signalling promotes the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway through LRP6 in
colorectal cancer.

Lemieux E(1), Cagnol S(1), Beaudry K(1), Carrier J(2), Rivard N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cancer Research Pavilion, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec,
Canada. (2)Gastroenterology Service, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Aberrant regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is one of the major
causes of colorectal cancer (CRC). Loss-of-function mutations in APC are commonly
found in CRC, leading to inappropriate activation of canonical Wnt signaling.
Conversely, gain-of-function mutations in KRAS and BRAF genes are detected in up 
to 60% of CRCs. Whereas KRAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathways are critical for intestinal tumorigenesis,
mechanisms integrating these two important signaling pathways during CRC
development are unknown. Results herein demonstrate that transformation of normal
intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) by oncogenic forms of KRAS, BRAF or MEK1 was
associated with a marked increase in ß-catenin/TCF4 and c-MYC promoter
transcriptional activities and mRNA levels of c-Myc, Axin2 and Lef1. Notably,
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of T-Cell Factor 4 (<U+0394>NTCF4) severely
attenuated IEC transformation induced by oncogenic MEK1 and markedly reduced
their tumorigenic and metastatic potential in immunocompromised mice.
Interestingly, the Frizzled co-receptor LRP6 was phosphorylated in a
MEK-dependent manner in transformed IECs and in human CRC cell lines. Expression 
of LRP6 mutant in which serine/threonine residues in each particular
ProlineProlineProlineSerine/ThreonineProline motif were mutated to alanines
(LRP6-5A) significantly reduced ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity.
Accordingly, MEK inhibition in human CRC cells significantly diminished
ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity and c-MYC mRNA and protein levels without
affecting ß-catenin expression or stability. Lastly, LRP6 phosphorylation was
also increased in human colorectal tumors, including adenomas, in comparison with
healthy adjacent normal tissues. Our data indicate that oncogenic activation of
KRAS/BRAF/MEK signaling stimulates the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, which in 
turn promotes intestinal tumor growth and invasion. Moreover, LRP6
phosphorylation by ERK1/2 may provide a unique point of convergence between
KRAS/MAPK and Wnt/ß-catenin signalings during oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4687460
PMID: 25500543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 12;16(6):496. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0496-5.

DEAD-box protein p68 is regulated by ß-catenin/transcription factor 4 to maintain
a positive feedback loop in control of breast cancer progression.

Guturi KK(1), Sarkar M(2), Bhowmik A(3), Das N(4), Ghosh MK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction in Cancer and Stem Cells Laboratory, Cancer Biology and
Inflammatory Disorder Division, Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology (CSIR-IICB), 4 Raja S C Mullick
Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, 700032, India. kirankumarndkm@gmail.com. (2)Signal
Transduction in Cancer and Stem Cells Laboratory, Cancer Biology and Inflammatory
Disorder Division, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Indian Institute
of Chemical Biology (CSIR-IICB), 4 Raja S C Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata,
700032, India. moumitasarkar.biology@gmail.com. (3)Signal Transduction in Cancer 
and Stem Cells Laboratory, Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology (CSIR-IICB), 4 Raja S C Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, 700032, India.
arijitbhoumik@gmail.com. (4)Signal Transduction in Cancer and Stem Cells
Laboratory, Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
(CSIR-IICB), 4 Raja S C Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, 700032, India.
nilanjana2008@gmail.com. (5)Signal Transduction in Cancer and Stem Cells
Laboratory, Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
(CSIR-IICB), 4 Raja S C Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, 700032, India.
mrinal.res@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin is important for cancer
development and it is found to overlap with p68 (DDX5) immunoreactivity in most
breast cancers, as indicated by both clinical investigations and studies in cell 
lines. In this study, we aim to investigate the regulation of p68 gene expression
through ß-catenin/transcription factor 4 (TCF4) signaling in breast cancer.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections derived from normal human
breast and breast cancer samples were used for immunohistochemical analysis.
Protein and mRNA expressions were determined by immunoblotting and quantitative
RT-PCR respectively. Promoter activity of p68 was checked using luciferase assay.
Occupancy of several factors on the p68 promoter was evaluated using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Finally, a syngeneic mouse model of breast cancer was used
to assess physiological significance.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that ß-catenin can directly induce transcription of p68 
promoter or indirectly through regulation of c-Myc in both human and mouse breast
cancer cells. Moreover, by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we have found
that both ß-catenin and TCF4 occupy the endogenous p68 promoter, which is further
enhanced by Wnt signaling. Furthermore, we have also established a positive
feedback regulation for the expression of TCF4 by p68. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report on ß-catenin/TCF4-mediated p68 gene
regulation, which plays an important role in epithelial to mesenchymal
transition, as shown in vitro in breast cancer cell lines and in vivo in an
animal breast tumour model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays an
important role in breast cancer progression through p68 upregulation.

PMCID: PMC4308923
PMID: 25499975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Bone. 2015 Mar;72:123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.11.024. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

The type 2 diabetes associated rs7903146 T allele within TCF7L2 is significantly 
under-represented in Hereditary Multiple Exostoses: insights into pathogenesis.

Sgariglia F(1), Pedrini E(2), Bradfield JP(3), Bhatti TR(4), D'Adamo P(5),
Dormans JP(1), Gunawardena AT(1), Hakonarson H(6), Hecht JT(7), Sangiorgi L(2),
Pacifici M(1), Enomoto-Iwamoto M(1), Grant SF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Medical Genetics and
Skeletal Rare Diseases, IRCCS Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute (IOR), Bologna,
Italy. (3)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology &
Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
(5)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste,
Italy; Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of
Trieste, Trieste, Italy. (6)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human
Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department 
of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric
Research, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA.
(8)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic 
address: grants@chop.edu.

Hereditary Multiple Exostoses (HME) is an autosomal-dominant disorder
characterized by benign cartilage tumors (exostoses) forming near the growth
plates, leading to severe health problems. EXT1 and EXT2 are the two genes known 
to harbor heterozygous loss-of-function mutations that account for the vast
majority of the primary genetic component of HME. However, patients present with 
wide clinical heterogeneity, suggesting that modifier genes play a role in
determining severity. Our previous work has pointed to an imbalance of ß-catenin 
signaling being involved in the pathogenesis of osteochondroma formation. TCF7L2 
is one of the key 'gate-keeper' TCF family members for Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway, and TCF7L2 and EXT2 are among the earliest associated loci reported in
genome wide appraisals of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Thus we investigated if the key 
T allele of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 within the TCF7L2
locus, which is strongly over-represented among T2D cases, was also associated
with HME. We leveraged genotype data available from ongoing GWAS efforts from
genomics and orthopedic centers in the US, Canada and Italy. Collectively 213
cases and 1890 controls were analyzed and, surprisingly, the T allele was in fact
significantly under-represented in the HME patient group [P = 0.009; odds ratio =
0.737 (95% C.I. 0.587-0.926)]; in addition, the direction of effect was
consistent within each individual cohort. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed
that TCF7L2 is differentially expressed and distributed in normal human growth
plate zones, and exhibits substantial variability in human exostoses in terms of 
staining intensity and distribution. In summary, the data indicate that there is 
a putative genetic connection between TCF7L2 and EXT in the context of HME. Given
this observation, we suggest that these loci could possibly modulate shared
pathways, in particular with respect to ß-catenin, and their respective variants 
interplay to influence HME pathogenesis as well as T2D.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4300120
PMID: 25498973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Genet. 2014 Dec 10;15:134. doi: 10.1186/s12863-014-0134-3.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, dietary intakes and type 2 diabetes risk in an
Algerian population.

Ouhaibi-Djellouli H(1,)(2), Mediene-Benchekor S(3,)(4), Lardjam-Hetraf SA(5),
Hamani-Medjaoui I(6), Meroufel DN(7), Boulenouar H(8), Hermant X(9), Saidi-Mehtar
N(10), Amouyel P(11), Houti L(12,)(13), Goumidi L(14), Meirhaeghe A(15).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria.
djellouli.ouhaibi@gmail.com. (2)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des
Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
djellouli.ouhaibi@gmail.com. (3)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, 
Oran, Algeria. sonia_mediene@yahoo.fr. (4)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté 
des Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
sonia_mediene@yahoo.fr. (5)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de
la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
lardjamhetraf.sarah@gmail.com. (6)Caisse Nationale des Assurances Sociales des
Travailleurs Salariés, Clinique Spécialisée en Orthopédie et Rééducation des
Victimes des Accidents de Travail, Oran, Algeria. amanim20002000@yahoo.fr.
(7)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria. meroufeln@yahoo.fr.
(8)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria.
boulenouar.houssam@gmail.com. (9)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
xavier.hermant@pasteur-lille.fr. (10)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, 
Oran, Algeria. nmehtar2002@yahoo.fr. (11)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
philippe.amouyel@pasteur-lille.fr. (12)Faculté de Médecine, Université Djillali
Liabes de Sidi Bel Abbès, Sidi Bel Abbès, Algeria. leilahouti@yahoo.fr.
(13)Laboratoire des Systèmes d'Information en Santé, Université d'Oran, Oran,
Algeria. leilahouti@yahoo.fr. (14)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
louisa.goumidi@pasteur-lille.fr. (15)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
aline.meirhaeghe@pasteur-lille.fr.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is the most
significant genetic risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Association analyses
were performed on participants (n = 751, aged between 30 and 64) in the ISOR
population-based study in the city of Oran. Dietary intakes were estimated using 
a weekly food frequency questionnaire.
RESULTS: The T allele of the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was
associated with lower body weight (p = 0.02), lower BMI (p = 0.009), lower waist 
circumference (p = 0.01) and a lower waist-to-hip ratio (p = 0.02). The T allele 
was associated with a significantly higher risk of T2D (odds ratio (OR) (95%
confidence interval) = 1.55 (1.09-2.20), p = 0.01) and this association was
independent of BMI. When considering the T2D risk, there were nominal
interactions between the rs7903146 SNP and dessert (p = 0.05) and milk intakes (p
= 0.01). The T2D risk was greater in T allele carriers with high dessert and milk
intakes (OR = 2.61 (1.51-4.52), p = 0.0006, and 2.46 (1.47-4.12), p = 0.0006,
respectively). In subjects with a high dessert intake, the T allele was also
associated with higher fasting plasma glucose concentrations (4.89 ± 0.46 mmol/L 
in TT subjects, 4.72 ± 0.48 mmol/L in CT subjects and 4.78 ± 0.51 mmol/L in CC
subjects; p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The T allele of the rs7903146 SNP is associated with a significantly
higher risk of T2D in an Algerian population. This association was further
strengthened by a high dessert intake, suggesting that gene-diet interactions
increase the T2D risk.

PMCID: PMC4266211
PMID: 25491720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 8;4:7351. doi: 10.1038/srep07351.

T2DM GWAS in the Lebanese population confirms the role of TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 in
disease susceptibility.

Ghassibe-Sabbagh M(1), Haber M(1), Salloum AK(1), Al-Sarraj Y(2), Akle Y(3),
Hirbli K(4), Romanos J(1), Mouzaya F(1), Gauguier D(5), Platt DE(6), El-Shanti
H(7), Zalloua PA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon.
(2)Shafallah Medical Genetics Center, Doha, Qatar. (3)Centre Hospitalier du
Nord-CHN, Zgharta, Lebanon. (4)1] Lebanese American University, School of
Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon [2] University Medical Center - Rizk Hospital
(UMC-RH), Lebanon. (5)INSERM, UMRS872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France. (6)Bioinformatics and Pattern Discovery, IBM T. J. Watson Research
Centre, Yorktown Hgts, NY 10598, USA. (7)1] Shafallah Medical Genetics Center,
Doha, Qatar [2] University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City. (8)1]
Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon [2]
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston MA 02215, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of multiple populations with distinctive
genetic and lifestyle backgrounds are crucial to the understanding of Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) pathophysiology. We report a GWAS on the genetic basis
of T2DM in a 3,286 Lebanese participants. More than 5,000,000 SNPs were directly 
genotyped or imputed using the 1000 Genomes Project reference panels. We identify
genome-wide significant variants in two loci CDKAL1 and TCF7L2, independent of
sex, age and BMI, with leading variants rs7766070 (OR = 1.39, P = 4.77 × 10(-9)) 
and rs34872471 (OR = 1.35, P = 1.01 × 10(-8)) respectively. The current study is 
the first GWAS to find genomic regions implicated in T2DM in the Lebanese
population. The results support a central role of CDKAL1 and TCF7L2 in T2DM
susceptibility in Southwest Asian populations and provide a plausible component
for understanding molecular mechanisms involved in the disease.

PMID: 25483131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(22):3506-18. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.958407.

Inhibition of C-terminal binding protein attenuates transcription factor 4
signaling to selectively target colon cancer stem cells.

Patel J(1), Baranwal S, Love IM, Patel NJ, Grossman SR, Patel BB.

Author information: 
(1)a Hunter Holmes McGuire VA Medical Center ; Richmond , VA USA.

Selective targeting of cancer stem cells (CSCs), implicated in tumor relapse,
holds great promise in the treatment of colorectal cancer. Overexpression of
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP), an NADH dependent transcriptional regulator,
is often observed in colon cancer. Of note, TCF-4 signaling is also up-regulated 
in colonic CSCs. We hypothesized that CtBP, whose dehydrogenase activity is
amenable to pharmacological inhibition by 4-methylthio-2-oxobutyric acid (MTOB), 
positively regulates TCF-4 signaling, leading to CSC growth and self-renewal.
CSCs demonstrated significant upregulation of CtBP1 and CtBP2 levels (mRNA and
protein) and activity partly due to increased NADH/NAD ratio, as well as
increased TCF/LEF transcriptional activity, compared to respective controls.
Depletion of CtBP2 inhibited, while its overexpression enhanced, CSC growth (1°
spheroids) and self-renewal (2°/3° spheroids). Similarly, MTOB caused a robust
inhibition of spheroid growth and self-renewal in a dose dependent manner. MTOB
displayed significantly greater selectivity for growth inhibition in the
spheroids, at least in part through induction of apoptosis, compared to monolayer
controls. Moreover, MTOB inhibited basal as well as induced (by GSK-3ß inhibitor)
TCF/LEF activity while suppressing mRNA and protein levels of several ß-catenin
target genes (CD44, Snail, C-MYC and LGR5). Lastly, CtBP physically interacted
with TCF-4, and this interaction was significantly inhibited in the presence of
MTOB. The above findings point to a novel role of CtBPs in the promotion of CSC
growth and self-renewal through direct regulation of TCF/LEF transcription.
Moreover, small molecular inhibition of its function can selectively target CSCs,
presenting a novel approach for treatment of colorectal cancer focused on
targeting of CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4613182
PMID: 25483087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Leukemia. 2015 Jun;29(6):1267-78. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.340. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Pre-clinical efficacy of combined therapy with novel ß-catenin antagonist BC2059 
and histone deacetylase inhibitor against AML cells.

Fiskus W(1), Sharma S(2), Saha S(1), Shah B(1), Devaraj SG(1), Sun B(1), Horrigan
S(3), Leveque C(1), Zu Y(1), Iyer S(1), Bhalla KN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Beta Cat
Pharmaceutical, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

The canonical wingless-type MMTV integration site (WNT)-ß-catenin pathway is
essential for self-renewal, growth and survival of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
stem/blast progenitor cells (BPCs). Deregulated WNT signaling inhibits
degradation of ß-catenin, causing increased nuclear translocation and co-factor
activity of ß-catenin with the transcriptional regulator T-cell factor (TCF)
4/lymphoid enhancer factor 1 in AML BPCs. Here, we determined the pre-clinical
anti-AML activity of the anthraquinone oxime-analog BC2059 (BC), known to
attenuate ß-catenin levels. BC treatment disrupted the binding of ß-catenin with 
the scaffold protein transducin ß-like 1 and proteasomal degradation and decline 
in the nuclear levels of ß-catenin. This was associated with reduced
transcriptional activity of TCF4 and expression of its target genes, cyclin D1,
c-MYC and survivin. BC treatment dose-dependently induced apoptosis of cultured
and primary AML BPCs. Treatment with BC also significantly improved the median
survival of immune-depleted mice engrafted with either cultured or primary AML
BPCs, exhibiting nuclear expression of ß-catenin. Co-treatment with the
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat and BC synergistically induced
apoptosis of cultured and primary AML BPCs, including those expressing FLT3-ITD, 
as well as further significantly improved the survival of immune-depleted mice
engrafted with primary AML BPCs. These findings underscore the promising
pre-clinical activity and warrant further testing of BC against human AML,
especially those expressing FLT3-ITD.

PMCID: PMC4456205
PMID: 25482131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Jun;230(6):1298-309. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24865.

Galectin-1 triggers epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Bacigalupo ML(1), Manzi M, Espelt MV, Gentilini LD, Compagno D, Laderach DJ,
Wolfenstein-Todel C, Rabinovich GA, Troncoso MF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry and Biophysics "Prof. Alejandro C. Paladini"
(UBA-CONICET), Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Pharmacy and
Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Galectin-1 (Gal1), a ß-galactoside-binding protein abundantly expressed in tumor 
microenvironments, is associated with the development of metastasis in
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). However, the precise roles of Gal1 in HCC cell
invasiveness and dissemination are uncertain. Here, we investigated whether Gal1 
mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HCC cells, a key process
during cancer progression. We used the well-differentiated and low invasive HepG2
cells and performed 'gain-of-function' and 'loss-function' experiments by
transfecting cells with Gal1 cDNA constructs or by siRNA strategies,
respectively. Epithelial and mesenchymal markers expression, changes in
apico-basal polarity, independent-anchorage growth, and activation of specific
signaling pathways were studied using Western blot, fluorescence microscopy,
soft-agar assays, and FOP/TOP flash reporter system. Gal1 up-regulation in HepG2 
cells induced down-regulation of the adherens junction protein E-cadherin and
increased expression of the transcription factor Snail, one of the main inducers 
of EMT in HCC. Enhanced Gal1 expression facilitated the transition from
epithelial cell morphology towards a fibroblastoid phenotype and favored
up-regulation of the mesenchymal marker vimentin in HCC cells. Cells
overexpressing Gal1 showed enhanced anchorage-independent growth and loss of
apico-basal polarity. Remarkably, Gal1 promoted Akt activation, ß-catenin nuclear
translocation, TCF4/LEF1 transcriptional activity and increased cyclin D1 and
c-Myc expression, suggesting activation of the Wnt pathway. Furthermore, Gal1
overexpression induced E-cadherin downregulation through a PI3K/Akt-dependent
mechanism. Our results provide the first evidence of a role of Gal1 as an inducer
of EMT in HCC cells, with critical implications in HCC metastasis.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25469885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt B):929-36. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.11.003.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

EZH2 is a negative prognostic factor and exhibits pro-oncogenic activity in
glioblastoma.

Zhang J(1), Chen L(2), Han L(2), Shi Z(2), Zhang J(3), Pu P(2), Kang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Key Laboratory of
Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of
Nervous System, Tianjin, China; Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China; Chinese Glioma
Cooperative Group (CGCG), China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Key Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central
Nervous System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries,
Variations and Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin, China; Chinese Glioma
Cooperative Group (CGCG), China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Key Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central
Nervous System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries,
Variations and Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Laboratory of
Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Key Laboratory of Post-trauma
Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Ministry of Education,
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of Nervous
System, Tianjin, China; Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG), China.
Electronic address: kang79061@gmail.com.

The identification of single or less genes based on mRNA expression as clinical
diagnostic markers for glioblastoma (GBM) remains a challenge. Recent data have
shown the potential oncogenic role and prognostic significance of EZH2 in several
human cancers. However, the clinical signature and further mechanisms of EZH2
function in gliomagenesis are still poorly understood. In this study, we found
that increased EZH2 expression was associated with tumor grade. High expression
of EZH2 in GBM was determined to be a strong and independent predictor of short
overall survival. Further, we screened EZH2 targets and associated genes in GBM. 
Repression of EZH2 induced cell cycle arrest and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. 
This event represents a positive feedback loop with ß-catenin/TCF4 and STAT3
signaling. Taken together, EZH2 could be an independent prognostic factor and
potential therapeutic target for GBM.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 25444902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jan;125(1):208-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI76902. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Intronic locus determines SHROOM3 expression and potentiates renal allograft
fibrosis.

Menon MC, Chuang PY, Li Z, Wei C, Zhang W, Luan Y, Yi Z, Xiong H, Woytovich C,
Greene I, Overbey J, Rosales I, Bagiella E, Chen R, Ma M, Li L, Ding W, Djamali
A, Saminego M, O'Connell PJ, Gallon L, Colvin R, Schroppel B, He JC, Murphy B.

Fibrosis underlies the loss of renal function in patients with chronic kidney
disease (CKD) and in kidney transplant recipients with chronic allograft
nephropathy (CAN). Here, we studied the effect of an intronic SNP in SHROOM3,
which has previously been linked to CKD, on the development of CAN in a
prospective cohort of renal allograft recipients. The presence of the rs17319721 
allele at the SHROOM3 locus in the donor correlated with increased SHROOM3
expression in the allograft. In vitro, we determined that the sequence containing
the risk allele at rs17319721 is a transcription factor 7-like 2-dependent
(TCF7L2-dependent) enhancer element that functions to increase SHROOM3
transcription. In renal tubular cells, TGF-ß1 administration upregulated SHROOM3 
expression in a ß-catenin/TCF7L2-mediated manner, while SHROOM3 in turn
facilitated canonical TGF-ß1 signaling and increased a1 collagen (COL1A1)
expression. Inducible and tubular cell-specific knockdown of Shroom3 markedly
abrogated interstitial fibrosis in mice with unilateral ureteric obstruction.
Moreover, SHROOM3 expression in allografts at 3 months after transplant and the
presence of the SHROOM3 risk allele in the donor correlated with increased
allograft fibrosis and with reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate at 12
months after transplant. Our findings suggest that rs17319721 functions as a
cis-acting expression quantitative trait locus of SHROOM3 that facilitates TGF-ß1
signaling and contributes to allograft injury.

PMCID: PMC4382250
PMID: 25437874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):2583-91. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2876-y. Epub 2014
Nov 28.

CIZ1 promoted the growth and migration of gallbladder cancer cells.

Zhang D(1), Wang Y, Dai Y, Wang J, Suo T, Pan H, Liu H, Shen S, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department, Zhongshan Hospital, General Surgery Institute,
Fudan University, 180 Fenglin Rd., 200032, Shanghai, China.

Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is one of the most common and aggressive diseases among 
the gastrointestinal tract malignancies, and the molecular mechanism underlying
this disease remains largely unknown. CIZ1 (Cip1 interacting zinc finger protein 
1), a binding partner of p21(Cip1/Waf1), has been found to be involved in the
tumorigenesis recently. However, the expression pattern and biological functions 
of CIZ1 in the progression of GBC are not fully understood. In this study, it was
found that the expression of CIZ1 was significantly elevated in GBC samples
compared to their adjacent normal tissues. Moreover, overexpression of CIZ1
promoted the growth and migration of GBC cells, while knocking down the
expression of CIZ1 inhibited the growth, migration, and tumorigenesis of GBC
cells in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CIZ1 was found to interact with TCF4
(T-cell factor) and activate beta-catenin/TCF signaling. Our study demonstrated
that CIZ1 played an oncogenic role in the progression of GBC and CIZ1 might be a 
promising target for the treatment of GBC.

PMID: 25427641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Surg Radiol Anat. 2015 Aug;37(6):571-8. doi: 10.1007/s00276-014-1396-1. Epub 2014
Nov 27.

Anatomical and histological study of human deep fasciae development.

Blasi M(1), Blasi J, Domingo T, Pérez-Bellmunt A, Miguel-Pérez M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fundamental Care and Medical-Surgical Nursing, University School
of Nursing, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: To characterize the connective tissue found between the subcutaneous
adipose tissue and the underlying muscle tissue in different regions and at
different stages of human fetal development. We aim to identify its structural
similarities to adult deep fascia, and to establish its role in myofascial
development.
METHODS: Samples from the arm, forearm, low back and thigh regions (from sites
topographically homologous to the adult deep fascia) of five fetus body donors
were obtained to perform gross anatomy dissection and histologic sections.
Sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and Masson trichrome stain to
observe their overall structure. Antiserum to protein S100 was used to analyze
the presence and distribution of nerve fibers, and immunohistochemistry
processing with Tcf4 marker was used to ensure fibroblast activity.
RESULTS: Gross anatomy and histological sections of fetal samples showed the
presence of connective tissue topographically and morphologically equivalent to
adult deep fasciae. Developing blood vessels and nerves were found evenly
distributed within the connective tissue during early development and in the
portion adjacent to the muscle at later stages. The presence of Tcf4+ fibroblasts
was confirmed in all analyzed mesenchymal connective tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep fascia is present from week 21 of human development in the
lower back and upper and lower limbs. Blood vessels and nerves develop parallel
to it and occasionally cross it from the deep to superficial plane. The presence 
of Tcf4+ fibroblasts in the deep fascia suggests a crucial role for this
structure in muscle morphogenesis.

PMID: 25424155  [PubMed - in process]


165. Front Neurosci. 2014 Nov 6;8:331. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00331. eCollection
2014.

Neuroinformatic analyses of common and distinct genetic components associated
with major neuropsychiatric disorders.

Lotan A(1), Fenckova M(2), Bralten J(3), Alttoa A(4), Dixson L(5), Williams
RW(6), van der Voet M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Psychiatry and the Biological Psychiatry Laboratory,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center Jerusalem, Israel. (2)Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Medical Center Nijmegen, Netherlands. (3)Department of Human Genetics,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical 
Center Nijmegen, Netherlands ; Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center
Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, Psychiatric Neurobiology Program, University of Würzburg
Würzburg, Germany. (5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Central Institute of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg Mannheim, 
Germany. (6)Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, Center for
Integrative and Translational Genomics, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center Memphis, TN, USA.

Major neuropsychiatric disorders are highly heritable, with mounting evidence
suggesting that these disorders share overlapping sets of molecular and cellular 
underpinnings. In the current article we systematically test the degree of
genetic commonality across six major neuropsychiatric disorders-attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anxiety disorders (Anx), autistic spectrum
disorders (ASD), bipolar disorder (BD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and
schizophrenia (SCZ). We curated a well-vetted list of genes based on large-scale 
human genetic studies based on the NHGRI catalog of published genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). A total of 180 genes were accepted into the analysis 
on the basis of low but liberal GWAS p-values (<10(-5)). 22% of genes overlapped 
two or more disorders. The most widely shared subset of genes-common to five of
six disorders-included ANK3, AS3MT, CACNA1C, CACNB2, CNNM2, CSMD1, DPCR1, ITIH3, 
NT5C2, PPP1R11, SYNE1, TCF4, TENM4, TRIM26, and ZNRD1. Using a suite of
neuroinformatic resources, we showed that many of the shared genes are implicated
in the postsynaptic density (PSD), expressed in immune tissues and co-expressed
in developing human brain. Using a translational cross-species approach, we
detected two distinct genetic components that were both shared by each of the six
disorders; the 1st component is involved in CNS development, neural projections
and synaptic transmission, while the 2nd is implicated in various cytoplasmic
organelles and cellular processes. Combined, these genetic components account for
20-30% of the genetic load. The remaining risk is conferred by distinct,
disorder-specific variants. Our systematic comparative analysis of shared and
unique genetic factors highlights key gene sets and molecular processes that may 
ultimately translate into improved diagnosis and treatment of these debilitating 
disorders.

PMCID: PMC4222236
PMID: 25414627  [PubMed]


166. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13646-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1225. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The mechanisms of genome-wide target gene regulation by TCF7L2 in liver cells.

Norton L(1), Chen X(2), Fourcaudot M(2), Acharya NK(2), DeFronzo RA(2), Heikkinen
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 
78229, USA nortonl@uthscsa.edu. (2)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (3)Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio 70211, Finland nortonl@uthscsa.edu.

In the liver Wnt-signaling contributes to the metabolic fate of hepatocytes, but 
the precise role of the TCF7L2 in this process is unknown. We employed a temporal
RNA-Seq approach to examine gene expression 3-96 h following Tcf7l2 silencing in 
rat hepatoma cells, and combined this with ChIP-Seq to investigate mechanisms of 
target gene regulation by TCF7L2. Silencing Tcf7l2 led to a time-dependent
appearance of 406 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including key regulators
of cellular growth and differentiation, and amino acid, lipid and glucose
metabolism. Direct regulation of 149 DEGs was suggested by strong proximal TCF7L2
binding (peak proximity score > 10) and early mRNA expression changes (= 18 h).
Indirect gene regulation by TCF7L2 likely occurred via alternate transcription
factors, including Hnf4a, Foxo1, Cited2, Myc and Lef1, which were differentially 
expressed following Tcf7l2 knock-down. Tcf7l2-silencing enhanced the expression
and chromatin occupancy of HNF4a, and co-siRNA experiments revealed that HNF4a
was required for the regulation of a subset of metabolic genes by TCF7L2,
particularly those involved in lipid and amino-acid metabolism. Our findings
suggest TCF7L2 is an important regulator of the hepatic phenotype, and highlight 
novel mechanisms of gene regulation by TCF7L2 that involve interplay between
multiple hepatic transcriptional pathways.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267646
PMID: 25414334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Genet Couns. 2015 Aug;24(4):663-74. doi: 10.1007/s10897-014-9793-5. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

Adults with Chromosome 18 Abnormalities.

Soileau B(1), Hasi M, Sebold C, Hill A, O'Donnell L, Hale DE, Cody JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

The identification of an underlying chromosome abnormality frequently marks the
endpoint of a diagnostic odyssey. However, families are frequently left with more
questions than answers as they consider their child's future. In the case of rare
chromosome conditions, a lack of longitudinal data often makes it difficult to
provide anticipatory guidance to these families. The objective of this study is
to describe the lifespan, educational attainment, living situation, and
behavioral phenotype of adults with chromosome 18 abnormalities. The Chromosome
18 Clinical Research Center has enrolled 483 individuals with one of the
following conditions: 18q-, 18p-, Tetrasomy 18p, and Ring 18. As a part of the
ongoing longitudinal study, we collect data on living arrangements, educational
level attained, and employment status as well as data on executive functioning
and behavioral skills on an annual basis. Within our cohort, 28 of the 483
participants have died, the majority of whom have deletions encompassing the TCF4
gene or who have unbalanced rearrangement involving other chromosomes. Data
regarding the cause of and age at death are presented. We also report on the
living situation, educational attainment, and behavioral phenotype of the 151
participants over the age of 18. In general, educational level is higher for
people with all these conditions than implied by the early literature, including 
some that received post-high school education. In addition, some individuals are 
able to live independently, though at this point they represent a minority of
patients. Data on executive function and behavioral phenotype are also presented.
Taken together, these data provide insight into the long-term outcome for
individuals with a chromosome 18 condition. This information is critical in
counseling families on the range of potential outcomes for their child.

PMID: 25403900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6447-61. eCollection 2014.

Silencing of WISP3 suppresses gastric cancer cell proliferation and metastasis
and inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Fang F(1), Zhao WY(2), Li RK(1), Yang XM(1), Li J(1), Ao JP(1), Jiang SH(1), Kong
FZ(3), Tu L(2), Zhuang C(2), Qin WX(1), He P(1), Zhang WM(4), Cao H(2), Zhang
ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Shanghai 200240, P.R. China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Renji Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Shanghai, China. (3)Department
of General Surgery, Central Hospital of Fengxian District 6600 Nan Feng Road,
Shanghai 201400, China. (4)Department of Endoscopy, Cancer Hospital, and
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University Shanghai
200032, China.

CCN6/Wnt1-inducible signaling protein-3 (CCN6/WISP3) is a cysteine-rich protein
that belongs to the CCN (Cyr61, CTGF, Nov) family of matricellular proteins,
which are often dysregulated in cancers. However, the functional role and
clinical significance of WISP3 in gastric cancer remain unclear. In this study,
we found that silencing of WISP3 suppressed gastric cancer cell proliferation,
migration and invasion. Cell adhesion to collagens (collagen I and IV), but not
to fibronectin, were significantly inhibited by silencing of WISP3. Furthermore, 
silencing of WISP3 prevented ß-catenin transferring from cell cytoplasm to
nuclear, and suppressed canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and its downstream
target genes, cyclin D1 and TCF-4. By immunohistochemical analysis of 379
patients, we found that the expression of WISP3 is closely associated with
gastric cancer size and tumor invasion, and indicates a poor prognosis in both
test cohort (253 patients) and validation cohort (126 patients). Moreover, the
expression of WISP3 was positively correlated with the expression of cyclin D1
and TCF-4 in gastric cancer tissues. Taken together, our data suggests that WISP3
might be a promising prognostic factor and WISP3-Wnt/ß-catenin axis may be a new 
therapeutic target for the intervention of gastric cancer growth and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4230117
PMID: 25400723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;399(1-2):1-5. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2209-x. Epub
2014 Nov 16.

Lhx3 is required to maintain cancer cell development of high-grade
oligodendroglioma.

Liu H(1), Liu W, Zhu B, Xu Q, Ni X, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital Baoshan Branch, Fudan University,
1999 West Changjiang Road, Shanghai, 200431, People's Republic of China,
yangjili@leele.org.

The LHX genes play a substantial role in an amount of adorning processes.
Potential roles of LHXs have been accepted and approved in an assortment of
neoplastic tissues as bump suppressors or promoters depending on bump cachet and 
types. The aim of this abstraction was to investigate the action role of LHXs in 
the animal High-grade Oligodendroglioma (HG-OT). The gene announcement changes of
LHXs in HG-OT tissues compared with non-cancerous colorectal tissues were
detected using application real-time quantitative about-face
transcriptase-polymerase alternation acknowledgment (QRT-PCR) assay and
immunohistochemistry. And we articulate the gene LHX3 that was decidedly
up-regulated in HG-OT by QRT-PCR assay and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, it 
was obvious that LHX3 responds to blight corpuscle admeasurement in vitro and
LHX3 announcement activated with animated ß-catenin levels in HG-OT and ß-catenin
action was appropriate for LHX3's oncogenic effects.  Mechanistically, LHX3
facilitates TCF4 to bind to ß-catenin and facilitates LHX3/TCF4/ß-catenin
circuitous and trans-active it's after ambition gene. LHX3 mutations that agitate
the LHX3-ß-catenin alternation partially anticipate its action in bump cells. All
in all, LHX3 is a frequently activated bump apostle that actuates Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in blight beef of HG-OT.

PMID: 25399296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 15;24(6):1646-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu577. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

Evidence of non-pancreatic beta cell-dependent roles of Tcf7l2 in the regulation 
of glucose metabolism in mice.

Bailey KA(1), Savic D(1), Zielinski M(2), Park SY(2), Wang LJ(3), Witkowski P(3),
Brady M(4), Hara M(2), Bell GI(5), Nobrega MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics. (2)Department of Medicine. (3)Department of
Surgery. (4)Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and
Metabolism, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)Department of Human
Genetics, Department of Medicine. (6)Department of Human Genetics,
nobrega@uchicago.edu.

Non-coding variation within TCF7L2 remains the strongest genetic determinant of
type 2 diabetes risk in humans. A considerable effort has been placed in
understanding the functional roles of TCF7L2 in pancreatic beta cells, despite
evidence of TCF7L2 expression in various peripheral tissues important in glucose 
homeostasis. Here, we use a humanized mouse model overexpressing Tcf7l2,
resulting in glucose intolerance, to infer the contribution of Tcf7l2
overexpression in beta cells and in other tissues to the metabolic phenotypes
displayed by these mice. Restoring Tcf7l2 expression specifically in beta cells
to endogenous levels, in face of its overexpression elsewhere, results in
impaired insulin secretion, reduced beta cell number and islet area,
corroborating data obtained in humans showing similar phenotypes as a result of
manipulations leading to Tcf7l2 loss of function. Interestingly, the persistent
overexpression of Tcf7l2 in non-pancreatic tissues results in a significant
worsening in glucose tolerance in vivo, indicating that Tcf7l2 overexpression in 
beta cells does not account for the glucose intolerance in the Tcf7l2
overexpression mouse model. Collectively, these data posit that Tcf7l2 plays key 
roles in glucose metabolism through actions beyond pancreatic beta cells, and
further points to functionally opposing cell-type specific effects for Tcf7l2 on 
the maintenance of balanced glucose metabolism, thereby urging a careful
examination of its role in non-pancreatic tissues as well as its composite
metabolic effects across distinct tissues. Uncovering these roles may lead to new
therapeutic targets for type 2 diabetes.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4381752
PMID: 25398947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e113064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113064.
eCollection 2014.

A simplified and versatile system for the simultaneous expression of multiple
siRNAs in mammalian cells using Gibson DNA Assembly.

Deng F(1), Chen X(2), Liao Z(3), Yan Z(4), Wang Z(4), Deng Y(4), Zhang Q(4),
Zhang Z(5), Ye J(6), Qiao M(7), Li R(5), Denduluri S(2), Wang J(4), Wei Q(4), Li 
M(2), Geng N(2), Zhao L(8), Zhou G(2), Zhang P(4), Luu HH(2), Haydon RC(2), Reid 
RR(9), Yang T(10), He TC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing,
400038, China; Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago,
IL, 60637, United States of America. (2)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 60637, United States of America. (3)Molecular
Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation
Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 60637, United
States of America; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, the Affiliated Xiang-Ya
Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. (4)Molecular
Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation
Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 60637, United
States of America; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine,
and the Affiliated Hospitals of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, 
China. (5)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
60637, United States of America; Department of Surgery, the Affiliated Zhongnan
Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China. (6)Molecular Oncology
Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The
University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 60637, United States of
America; School of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044,
China. (7)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
60637, United States of America; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Diagnostic Medicine, and the Affiliated Hospitals of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, 400016, China; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, the
Affiliated Xiang-Ya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410008,
China. (8)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
60637, United States of America; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu, 730000, China.
(9)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
60637, United States of America; The Laboratory of Craniofacial Biology,
Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
60637, United States of America. (10)Department of Cell Biology, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, 400038, China.

RNA interference (RNAi) denotes sequence-specific mRNA degradation induced by
short interfering double-stranded RNA (siRNA) and has become a revolutionary tool
for functional annotation of mammalian genes, as well as for development of novel
therapeutics. The practical applications of RNAi are usually achieved by
expressing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) or siRNAs in cells. However, a major
technical challenge is to simultaneously express multiple siRNAs to silence one
or more genes. We previously developed pSOS system, in which siRNA duplexes are
made from oligo templates driven by opposing U6 and H1 promoters. While
effective, it is not equipped to express multiple siRNAs in a single vector.
Gibson DNA Assembly (GDA) is an in vitro recombination system that has the
capacity to assemble multiple overlapping DNA molecules in a single isothermal
step. Here, we developed a GDA-based pSOK assembly system for constructing single
vectors that express multiple siRNA sites. The assembly fragments were generated 
by PCR amplifications from the U6-H1 template vector pB2B. GDA assembly
specificity was conferred by the overlapping unique siRNA sequences of insert
fragments. To prove the technical feasibility, we constructed pSOK vectors that
contain four siRNA sites and three siRNA sites targeting human and mouse
ß-catenin, respectively. The assembly reactions were efficient, and candidate
clones were readily identified by PCR screening. Multiple ß-catenin siRNAs
effectively silenced endogenous ß-catenin expression, inhibited Wnt3A-induced
ß-catenin/Tcf4 reporter activity and expression of Wnt/ß-catenin downstream
genes. Silencing ß-catenin in mesenchymal stem cells inhibited Wnt3A-induced
early osteogenic differentiation and significantly diminished synergistic
osteogenic activity between BMP9 and Wnt3A in vitro and in vivo. These findings
demonstrate that the GDA-based pSOK system has been proven simplistic, effective 
and versatile for simultaneous expression of multiple siRNAs. Thus, the reported 
pSOK system should be a valuable tool for gene function studies and development
of novel therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4232585
PMID: 25398142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. FASEB J. 2015 Feb;29(2):623-35. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-253211. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway represses the transcription of the
ß-amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE1) via binding of T-cell
factor-4 to BACE1 promoter.

Parr C(1), Mirzaei N(1), Christian M(1), Sastre M(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 
and Division of Metabolic and Vascular Health, Warwick Medical School, University
of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom. (2)*Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom; and Division of Metabolic and Vascular
Health, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
m.sastre@imperial.ac.uk.

Alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway have been implicated in Alzheimer's
disease; however, its role in the processing of the amyloid precursor protein
remains unknown. In this study, activation of the Wnt pathway by overexpression
of the agonist Wnt3a or ß-catenin or by inhibition of glycogen kinase synthase-3 
in N2a cells resulted in a reduction in Aß levels and in the activity and
expression of BACE1 (ß-APP cleaving enzyme). Conversely, inhibition of the
pathway by transfection of the antagonists secreted frizzled receptor protein-1
or dickkopf-1 produced the opposite effects. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that ß-catenin binds specifically to regions within the
promoter of BACE1 containing putative T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer binding
factor-1 (TCF/LEF) motifs, consistent with canonical Wnt target regulation.
Furthermore, cells transfected with ß-catenin mutants incapable of binding to
TCF/LEF increased BACE1 gene promoter activity. Interestingly, TCF4 knockdown
reversed the effects of Wnt3a activation on BACE1 transcription. We found that
TCF4 binds to the same region on BACE1 promoter following Wnt3a stimulation,
indicating that TCF4 functions as a transcriptional repressor of BACE1 gene. In
conclusion, Wnt/ß-catenin stimulation may repress BACE1 transcription via binding
of TCF4 to BACE1 gene, and therefore, activation of the Wnt pathway may hold the 
key to new treatments of Alzheimer disease.-Parr, C., Mirzaei, N., Christian, M.,
and Sastre, M. Activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway represses the
transcription of the ß-amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE1) via
binding of T-cell factor-4 to BACE1 promoter.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25384422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014 Dec;31(8):945-59. doi: 10.1007/s10585-014-9682-1. Epub 
2014 Oct 31.

Wnt signaling induces gene expression of factors associated with bone destruction
in lung and breast cancer.

Johnson RW(1), Merkel AR, Page JM, Ruppender NS, Guelcher SA, Sterling JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (VISN 9),
Nashville, TN, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is an important regulator of bone
destruction in bone metastatic tumors. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß)
stimulates PTHrP production in part through the transcription factor Gli2, which 
is regulated independent of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in osteolytic cancer
cells. However, inhibition of TGF-ß in vivo does not fully inhibit tumor growth
in bone or tumor-induced bone destruction, suggesting other pathways are
involved. While Wnt signaling regulates Gli2 in development, the role of Wnt
signaling in bone metastasis is unknown. Therefore, we investigated whether Wnt
signaling regulates Gli2 expression in tumor cells that induce bone destruction. 
We report here that Wnt activation by ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 (TCF4)
over-expression or lithium chloride (LiCl) treatment increased Gli2 and PTHrP
expression in osteolytic cancer cells. This was mediated through the TCF and Smad
binding sites within the Gli2 promoter as determined by promoter mutation
studies, suggesting cross-talk between TGF-ß and Wnt signaling. Culture of tumor 
cells on substrates with bone-like rigidity increased Gli2 and PTHrP production, 
enhanced autocrine Wnt activity and led to an increase in the TCF/Wnt signaling
reporter (TOPFlash), enriched ß-catenin nuclear accumulation, and elevated
Wnt-related genes by PCR-array. Stromal cells serve as an additional paracrine
source of Wnt ligands and enhanced Gli2 and PTHrP mRNA levels in MDA-MB-231 and
RWGT2 cells in vitro and promoted tumor-induced bone destruction in vivo in a
ß-catenin/Wnt3a-dependent mechanism. These data indicate that a combination of
matrix rigidity and stromal-secreted factors stimulate Gli2 and PTHrP through Wnt
signaling in osteolytic breast cancer cells, and there is significant cross-talk 
between the Wnt and TGF-ß signaling pathways. This suggests that the Wnt
signaling pathway may be a potential therapeutic target for inhibiting tumor cell
response to the bone microenvironment and at the very least should be considered 
in clinical regimens targeting TGF-ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC4258192
PMID: 25359619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004772.
eCollection 2014.

De novo mutations in moderate or severe intellectual disability.

Hamdan FF(1), Srour M(2), Capo-Chichi JM(1), Daoud H(3), Nassif C(1), Patry L(1),
Massicotte C(1), Ambalavanan A(3), Spiegelman D(3), Diallo O(3), Henrion E(3),
Dionne-Laporte A(3), Fougerat A(1), Pshezhetsky AV(1), Venkateswaran S(4),
Rouleau GA(3), Michaud JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Canada. (2)CHU Sainte-Justine
Research Center, Montreal, Canada; Division of Pediatric Neurology, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montreal, Canada. (3)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. (4)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. (5)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal,
Canada; Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neurosciences, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Genetics is believed to have an important role in intellectual disability (ID).
Recent studies have emphasized the involvement of de novo mutations (DNMs) in ID 
but the extent to which they contribute to its pathogenesis and the identity of
the corresponding genes remain largely unknown. Here, we report a screen for DNMs
in subjects with moderate or severe ID. We sequenced the exomes of 41 probands
and their parents, and confirmed 81 DNMs affecting the coding sequence or
consensus splice sites (1.98 DNMs/proband). We observed a significant excess of
de novo single nucleotide substitutions and loss-of-function mutations in these
cases compared to control subjects, suggesting that at least a subset of these
variations are pathogenic. A total of 12 likely pathogenic DNMs were identified
in genes previously associated with ID (ARID1B, CHD2, FOXG1, GABRB3, GATAD2B,
GRIN2B, MBD5, MED13L, SETBP1, TBR1, TCF4, WDR45), resulting in a diagnostic yield
of ~29%. We also identified 12 possibly pathogenic DNMs in genes (HNRNPU, WAC,
RYR2, SET, EGR1, MYH10, EIF2C1, COL4A3BP, CHMP2A, PPP1CB, VPS4A, PPP2R2B) that
have not previously been causally linked to ID. Interestingly, no case was
explained by inherited mutations. Protein network analysis indicated that the
products of many of these known and candidate genes interact with each other or
with products of other ID-associated genes further supporting their involvement
in ID. We conclude that DNMs represent a major cause of moderate or severe ID.

PMCID: PMC4214635
PMID: 25356899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):1390-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu553. Epub 2014 Oct
29.

Selective disruption of Tcf7l2 in the pancreatic ß cell impairs secretory
function and lowers ß cell mass.

Mitchell RK(1), Mondragon A(1), Chen L(2), Mcginty JA(2), French PM(2), Ferrer
J(3), Thorens B(4), Hodson DJ(1), Rutter GA(5), Da Silva Xavier G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine. (2)Photonics Group, Department of Physics and. (3)Section
of Genetics and Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK. (4)Center for
Integrative Genomics, Physiology Department, University of Lausanne, Genopode
Building, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)Section of Cell Biology, Division of 
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
g.dasilva-xavier@imperial.ac.uk g.rutter@imperial.ac.uk.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by ß cell dysfunction and loss. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms in the T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, associated 
with T2D by genome-wide association studies, lead to impaired ß cell function.
While deletion of the homologous murine Tcf7l2 gene throughout the developing
pancreas leads to impaired glucose tolerance, deletion in the ß cell in adult
mice reportedly has more modest effects. To inactivate Tcf7l2 highly selectively 
in ß cells from the earliest expression of the Ins1 gene (~E11.5) we have
therefore used a Cre recombinase introduced at the Ins1 locus.
Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre mice display impaired oral and intraperitoneal glucose
tolerance by 8 and 16 weeks, respectively, and defective responses to the GLP-1
analogue liraglutide at 8 weeks. Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre islets displayed defective
glucose- and GLP-1-stimulated insulin secretion and the expression of both the
Ins2 (~20%) and Glp1r (~40%) genes were significantly reduced. Glucose- and
GLP-1-induced intracellular free Ca(2+) increases, and connectivity between
individual ß cells, were both lowered by Tcf7l2 deletion in islets from mice
maintained on a high (60%) fat diet. Finally, analysis by optical projection
tomography revealed ~30% decrease in ß cell mass in pancreata from
Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre mice. These data demonstrate that Tcf7l2 plays a cell
autonomous role in the control of ß cell function and mass, serving as an
important regulator of gene expression and islet cell coordination. The possible 
relevance of these findings for the action of TCF7L2 polymorphisms associated
with Type 2 diabetes in man is discussed.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4321446
PMID: 25355422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;49(8):588-93.

[Correlation between TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and genetic susceptibility in women
with gestational diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi X(1), Cai Q(2), Zou M, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Maternal and Children Health Hospital of Jiangxi
Province, Nanchang 330000, China. (2)Email: ai929@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) at locus rs7903146, rs290487,
rsl1196205, rs12255372 and genetic susceptibility in women with gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: As a case- control study, 100 pregnant women with GDM and 100 healthy
pregnant women in the Maternal and Children Health Hospital of Jiangxi Province
were recruited from January 2010 to July 2013. Clinical parameters, including
body mass index (BMI), fasting insulin (FINS), fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and
homeostatic model assessment-insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) were measured
after admission to hospital. Allelespecific PCR was used to analyze the SNP of
TCF7L2 at locus rs7903146, rs290487, rs11196205, rs12255372.
RESULTS: (1)The BMI, FPG, FINS and HOMA-IR in GDM group were (27.4 ± 3.0)kg/m²,
(5.6 ± 1.0) mmol/L, (6.2 ± 3.4) mU/L and 1.8 ± 1.0, and were (24.2 ± 2.9) kg/m², 
(5.3 ± 0.8) mmol/L, (4.5 ± 2.8) mU/L, 1.2 ± 0.8 in the control group,
respectively. The differences had statistically significance (P < 0.05). (2)The
SNP of TCF7L2 gene, locus rs7903146 were CC, CT and TT genotype; the SNP of locus
rs290487 were CC, CT and TT genotype; and the SNP of locus rs11196205 were GG and
CC genotype; while the SNP of locus rs12255372 was GG genotype. (3) The
distribution frequencies of genotype CC, CT and TT at locus rs7903146 in the GDM 
group were 40% (40/100), 36% (36/100) and 24% (24/100), respectively. While in
the control group, they were 55% (55/100), 38% (38/100) and 7% (7/100),
respectively. The frequencies of C and T allele of rs7903146 were 58%and 42% in
the GDM group, and in the control group they were 74% (148/200) and 26% (52/200).
The differences of genotype distribution and C/T allele frequency of rs7903146
between the two groups were statistically significant (P < 0.05). (4) The
distribution frequencies of genotype CC, CT and TT at locus rs290487 in the GDM
group were 12% (12/100), 36% (36/ 100) and 52% (52/100), and were 16% (16/100),
34% (34/100)and 50% (50/100) in the control group. The frequencies of C and T
allele of rs290487 were 30% (60/200) and 70% (140/200) in the GDM group, and were
33% (66/200) and 67% (134/200) in the control group. There was no difference of
genotype distribution and C/T allele frequency of rs290487 between the two groups
(P > 0.05). (5)The distribution frequencies of genotype GG and CC at locus
rs11196205 in the GDM group were 99% (99/100) and 1% (1/100), while those in the 
control group were 100% (100/100)and 0%. The frequency of G and C allele of
rs11196205 were 99% (198/200) and 1% (2/200) in the GDM group, while in the
control group were 100% (200/200) and 0. There was no difference of genotype
distribution and G/C allele frequency of rs11196205 between the two groups (P >
0.05). (6)The distribution frequencies of genotype GG at locus rs12255372 were
100% (100/100) in both the GDM group and the control group. The frequencies of G 
allele of rs12255372 were 100% (200/200) in both the GDM group and the control
group. There was no difference of genotype distribution and G allele frequency of
rs12255372 between the two groups (P > 0.05). (7) After adjusting for age,
gestational age, BMI, FPG and FINS, pregnant women with TT genotype at locus
rs7903146 were more likely to have hyperglycemia compared with the C allele
carriers (OR = 2.77, 95% CI: 1.03-7.57, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The polymorphism of locus rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene may be associated
with genetic susceptibility in women with GDM. TT genotype is likely to be risk
factor in the pathogenesis of GDM.

PMID: 25354859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 Mar;31(3):326-34. doi: 10.1089/aid.2014.0195.
Epub 2014 Oct 29.

rs7903146 polymorphism at transcription factor 7 like 2 gene is associated with
total cholesterol and lipoprotein profile in HIV/hepatitis C virus-coinfected
patients.

Pineda-Tenor D(1), Berenguer J, Jiménez-Sousa MA, Carrero A, García-Álvarez M,
Aldámiz-Echevarria T, García-Broncano P, Diez C, Guzmán-Fulgencio M,
Fernández-Rodríguez A, Resino S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Unidad de Infección Viral e Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III , Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain .

Transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 polymorphism has been associated
with metabolic disturbance and cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was 
to analyze the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and potential
disturbances on the lipid profile in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/hepatitis
C virus (HCV)-coinfected patients. We performed a cross-sectional study on 263
HIV/HVC-coinfected patients. TCF7L2 polymorphism was genotyped by GoldenGate
assay. The analysis was performed by linear and logistic regression under a
dominant model of inheritance. The variables analyzed were total cholesterol
(TC), high-density lipoprotein (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein (LDL-C),
non-HDL-C, and triglycerides. Patients harboring the rs7903146 TT/TC genotype
showed a diminished concentration of TC (p=0.003), LDL-C (p=0.004), HDL-C
(p=0.012), and non-HDL-C (p=0.013), a lower percentage of TC=200<U+2009>mg/dl (p=0.038),
and a higher percentage of HDL=40<U+2009>mg/dl (p=0.023). In addition, we observed that 
rs7903146 was differently related to fasting serum lipid levels according to the 
HCV-genotype (HCV-GT). With regard to HCV-GT1 patients, the rs7903146 TT/TC
genotype was associated with lower levels of HDL-C [adjusted arithmetic mean
ratio (aAMR)=0.91; p=0.049] and an elevated percentage of patients with
HDL-C=40<U+2009>mg/dl [adjusted odds ratio (aOR)=3.26; p=0.003]. For HCV-GT3 patients,
the rs7903146 TT/TC genotype was associated with lower serum values of TC
(aAMR=0.81; p=0.037), LDL-C (aAMR=0.67; p=0.001), and non-HDL-C (aAMR=0.75;
p=0.002) and a reduced percentage of TC=200<U+2009>mg/dl (aOR=0.089; p=0.037). In
conclusion, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 TT/TC genotype was associated with lower levels 
of TC, LDL, and HDL in HCV-GT3 patients, and lower levels of HDL-C in HCV-GT1
patients, suggesting a role in cardiovascular disease and a potential use as a
biomarker in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients.

PMCID: PMC4348080
PMID: 25353718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Oct 28;55(11):7433-40. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12652.

Canonical wnt signaling regulates extracellular matrix expression in the
trabecular meshwork.

Villarreal G Jr(1), Chatterjee A(1), Oh SS(1), Oh DJ(1), Kang MH(1), Rhee DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye & Ear Infirmary, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States.

PURPOSE: Canonical Wnt signaling has emerged as a critical regulator of aqueous
outflow facility and intraocular pressure (IOP). In this study, we examine the
role of canonical Wnt signaling on extracellular matrix (ECM) expression in the
trabecular meshwork (TM) and explore the molecular mechanisms involved.
METHODS: ß-catenin localization in human TM tissue was examined using
immunofluorescent staining. Primary human TM cells were incubated with lithium
chloride (LiCl) and the effect on active ß-catenin expression was assessed by
immunoblot. Adenovirus expressing a dominant-negative TCF4 mutant that lacks a
ß-catenin binding domain was used. Changes in the levels of the microRNA-29
(miR-29) family and ECM proteins were determined by real-time quantitative PCR
and immunoblot analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: ß-catenin was expressed throughout the TM, with localization primarily
to the plasma membrane. Incubation of TM cells with lithium chloride increased
the expression of active ß-catenin. Lithium chloride treatment upregulated
miR-29b expression, and suppressed the levels of various ECM proteins under both 
basal and TGF-ß2 stimulatory conditions. Infection of TM cells with a
dominant-negative TCF4 mutant induced ECM levels without a significant change in 
the expression of the miR-29 family.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our data identify the canonical Wnt signaling pathway 
as an important modulator of ECM expression in the TM and provide a mechanistic
framework for its regulation of outflow facility and IOP.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4238318
PMID: 25352117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec;95(6):392-400. doi: 10.1111/iep.12102. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

STAT3 paradoxically stimulates ß-catenin expression but inhibits ß-catenin
function.

Ibrahem S(1), Al-Ghamdi S, Baloch K, Muhammad B, Fadhil W, Jackson D, Nateri AS, 
Ilyas M.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Molecular Pathology, Nottingham University, Nottingham, UK.

Wnt signalling and the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
are oncogenic signalling pathways which are deregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC). Here we investigated the interaction of these two pathways. Firstly, we
investigated biochemical interaction by inhibiting STAT3 and ß-catenin (through
gene knock-down and dominant-negative TCF4 expression) in nine CRC cell lines.
ß-catenin inhibition did not affect STAT3 levels, whereas STAT3 knock-down
resulted in reduced ß-catenin mRNA and protein levels. The reduction in ß-catenin
protein was not prevented by proteasome inhibition, and IL6-induced STAT3
activation resulted in increased ß-catenin mRNA. This suggests that STAT3
positively regulates ß-catenin (at a transcriptional level) and evaluation of 44 
CRCs by immunostaining supported this by showing an association between nuclear
STAT3 expression and nuclear ß-catenin (P = 0.022). We tested the functional
interaction between STAT3 and Wnt signalling by knocking down STAT3 and ß-catenin
individually and in combination. Knock-down of ß-catenin and STAT3 individually
inhibited cell proliferation (P < 0. 001 for each) through G1 arrest. However,
simultaneous knock-down of STAT3 and ß-catenin had a significantly weaker effect 
than knock-down of ß-catenin alone (P < 0.01). Knock-down of STAT3 and ß-catenin,
individually and together, inhibited cell motility (P < 0.001) without evidence
of interaction. We conclude that STAT3 regulates ß-catenin but ß-catenin does not
regulate STAT3. The STAT3/ß-catenin interaction is complex but may reduce the
proliferative activity of ß-catenin possibly by taking ß-catenin protein beyond
the optimal level. This may indicate biological differences in tumours where both
STAT3 and ß-catenin are activated compared to those where only one is activated.

© 2014 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Company of the International Journal of
Experimental Pathology (CIJEP).

PMCID: PMC4285465
PMID: 25348333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Oct 23;55(11):7674-80. doi:
10.1167/iovs.14-15297.

Genetic association of TCF4 intronic polymorphisms, CTG18.1 and rs17089887, with 
Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy in an Indian population.

Nanda GG(1), Padhy B(1), Samal S(2), Das S(2), Alone DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and
Research, Bhubaneswar, India. (2)Cornea and Anterior Segment Services, L. V.
Prasad Eye Institute, Bhubaneswar, India.

PURPOSE: To assess the genetic association of transcription factor 4 (TCF4)
intronic polymorphisms and CTG18.1 allele in individuals with Fuchs' endothelial 
corneal dystrophy (FECD) individuals from a sample Indian population.
METHODS: Forty-four FECD patients and 108 unrelated age-matched controls were
recruited with informed consent for this study. Three, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning the third intronic region of TCF4 (rs613872,
rs17089887, and rs17089925) and an unstable trinucleotide repeat CTG18.1 allele
were genotyped by direct sequencing using Sanger's method. The association of
polymorphisms was analyzed using <U+03C7>(2) test and logistic regression.
RESULTS: SNP rs17089887 (P = 0.013) and CTG18.1 (P = 2 × 10(-4)) alleles were
found to be significantly associated with FECD in the sample Indian population.
However, the other two SNPs, rs613872 and rs17089925, were not likewise
associated. Thirty-four percent of FECD subjects and 5% of control individuals
harbor more than 50 trinucleotide repeats, which was considered as the disease
threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF4 poses a major contributor to FECD manifestation globally, with 
a significant association of rs17089887 and CTG18.1 allele in the Indian
population.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMID: 25342617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):8163-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3716-2. Epub 2014
Oct 17.

Oncogenicity of LHX2 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Zhou F(1), Gou S, Xiong J, Wu H, Wang C, Liu T.

Author information: 
(1)Pancreatic Disease Institute, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, 1277 Jiefang Ave, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030,
People's Republic of China.

The LIM proteins (Lhx1, Lhx2, Lhx3 and Lhx4) have been report to play important
roles in human development. The function role of Lhxs have been characterized in 
various tumor tissues as cancer suppressors or promoters in different can status 
and types. The aim of present study was to clarify the function role of Lhx
proteins in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). The gene expression
profiles of Lhxs was evaluated using real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) analysis and
immunohistochemistry in human PDA tissues compared with normal pancreatic
tissues, which identified the gene overexpression of Lhx2 in PDA. Furthermore, we
discovered that Lhx2 promoted cancer cell proliferation in vitro/vivo and
elevated ß-catenin levels correlated with Lhx2 expression in PDA while the Lhx2
simulated ß-catenin activation was required for LMO1's oncogenic effects.
Mechanistically, Lhx2 facilitate TCF4 to bind to ß-catenin and form a stable
Lhx2/TCF4/ß-catenin complex and trans-active its downstream target gene. Lhx2
mutations that disrupt the Lhx2-ß-catenin interaction partially prevent its
function in tumor cells.

PMID: 25324171  [PubMed - in process]


182. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):550-64. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0310. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Epigenetic disruptions of histone signatures for the trophectoderm and inner cell
mass in mouse parthenogenetic embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center , Taipei, Taiwan .

Epigenetic asymmetry has been shown to be associated with the first lineage
allocation event in preimplantation development, that is, the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages in the blastocyst. Since
parthenogenesis causes aberrant segregation between the TE and ICM lineages, we
examined several development-associated histone modifications in parthenotes,
including those involved in (i) transcriptional activation [acetylated histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9Ac) and lysine 14 (H3K14Ac), trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4Me3), and dimethylated histone H3 arginine 26 (H3R26Me2)] and (ii)
transcriptional repression [trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9Me3) and
lysine 27 (H3K27Me3), and mono-ubiquitinated histone H2A lysine 119 (H2AK119u1)].
Here, we report that in parthenotes, H3R26Me2 expression decreased from the
morula stage, while expression patterns and levels of H3K9Ac, H3K27Me3, and
H2AK119u1 were unchanged until the blastocyst stage; whereas H3K14Ac, H3K4Me3,
and H3K9Me3 showed normal patterns and levels of expressions. Relative to the
decrease of H3K9Ac in the ICM and increase in the TE of parthenotes, we detected 
reduced expression of TAT-interactive protein 60 acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase 1 deacetylase in the ICM and TE of parthenotes, respectively.
Relative to the decrease of H3R26Me2, we also observed decreased expression of
coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 methyltransferase and
increased expression of the Wnt effector transcription factor 7L2 and miR-181c
microRNA in parthenotes. Furthermore, relative to the decrease in H3K27Me3 and
H2AK119u1, we found increased phosphorylation of Akt1 and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 in parthenogenetic TE. Therefore, our findings that histone signatures 
are impaired in parthenotes provide a mechanistic explanation for aberrant
lineage segregation and TE defects.

PMCID: PMC4333321
PMID: 25315067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 28;588(23):4334-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.042. Epub 
2014 Oct 13.

TRIB2 inhibits Wnt/ß-Catenin/TCF4 signaling through its associated ubiquitin E3
ligases, ß-TrCP, COP1 and Smurf1, in liver cancer cells.

Xu S(1), Tong M(2), Huang J(1), Zhang Y(3), Qiao Y(4), Weng W(1), Liu W(1), Wang 
J(5), Sun F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, 200072 Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory Medicine, Tong Ren Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, 200336 Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Central Laboratory, 
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, China. (4)School of Public
Health, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. 
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, 200072 Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
karajan2@163.com. (6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital of Tongji University, 200072 Shanghai, China. Electronic
address: sunfenyong@126.com.

Tribbles homolog 2 (TRIB2) is specifically regulated by Wnt signaling in liver
cancer cells but not in colon cancer cells. However, whether and how TRIB2
regulates Wnt signaling in liver cancer cells remains unclear. Here, we report
that TRIB2 negatively regulates Wnt activity through a reduction in protein
stability of TCF4 and ß-Catenin. Mechanistically, TRIB2 associated-ubiquitin E3
ligases beta-transducin repeat-containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (ß-TrCP),
COP1 and Smad ubiquitination regulatory factor 1 (Smurf1) reduced TCF4/ß-Catenin 
expression, and these effects could be enhanced by TRIB2. Moreover, deletion of
the binding regions of these E3-ligases within the TRIB2 protein decreased
ubiquitination of TCF4/ß-Catenin and reduced nuclear accumulation of ß-TrCP, COP1
and Smurf1, which suggested that TRIB2 regulated-Wnt activity is closely
correlated with its associated E3 ligases.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25311538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Nov 6;95(5):490-508. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.09.013. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

Molecular convergence of neurodevelopmental disorders.

Chen ES(1), Gigek CO(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), Diallo AB(1), Maussion G(1), Chen
GG(1), Vaillancourt K(1), Lopez JP(3), Crapper L(1), Poujol R(1), Shaffer LG(4), 
Bourque G(5), Ernst C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada;
McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital Research Institute, Montreal, 
QC H4H 1R3, Canada. (2)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane,
WA 99207, USA. (3)McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital Research
Institute, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill
University, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada. (4)Paw Print Genetics, Genetic
Veterinary Sciences Inc., Spokane, WA 99202, USA. (5)Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada; McGill University and 
Genome Quebec Innovation Center, Montreal, QC H3A 0G1, Canada. (6)Department of
Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada; McGill Group for
Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital Research Institute, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3,
Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3,
Canada. Electronic address: carl.ernst@mcgill.ca.

Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are caused by mutations in diverse genes
involved in different cellular functions, although there can be crosstalk, or
convergence, between molecular pathways affected by different NDDs. To assess
molecular convergence, we generated human neural progenitor cell models of 9q34
deletion syndrome, caused by haploinsufficiency of EHMT1, and 18q21 deletion
syndrome, caused by haploinsufficiency of TCF4. Using next-generation RNA
sequencing, methylation sequencing, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, and
whole-genome miRNA analysis, we identified several levels of convergence. We
found mRNA and miRNA expression patterns that were more characteristic of
differentiating cells than of proliferating cells, and we identified CpG clusters
that had similar methylation states in both models of reduced gene dosage. There 
was significant overlap of gene targets of TCF4 and EHMT1, whereby 8.3% of TCF4
gene targets and 4.2% of EHMT1 gene targets were identical. These data suggest
that 18q21 and 9q34 deletion syndromes show significant molecular convergence but
distinct expression and methylation profiles. Common intersection points might
highlight the most salient features of disease and provide avenues for similar
treatments for NDDs caused by different genetic mutations.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4225591
PMID: 25307298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10571-83.

SOX10, a novel HMG-box-containing tumor suppressor, inhibits growth and
metastasis of digestive cancers by suppressing the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

Tong X(1), Li L(2), Li X(3), Heng L(4), Zhong L(2), Su X(2), Rong R(2), Hu S(4), 
Liu W(5), Jia B(5), Liu X(6), Kou G(7), Han J(8), Guo S(9), Hu Y(5), Li C(5), Tao
Q(2), Guo Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Cancer Institute, The Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China. PLA General Hospital Cancer Center Key Laboratory, Medical
School of Chinese PLA, Beijing, China. Department of Pharmacy, Liao Cheng
University, Shandong, China. (2)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of
Clinical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sir YK Pao
Center for Cancer and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (3)International Joint Cancer Institute, The 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. PLA General Hospital Cancer 
Center Key Laboratory, Medical School of Chinese PLA, Beijing, China.
(4)International Joint Cancer Institute, The Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China. (5)PLA General Hospital Cancer Center Key Laboratory, Medical
School of Chinese PLA, Beijing, China. (6)150 hospital of Chinese PLA, Luoyang,
China. (7)International Joint Cancer Institute, The Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. Department of Pharmacy, Liao Cheng University,
Shandong, China. (8)Department of Pharmacy, Liao Cheng University, Shandong,
China. State Key Laboratory of Antibody Medicine & Targeting Therapy and Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Cell Engineering & Antibody, Shanghai, China. (9)Department of 
Pharmacy, Liao Cheng University, Shandong, China. (10)International Joint Cancer 
Institute, The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. PLA General
Hospital Cancer Center Key Laboratory, Medical School of Chinese PLA, Beijing,
China. Department of Pharmacy, Liao Cheng University, Shandong, China. State Key 
Laboratory of Antibody Medicine & Targeting Therapy and Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Cell Engineering & Antibody, Shanghai, China.

SOX10 was identified as a methylated gene in our previous cancer methylome study.
Here we further analyzed its epigenetic inactivation, biological functions and
related cell signaling in digestive cancers (colorectal, gastric and esophageal
cancers) in detail. SOX10 expression was decreased in multiple digestive cancer
cell lines as well as primary tumors due to its promoter methylation.
Pharmacologic or genetic demethylation reversed SOX10 silencing. Ectopic
expression of SOX10 in SOX10-deficient cancer cells inhibits their proliferation,
tumorigenicity, and metastatic potentials in vitro and in vivo. SOX10 also
suppressed the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stemness properties
of digestive tumor cells. Mechanistically, SOX10 competes with TCF4 to bind
ß-catenin and transrepresses its downstream target genes via its own DNA-binding 
property. SOX10 mutations that disrupt the SOX10-ß-catenin interaction partially 
prevented tumor suppression. SOX10is thus a commonly inactivated tumor suppressor
that antagonizes Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in cancer cells from different digestive
tissues.

PMCID: PMC4279394
PMID: 25301735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e109142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109142.
eCollection 2014.

Association of common variants in TCF4 and PTPRG with Fuchs' corneal dystrophy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Lau LC(1), Ma L(2), Young AL(1), Rong SS(2), Jhanji V(1), Brelen ME(1), Pang
CP(1), Chen LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Prince of Wales hospital,
Hong Kong, China; Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

TOPIC: A meta-analysis of TCF4 and PTPRG gene variants in Fuchs' corneal
dystrophy (FCD).
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: To identify novel genetic markers in patients with FCD in
different ethnic populations.
METHODS: MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched for eligible genetic studies on TCF4
and PTPRG in FCD. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of each
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in allelic, dominant and recessive models
were estimated using fixed-effect model if I2<50% in the test for heterogeneity, 
otherwise the random effects model was used.
RESULTS: Thirty-three records were obtained, with 8 being suitable for
meta-analysis, which included five SNPs in TCF4 and two in PTPRG. There were 1610
FCD patients and 1565 controls tested for TCF4 rs613872. This SNP was strongly
associated with FCD in Caucasians (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.0×10-106), with the risk allele G
conferring an OR of 3.95 (95% CI: 3.49-4.46). A further 4 TCF4 SNPs (rs17595731, 
rs2286812, rs618869 and rs9954153) were also significantly associated with FCD in
Caucasians (P<10-8). However, we found no SNP associated with FCD in Chinese. In 
addition, there was no significant association between FCD and PTPRG.
CONCLUSION: TCF4 rs613872 is strongly associated with FCD in Caucasians but not
in Chinese, which may suggest ethnic diversity in FCD SNP associations. SNPs in
PTPRG were not associated with FCD in Caucasians or Chinese populations. Results 
of this meta-analysis indicate the need for larger-scale and multi-ethnic genetic
studies on FCD to further explore the associated gene variants and their roles on
the mechanism and genetic basis of FCD.

PMCID: PMC4192317
PMID: 25299301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Sep 29;13(3):7889-98. doi: 10.4238/2014.September.29.1.

Association of the rs7903146 and rs12255372 polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene with
type 2 diabetes in a population from northeastern Brazil.

Barros CM(1), Araujo-Neto AP(1), Lopes TR(1), Barros MA(1), Motta FJ(1), Canalle 
R(1), Nunes LC(2), Rey JA(3), Burbano RR(4), Lima-Barros MA(5), Yoshioka FK(1),
Pinto GR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Piauí,
Parnaíba, PI, Brasil. (2)Núcleo de Tecnologia Farmacêutica, Universidade Federal 
do Piauí, Teresina, PI, Brasil. (3)Laboratorio de Oncogenética Molecular,
Departamento de Cirugía Experimental, Hospital Universitario "La Paz", Madrid,
España. (4)Laboratório de Citogenética Humana, Universidade Federal do Pará,
Belém, PA, Brasil. (5)Tec Lab Medicina Laboratorial, Parnaíba, PI, Brasil.
(6)Laboratório de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Piauí,
Parnaíba, PI, Brasil pintogr@ufpi.edu.br.

Approximately 200 million people suffer from type 2 diabetes (T2D) worldwide, and
the rapid increase in the prevalence of this disease is likely a result of
multiple environmental factors, such as increased food intake and decreased
physical activity in genetically predisposed individuals. Different population
studies have demonstrated a strong association of two polymorphic variations in
the TCF7L2 gene, the noncoding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146
(C/T) and rs12255372 (G/T), with T2D. Herein, we analyzed the association of
these SNPs with T2D in a population from northeastern Brazil. Our results showed 
that the genotype and allele frequencies in TCF7L2 rs7903146 and rs12255372 were 
similar in the patient and control groups (P > 0.05). In addition, the allele
frequencies were not significantly associated with T2D risk [rs7903146: odds
ratio (OR) = 0.95, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.52-1.76, P = 1.00, and
rs12255372: OR = 1.38, 95%CI = 0.72-2.62, P = 0.41]. These data suggest that the 
TCF7L2 SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 may not significantly contribute to T2D
susceptibility in this population. However, our results may reflect the small
number of subjects. Alternatively, these results may be attributable to specific 
ethnic effects, as most of the previously reported associations were demonstrated
with predominantly European populations. To reach a definitive conclusion on the 
role of such gene variants for T2D in mixed populations, additional efforts are
necessary to replicate this study with larger populations from areas with more
ethnic heterogeneity.

PMID: 25299103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Oct 8;55(11):7073-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-15390.

Transethnic replication of association of CTG18.1 repeat expansion of TCF4 gene
with Fuchs' corneal dystrophy in Chinese implies common causal variant.

Xing C(1), Gong X(2), Hussain I(2), Khor CC(3), Tan DT(4), Aung T(4), Mehta
JS(4), Vithana EN(5), Mootha VV(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, McDermott Center for Human
Growth and Development/Center for Human Genetics, Dallas, Texas, United States.
(2)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Dallas, Texas, United States. (3)Division of Human Genetics, Genome Institute of 
Singapore, Singapore. (4)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore Department of Ophthalmology, Yong 
Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Department of Neuroscience, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
(6)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, McDermott Center for Human
Growth and Development/Center for Human Genetics, Dallas, Texas, United States
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology,
Dallas, Texas, United States.

PURPOSE: To test the association between the CTG18.1 trinucleotide repeat
expansion of TCF4 gene and Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in a
Chinese population.
METHODS: The trinucleotide repeat polymorphism CTG18.1 was genotyped using short 
tandem repeat and triplet repeat primed polymerase chain reaction assays in 57
Chinese subjects with FECD and 121 controls. Statistical association of the
expanded CTG18.1 allele and 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across TCF4
with FECD was evaluated. To investigate the linkage disequilibrium structure of
the TCF4 region, haplotype analysis was performed on our study subjects and
compared with genotyping data of 97 Han Chinese and 85 Caucasians in the 1000
Genomes Project.
RESULTS: The expanded CTG18.1 allele was associated with FECD (P = 4.7 ×
10(-14)), with the odds ratio of each copy of the expanded allele estimated to be
66.5 (95% confidence interval: 12.6-350.1). Five TCF4 SNPs showed association
with FECD at a nominal level (P < 5.0 × 10(-2)); however, conditional on the
expanded CTG18.1 polymorphism, none of the SNPs showed association with FECD. The
only haplotype associated with the disease was the one with the expansion at the 
CTG18.1 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: Transethnic replication of the association between the CTG18.1
repeat expansion in the TCF4 gene and FECD suggests it is a common, causal
variant shared in Eurasian populations conferring significant risk for the
development of FECD. Our data suggest that the expanded CTG18.1 allele is the
main, if not sole, causal variant at this gene locus in the Chinese population.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4224583
PMID: 25298419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Acta Ophthalmol. 2015 May;93(3):e223-9. doi: 10.1111/aos.12542. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

The gene polymorphisms of UCP1 but not PPAR <U+03B3> and TCF7L2 are associated with
diabetic retinopathy in Chinese type 2 diabetes mellitus cases.

Zhang Y(1), Meng N, Lv Z, Li H, Qu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to investigate the association between the
polymorphisms in three insulin resistance-related genes, uncoupling protein-1
(UCP1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and the susceptibility to diabetic retinopathy (DR) in a
Chinese type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) cohort.
METHODS: A total of 792 patients with T2DM were enrolled and categorized into two
groups: (1) the DR group consisted of 448 patients, which was further
subclassified into a proliferative DR (PDR) group with 220 patients and a
non-proliferative DR (NPDR) group with 228 patients; (2) the diabetes without
retinopathy (DNR) group, comprised 344 patients who had no signs of DR.
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs1800592 in the UCP1 gene, rs1801282,
rs3856806 and rs1249719 in the PPAR<U+03B3> gene and rs11196205 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
genotyped in this study.
RESULTS: For SNP rs1800592 of the UCP1 gene, the frequency of allele G and
genotype GG was significantly higher in the PDR group than in the DNR group
(allele OR: 1.32, 95% CI: 1.03-1.68, p = 0.03; genotype OR: 1.72, 95%CI:
1.06-2.79, p = 0.03). No evident association was found between the allele
frequencies and genotype distributions of any individual SNP in the PPAR<U+03B3> or
TCF7L2 genes and DR, PDR or NPDR. Haplotype analyses of the PPAR<U+03B3> gene did not
provide any evidence for an association with DR, PDR or NPDR in this Chinese T2DM
cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the SNP rs1800592 in the UCP1 gene is
associated with increased risk of PDR in the Chinese T2DM population.

© 2014 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25274455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014 Jul-Aug;10(4):679-83. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2013.12.016.
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Weight loss independent association of TCF7 L2 gene polymorphism with fasting
blood glucose after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in type 2 diabetic patients.

Rouskas K(1), Cauchi S(2), Raverdy V(1), Yengo L(2), Froguel P(3), Pattou F(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. (2)European Genetic
Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord de France, Lille,
France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France. (3)CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.
(4)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France. Electronic address: fpattou@univ-lille2.fr.

BACKGROUND: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery improves glucose control in
most but not all patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2 DM). Transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7 L2) gene variation (rs7903146, C: wild-type allele, T:
risk-allele) is the strongest contributor to T2 DM risk. Until now, there are no 
studies investigating gene interactions with changes of glycemia in obese
patients with T2 DM after RYGB. The objective of this study was to assess the
effect of TCF7 L2 genotype on RYGB-induced changes in glucose homeostasis in 99
obese patients with T2 DM at 1-year follow-up.
METHODS: Body mass index (BMI) and fasting blood glucose (FBG) were measured
before and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after RYGB. Genotyping was performed with
TaqMan technology. The effect of the interaction between TCF7 L2 genotype and
postoperative time on BMI and FBG changes was analyzed with a linear mixed model.
RESULTS: Preoperatively, there was no difference in BMI, FBG, and other diabetes 
associated traits between homozygous (CC) (n = 49) and heterozygous (CT) or
homozygous (TT) T risk-allele carriers (n = 50). One year after RYGB, 48 out of
99 patients had glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1 c) lower than 6.5% in absence of
any antidiabetic medication. BMI decreased similarly in both groups (P = .769,
genotype-time interaction), however, the decrease in FBG over time was lower in T
risk-allele carriers (P = .016, genotype-time interaction). At 1 year, FBG was
6.42 ± 2.98 mmol/L in CT/TT versus 5.36 ± 0.98 mmol/L in CC (P = .022, t test).
CONCLUSION: TCF7 L2 gene variation affected the decrease of FBG after RYGB in
obese patients with T2 DM, independently of weight loss.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25224167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Circulation. 2014 Oct 14;130(16):1363-73. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011090.
Epub 2014 Sep 15.

MHC Class II-restricted antigen presentation by plasmacytoid dendritic cells
drives proatherogenic T cell immunity.

Sage AP(1), Murphy D(1), Maffia P(1), Masters LM(1), Sabir SR(1), Baker LL(1),
Cambrook H(1), Finigan AJ(1), Ait-Oufella H(1), Grassia G(1), Harrison JE(1),
Ludewig B(1), Reith W(1), Hansson GK(1), Reizis B(1), Hugues S(1), Mallat Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom
(A.P.S., D.M., L.M.M., L.L.B., A.J.F., J.E.H., Z.M.); Centre for Immunobiology,
Institute of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, College of Medical,
Veterinary, and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
(P.M., S.R.S., H.C., G.G.); Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Unit 970, Paris Cardiovascular Research Center, Paris, France (H.A.,
Z.M.); the Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy (P.M., G.G.); Institute of Immunobiology, Kantonal Hospital St. Gallen,
CH-9007 St. Gallen, Switzerland (B.L.); the Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
(W.R.); Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden (G.K.H.); the
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY (B.R.); and the Department of Pathology, University of Geneva
Medical School, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland (S.H.). (2)From the Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom (A.P.S., D.M., L.M.M., L.L.B., 
A.J.F., J.E.H., Z.M.); Centre for Immunobiology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity, and Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary, and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom (P.M., S.R.S., H.C., G.G.);
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unit 970, Paris
Cardiovascular Research Center, Paris, France (H.A., Z.M.); the Department of
Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy (P.M., G.G.); Institute
of Immunobiology, Kantonal Hospital St. Gallen, CH-9007 St. Gallen, Switzerland
(B.L.); the Department of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland (W.R.); Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden (G.K.H.); the Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY (B.R.); and the Department of
Pathology, University of Geneva Medical School, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland
(S.H.). zm255@medchl.cam.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2014 Oct 14;130(16):1340-2.

BACKGROUND: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) bridge innate and adaptive immune
responses and are important regulators of immuno-inflammatory diseases. However, 
their role in atherosclerosis remains elusive.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we used genetic approaches to investigate the role of 
pDCs in atherosclerosis. Selective pDC deficiency in vivo was achieved using
CD11c-Cre × Tcf4(-/flox) bone marrow transplanted into Ldlr(-/-) mice. Compared
with control Ldlr(-/-) chimeric mice, CD11c-Cre × Tcf4(-/flox) mice had reduced
atherosclerosis levels. To begin to understand the mechanisms by which pDCs
regulate atherosclerosis, we studied chimeric Ldlr(-/-) mice with selective MHCII
deficiency on pDCs. Significantly, these mice also developed reduced
atherosclerosis compared with controls without reductions in pDC numbers or
changes in conventional DCs. MHCII-deficient pDCs showed defective stimulation of
apolipoprotein B100-specific CD4(+) T cells in response to native low-density
lipoprotein, whereas production of interferon-a was not affected. Finally, the
atheroprotective effect of selective MHCII deficiency in pDCs was associated with
significant reductions of proatherogenic T cell-derived interferon-<U+03B3> and lesional
T cell infiltration, and was abrogated in CD4(+) T cell-depleted animals.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports a proatherogenic role for pDCs in murine
atherosclerosis and identifies a critical role for MHCII-restricted antigen
presentation by pDCs in driving proatherogenic T cell immunity.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4428652
PMID: 25223984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Schizophr Res. 2014 Nov;159(2-3):329-32. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.08.007. Epub 
2014 Sep 10.

No effect of schizophrenia risk genes MIR137, TCF4, and ZNF804A on macroscopic
brain structure.

Cousijn H(1), Eissing M(2), Fernández G(3), Fisher SE(4), Franke B(5), Zwiers
M(6), Harrison PJ(1), Arias-Vásquez A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (2)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Departments of Psychiatry, Human Genetics & Cognitive
Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Departments of
Psychiatry, Human Genetics & Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (4)Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Departments of Psychiatry, Human Genetics & Cognitive
Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (7)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Departments of Psychiatry, Human Genetics & Cognitive
Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: Alejandro.AriasVasquez@radboudumc.nl.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the MIR137, TCF4, and ZNF804A genes
show genome-wide association to schizophrenia. However, the biological basis for 
the associations is unknown. Here, we tested the effects of these genes on brain 
structure in 1300 healthy adults. Using volumetry and voxel-based morphometry,
neither gene-wide effects--including the combined effect of the genes--nor single
SNP effects--including specific psychosis risk SNPs--were found on total brain
volume, grey matter, white matter, or hippocampal volume. These results suggest
that the associations between these risk genes and schizophrenia are unlikely to 
be mediated via effects on macroscopic brain structure.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4245712
PMID: 25217366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):4203-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400614. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

TLR2-dependent activation of ß-catenin pathway in dendritic cells induces
regulatory responses and attenuates autoimmune inflammation.

Manoharan I(1), Hong Y(1), Suryawanshi A(1), Angus-Hill ML(2), Sun Z(3), Mellor
AL(4), Munn DH(5), Manicassamy S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, Georgia Regents
University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912; (2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT 84112; (3)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City
of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010; (4)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance
Program, Georgia Regents University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; and. (5)Cancer
Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, Georgia Regents University
Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
GA 30912; Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA 30912. (6)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance 
Program, Georgia Regents University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; and
smanicassamy@gru.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) sense microbes via multiple innate receptors. Signals from 
different innate receptors are coordinated and integrated by DCs to generate
specific innate and adaptive immune responses against pathogens. Previously, we
have shown that two pathogen recognition receptors, TLR2 and dectin-1, which
recognize the same microbial stimulus (zymosan) on DCs, induce mutually
antagonistic regulatory or inflammatory responses, respectively. How diametric
signals from these two receptors are coordinated in DCs to regulate or incite
immunity is not known. In this study, we show that TLR2 signaling via AKT
activates the ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 pathway in DCs and programs them to drive
T regulatory cell differentiation. Activation of ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 was
critical to induce regulatory molecules IL-10 (Il-10) and vitamin A metabolizing 
enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Aldh1a2) and to suppress proinflammatory
cytokines. Deletion of ß-catenin in DCs programmed them to drive Th17/Th1 cell
differentiation in response to zymosan. Consistent with these findings,
activation of the ß-catenin pathway in DCs suppressed chronic inflammation and
protected mice from Th17/Th1-mediated autoimmune neuroinflammation. Thus,
activation of ß-catenin in DCs via the TLR2 receptor is a novel mechanism in DCs 
that regulates autoimmune inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4185231
PMID: 25210120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Curr Biol. 2014 Oct 6;24(19):2217-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.08.006. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Tcf7l2 is required for left-right asymmetric differentiation of habenular
neurons.

Hüsken U(1), Stickney HL(2), Gestri G(2), Bianco IH(2), Faro A(2), Young RM(2),
Roussigne M(3), Hawkins TA(2), Beretta CA(1), Brinkmann I(1), Paolini A(1),
Jacinto R(1), Albadri S(4), Dreosti E(5), Tsalavouta M(2), Schwarz Q(6),
Cavodeassi F(2), Barth AK(2), Wen L(7), Zhang B(7), Blader P(8), Yaksi E(9),
Poggi L(4), Zigman M(10), Lin S(11), Wilson SW(12), Carl M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. (2)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK; Centre de Biologie du Développement
(CDB), UPS, Université de Toulouse, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062, France; CNRS,
CDB UMR 5547, 31062 Toulouse, France. (4)Centre for Organismal Studies,
Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
UK; Neuroelectronics Research Flanders, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. (6)Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK. (7)Key Laboratory 
of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, College
of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. (8)Centre de Biologie
du Développement (CDB), UPS, Université de Toulouse, 118 Route de Narbonne,
31062, France; CNRS, CDB UMR 5547, 31062 Toulouse, France. (9)Neuroelectronics
Research Flanders, 3001 Leuven, Belgium; Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie,
3001 Leuven, Belgium; KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. (10)Department of
Molecular Evolution and Genomics, Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), Heidelberg
University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 329, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Key
Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China;
Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, 621 Charles E. Young Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 
(12)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. Electronic address: s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk.
(13)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
Electronic address: matthias.carl@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Although left-right asymmetries are common features of nervous
systems, their developmental bases are largely unknown. In the zebrafish
epithalamus, dorsal habenular neurons adopt medial (dHbm) and lateral (dHbl)
subnuclear character at very different frequencies on the left and right sides.
The left-sided parapineal promotes the elaboration of dHbl character in the left 
habenula, albeit by an unknown mechanism. Likewise, the genetic pathways acting
within habenular neurons to control their asymmetric differentiated character are
unknown.
RESULTS: In a forward genetic screen for mutations that result in loss of
habenular asymmetry, we identified two mutant alleles of tcf7l2, a gene that
encodes a transcriptional regulator of Wnt signaling. In tcf7l2 mutants, most
neurons on both sides differentiate with dHbl identity. Consequently, the
habenulae develop symmetrically, with both sides adopting a pronounced leftward
character. Tcf7l2 acts cell automously in nascent equipotential neurons, and on
the right side, it promotes dHbm and suppresses dHbl differentiation. On the
left, the parapineal prevents this Tcf7l2-dependent process, thereby promoting
dHbl differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Tcf7l2 is essential for lateralized fate selection by habenular
neurons that can differentiate along two alternative pathways, thereby leading to
major neural circuit asymmetries.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4194317
PMID: 25201686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Curr Diab Rep. 2014;14(11):550. doi: 10.1007/s11892-014-0550-9.

Overlap of genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults.

Basile KJ(1), Guy VC, Schwartz S, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, 19104, USA.

Despite the notion that there is a degree of commonality to the biological
etiology of type 1 diabetes (T1D) and type 2 diabetes (T2D), the lack of overlap 
in the genetic factors underpinning each of them suggests very distinct
mechanisms. A disorder considered to be at the "intersection" of these two
diseases is "latent autoimmune diabetes in adults" (LADA). Interestingly, genetic
signals from both T1D and T2D are also seen in LADA, including the key HLA and
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) loci, but the magnitudes of these effects 
are more complex than just pointing to LADA as being a simple admixture of T1D
and T2D. We review the current status of the understanding of the genetics of
LADA and place it in the context of what is known about the genetics of its
better-studied "cousins," T1D and T2D, especially with respect to the myriad of
discoveries made over the last decade through genome-wide association studies.

PMID: 25189437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Diabet Med. 2014 Dec;31(12):1480-7. doi: 10.1111/dme.12579.

Dorothy Hodgkin Lecture 2014. Understanding genes identified by genome-wide
association studies for type 2 diabetes.

Rutter GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cell Biology, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Whilst the heritable nature of Type 2 diabetes has been recognized for many
years, only in the past two decades have linkage analyses in families and
genome-wide association studies in large populations begun to reveal the genetic 
landscape of the disease in detail. Whilst the former have provided a powerful
means of identifying the genes responsible for monogenic forms of the disease,
the latter highlight relatively large genomic regions. These often harbour
multiple genes, whose relative contribution to exaggerated disease risk is
uncertain. In the present study, the approaches that have been used to dissect
the role of just a few (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, ADCY5, MTNR1B and CDKAL1) of the ~ 500
genes identified at dozens of implicated loci are described. These are usually
selected based on the strength of their effect on disease risk, and predictions
as to their likely biological role. Direct determination of the effects of
identified polymorphisms on gene expression in disease-relevant tissues, notably 
the pancreatic islet, are then performed to identify genes whose expression is
affected by a particular polymorphism. Subsequent functional analyses then
involve perturbing gene expression in vitro in ß-cell lines or isolated islets
and in vivo in animal models. Although the majority of polymorphisms affect
insulin production rather than action, and mainly affect the ß cell, effects via 
other tissues may also contribute, requiring careful consideration in the design 
and interpretation of experiments in model systems. These considerations
illustrate the scale of the task needed to exploit genome-wide association study 
data for the development of new therapeutic strategies.

© 2014 The Author. Diabetic Medicine © 2014 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 25186316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Clin Lab. 2014;60(8):1269-76.

Association of rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487 polymorphisms in TCF7L2 gene
with type 2 diabetes in an Iranian Kurdish ethnic group.

Shokouhi S, Delpisheh A, Haghani K, Mahdizadeh M, Bakhtiyari S.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are well known risk variants for type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM). The association between TCF7L2 SNPs and T2DM has been
investigated in several studies, but the results are controversial. In this
study, we investigated whether the rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487
polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are associated with T2DM per se or metabolic traits
related to this disease in a Kurdish ethnic group of Iran.
METHODS: In all, 173 patients with T2DM and 173 normoglycemic subjects were
included in this study. All subjects were genotyped using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Genotypic and
allelic frequencies were then analyzed in each group. Serum lipids, fasting
glucose, fasting serum insulin, HOMA-IR, and HbA1c levels were determined by
conventional methods.
RESULTS: T-allele and genotype frequencies of rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487
were significantly different between T2DM and control subjects. The CT genotype
(OR = 1.98, p = 0.008), TT genotype (OR = 3.54, p = 0.024), and the dominant
model (OR = 2.16, p = 0.002) of rs7903146 were associated with T2DM. The GT
genotype (OR = 2.23, p = 0.005), TT genotype (OR = 4.25, p = 0.046), and the
dominant model (OR = 2.2, p = 0.001) of rs12255372 gave a higher risk for T2DM.
The carriers of CT genotype of rs290487 showed a significantly increased risk for
T2DM (OR = 2.24, p = 0.003). Similarly, the dominant model of this SNP was found 
to be significantly associated with T2DM (OR = 2.25, p = 0.002). The control
subjects carrying the T-allele of rs7903146 had higher levels of total
cholesterol (CC; 4.52 +/- 1.03 vs. CT + TT; 5.00 +/- 1.2 mmol/L, p = 0.009) than 
those with CC genotype. Normoglycemic subjects carrying GT + TT genotypes of
rs12255372 had a significantly higher WHR (GG; 0.90 +/- 0.059 vs. GT + TT; 0.93
+/- 0.07, p = 0.038) as compared with those with the GG genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The T-allele of rs12255372, rs7903146, and rs290487 polymorphisms of
TCF7L2 confer susceptibility to T2DM in the Kurdish population of Iran.

PMID: 25185411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Period Med. 2014;18(2):169-175.

[Pitt-Hopkins syndrome - own experience on the base of two case reports and
literature review with special emphasis on differential diagnosis.]

[Article in Polish]

Stembalska A(1), Smigiel R.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Genetyki UM, Marcinkowskiego 1, 50-368 Wroclaw,
agnieszka.stembalska@umed.wroc.pl.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a rare congenital dysmorphic syndrome with
neurodevelopmental disturbances, which usually occurs sporadically. Mutations in 
the TCF4 gene located at 18q21.2 are the cause of this syndrome (an autosomal
dominant de novo mutation). PTHS characterized by severe intellectual disability,
specific breathing pattern (paroxysms of hyperpnea and apnea) and typical
craniofacial dysmorphism. We report two patients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome:
proband 1 - 4 years of age female child with a new mutation in TCF4 gene and
proband 2 - 22 months of age girl with a heterogeneous deletion of complete TCF4 
gene. Additionally, we present a clinical follow-up of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and 
a review of literature with special emphasis on differential diagnosis.

PMID: 25182255  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


199. J Exp Med. 2014 Sep 22;211(10):1969-76. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132522. Epub 2014 Sep 
1.

Genetic evidence for the role of plasmacytoid dendritic cells in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Sisirak V(1), Ganguly D(1), Lewis KL(1), Couillault C(1), Tanaka L(2), Bolland
S(3), D'Agati V(1), Elkon KB(2), Reizis B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Department of Pathology,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032. (2)Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195. (3)Laboratory of
Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Rockville,
MD 20852. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Department of
Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032
bvr2101@columbia.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2014 Oct;10(10):573.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by the
production of antibodies to self-nucleic acids, immune complex deposition, and
tissue inflammation such as glomerulonephritis. Innate recognition of self-DNA
and -RNA and the ensuing production of cytokines such as type I interferons
(IFNs) contribute to SLE development. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) have
been proposed as a source of pathogenic IFN in SLE; however, their net
contribution to the disease remains unclear. We addressed this question by
reducing gene dosage of the pDC-specific transcription factor E2-2 (Tcf4), which 
causes a specific impairment of pDC function in otherwise normal animals. We
report that global or DC-specific Tcf4 haplodeficiency ameliorated SLE-like
disease caused by the overexpression of the endosomal RNA sensor Tlr7.
Furthermore, Tcf4 haplodeficiency in the B6.Sle1.Sle3 multigenic model of SLE
nearly abolished key disease manifestations including anti-DNA antibody
production and glomerulonephritis. Tcf4-haplodeficient SLE-prone animals showed a
reduction of the spontaneous germinal center reaction and its associated gene
expression signature. These results provide genetic evidence that pDCs are
critically involved in SLE pathogenesis and autoantibody production, confirming
their potential utility as therapeutic targets in the disease.

© 2014 Sisirak et al.

PMCID: PMC4172218
PMID: 25180061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Toxicology. 2014 Nov 5;325:144-50. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.08.011. Epub 2014 Aug 
29.

5-Fluorouracil causes severe CNS demyelination by disruption of
TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in adolescent mice.

Weng Q(1), Tan B(2), Wang J(2), Wang J(2), Zhou H(3), Shi J(3), He Q(4), Yang
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and
Research, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
wengqinjie@zju.edu.cn. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (3)Departments of
Pediatrics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, Institute of Stem Cell and Developmental
Biology, West China Second Hospital, Chengdu 61004, China. (4)Institute of
Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Several studies have showed the anti-cancer efficacy of 5-FU (5-fluorouracil) on 
pediatric tumors. Although the delayed demyelination induced by 5-FU in adult
patients has been reported, the effect of 5-FU on oligodendrocyte myelination in 
adolescence is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that systemic administration
with 5-FU leads to immediate demyelination in the central nervous system (CNS) of
adolescent mice, which is mainly attributed to the death of OLs. Gene-chip
microarray transcriptome analysis identifies that oligodendrocyte-specific factor
TCF7L2 may be a toxic target of 5-FU-impaired myelination. 5-FU-decreased TCF7L2 
results in disruption of the interaction between TCF7L2 and HDAC1/2. Inhibition
of crucial myelination-promoting factors by 5-FU is more significantly
antagonized by co-transfection of TCF7L2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 than TCF7L2 alone. Our 
findings reveal that 5-FU could acutely induce the severe myelin degeneration in 
adolescence and disruption of TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex is at least partially
involved in 5-FU-induced demyelination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25178657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Aug 28;55(9):6101-7. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14958.

Comprehensive assessment of genetic variants within TCF4 in Fuchs' endothelial
corneal dystrophy.

Wieben ED(1), Aleff RA(2), Eckloff BW(3), Atkinson EJ(4), Baheti S(4), Middha
S(4), Brown WL(5), Patel SV(5), Kocher JP(4), Baratz KH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States Medical Genome Facility, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States. (2)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States. (3)Medical Genome Facility,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States. (4)Departments of Health
Sciences Research and Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States.

PURPOSE: The single nucleotide variant (SNV), rs613872, in the transcription
factor 4 (TCF4) gene was previously found to be strongly associated (P = 6 ×
10(-26)) with Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD). Subsequently, an
intronic expansion of the repeating trinucleotides, TGC, was found to be even
more predictive of disease. We performed comprehensive sequencing of the TCF4
gene region in order to identify the best marker for FECD within TCF4 and to
identify other novel variants that may be associated with FECD.
METHODS: Leukocyte DNA was isolated from 68 subjects with FECD and 16 unaffected 
individuals. A custom capture panel was used to isolate the region surrounding
the two previously validated markers of FECD. Sequencing of the TCF4 coding
region, introns and flanking sequence, spanning 465 kb was performed at >1000×
average coverage using the Illumina HiSequation 2000.
RESULTS: TGC expansion (>50 repeats) was present in 46 (68%) FECD-affected
subjects and one (6%) normal subject. A total of 1866 variants, including 1540
SNVs, were identified. Only two previously reported SNVs resided in the TCF4
coding region, neither of which segregated with disease. No variant, including
TGC expansion, correlated perfectly with disease status. Trinucleotide repeat
expansion was a better predictor of disease than any other variant.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete sequencing of the TCF4 genomic region revealed no single
causative variant for FECD. The intronic trinucleotide repeat expansion within
TCF4 continues to be more strongly associated with FECD than any other genetic
variant.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4179444
PMID: 25168903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Med Genet. 2014 Nov;51(11):724-36. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102554. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Efficient strategy for the molecular diagnosis of intellectual disability using
targeted high-throughput sequencing.

Redin C(1), Gérard B(2), Lauer J(2), Herenger Y(2), Muller J(3), Quartier A(1),
Masurel-Paulet A(4), Willems M(5), Lesca G(6), El-Chehadeh S(4), Le Gras S(7),
Vicaire S(7), Philipps M(7), Dumas M(7), Geoffroy V(8), Feger C(7), Haumesser
N(1), Alembik Y(9), Barth M(10), Bonneau D(10), Colin E(10), Dollfus H(11), Doray
B(9), Delrue MA(12), Drouin-Garraud V(13), Flori E(9), Fradin M(14), Francannet
C(15), Goldenberg A(13), Lumbroso S(16), Mathieu-Dramard M(17), Martin-Coignard
D(18), Lacombe D(12), Morin G(17), Polge A(16), Sukno S(19), Thauvin-Robinet
C(4), Thevenon J(4), Doco-Fenzy M(20), Genevieve D(5), Sarda P(5), Edery P(6),
Isidor B(21), Jost B(7), Olivier-Faivre L(4), Mandel JL(22), Piton A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Médicine translationnelle et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR
7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France Chaire de Génétique
Humaine, Collège de France, Illkirch, France. (2)Laboratoire de diagnostic
génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(3)Département de Médicine translationnelle et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR
7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France Laboratoire de
diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. 
(4)Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et
Syndromes malformatifs, Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France.
(5)Département de Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares
Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-Languedoc Roussillon,
Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. (6)Département de Génétique
Médicale, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France. (7)Plateforme de Biopuces et
Séquençage, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, 
France. (8)Plateforme de Bioinformatique de Strasbourg (BIPS), IGBMC, CNRS UMR
7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. (9)Département de
Génétique, CHU de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. (10)Départment de Biochimie et
de Génétique, CHU d'Angers, Angers, France. (11)Laboratoire de Génétique
Médicale, INSERM U1112, Faculté de Médecine de Strasbourg, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. (12)CHU de Bordeaux, Génétique 
Médicale, Université de Bordeaux, Laboratoire MRGM, Bordeaux, France.
(13)Départment de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France. (14)Service de
Génétique Médicale, Centre De Référence Anomalies du Développement, CHU de
Rennes, Rennes, France. (15)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôtel Dieu,
Clermont-Ferrand, France. (16)Laboratoire de Biochimie, CHU de Nîmes, Nîmes,
France. (17)Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU d'Amiens, Amiens, France.
(18)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier, Le Mans, France. (19)Service de
Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Groupe Hospitalier de l'Institut
Catholique Lillois, Faculté Libre de Médecine, Lille, France. (20)Service de
Génétique, CHU de Reims, EA3801, Reims, France. (21)Service de Génétique
Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France. (22)Département de Médicine
translationnelle et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U964/Université
de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France,
Illkirch, France Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: Intellectual disability (ID) is characterised by an extreme genetic
heterogeneity. Several hundred genes have been associated to monogenic forms of
ID, considerably complicating molecular diagnostics. Trio-exome sequencing was
recently proposed as a diagnostic approach, yet remains costly for a general
implementation.
METHODS: We report the alternative strategy of targeted high-throughput
sequencing of 217 genes in which mutations had been reported in patients with ID 
or autism as the major clinical concern. We analysed 106 patients with ID of
unknown aetiology following array-CGH analysis and other genetic investigations. 
Ninety per cent of these patients were males, and 75% sporadic cases.
RESULTS: We identified 26 causative mutations: 16 in X-linked genes (ATRX, CUL4B,
DMD, FMR1, HCFC1, IL1RAPL1, IQSEC2, KDM5C, MAOA, MECP2, SLC9A6, SLC16A2, PHF8)
and 10 de novo in autosomal-dominant genes (DYRK1A, GRIN1, MED13L, TCF4, RAI1,
SHANK3, SLC2A1, SYNGAP1). We also detected four possibly causative mutations (eg,
in NLGN3) requiring further investigations. We present detailed reasoning for
assigning causality for each mutation, and associated patients' clinical
information. Some genes were hit more than once in our cohort, suggesting they
correspond to more frequent ID-associated conditions (KDM5C, MECP2, DYRK1A,
TCF4). We highlight some unexpected genotype to phenotype correlations, with
causative mutations being identified in genes associated to defined syndromes in 
patients deviating from the classic phenotype (DMD, TCF4, MECP2). We also bring
additional supportive (HCFC1, MED13L) or unsupportive (SHROOM4, SRPX2) evidences 
for the implication of previous candidate genes or mutations in cognitive
disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: With a diagnostic yield of 25% targeted sequencing appears relevant 
as a first intention test for the diagnosis of ID, but importantly will also
contribute to a better understanding regarding the specific contribution of the
many genes implicated in ID and autism.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4215287
PMID: 25167861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Oct;210(10):621-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.10.007. Epub
2014 Feb 24.

Nuclear expression of phosphorylated TRAF2- and NCK-interacting kinase in
hepatocellular carcinoma is associated with poor prognosis.

Jin J(1), Jung HY(1), Wang Y(2), Xie J(2), Yeom YI(3), Jang JJ(4), Lee KB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea. (2)Pfizer Global
Research and Development, 10770 Science Center Drive, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
(3)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology, 125 Gwahangno, Daejeon
304-806, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, 28 Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Republic of
Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul
110-744, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: azirang@chol.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: TRAF2- and NCK-interacting kinase (TNIK) is a member of the 
germinal center kinase family and a transcription factor 4 (TCF4) interactor is
recruited to promoters of Wnt target genes via phosphorylation of the
TCF/ß-catenin complex. The aim of this study was to evaluate the TNIK, the active
form of TNIK (p-TNIK), and ß-catenin expression in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), and to identify the prognostic significance of p-TNIK.
METHODS: We assessed the expression status of TNIK, p-TNIK, and ß-catenin by
using immunohistochemical analysis of 302 HCCs in 8 tissue microarray blocks, and
we evaluated their clinicopathologic features and survival rates based on their
p-TNIK expression.
RESULTS: Of 302 HCCs, 92.7% stained positive for TNIK in the cytoplasm. Nuclear
expression of p-TNIK was identified in 7.9% HCCs. Aberrant cytoplasmic expression
of ß-catenin was identified in 77.2% and nuclear expression in 3.3%. p-TNIK
nuclear staining was positively correlated to ß-catenin nuclear expression
(P=0.036). Cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of p-TNIK was more frequently
observed in high Edmondson-Steiner (ES) nuclear grade groups (P=0.030). Nuclear
p-TNIK expression was also associated with pathological M1 stage (pM1 stage)
patients (P<0.0001). Aberrant cytoplasmic expression of ß-catenin was more
frequently identified in larger tumors (P=0.014). Univariate (DFS, P=0.049; OS,
0.037) and multivariate analysis (DFS, P=0.006; OS, P=0.003) confirmed the
independent prognostic significance of nuclear p-TNIK expression.
CONCLUSION: This is the first time that nuclear p-TNIK expression was studied in 
HCC, and p-TNIK nuclear expression was associated with poor prognosis and is a
candidate prognostic marker for HCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25160513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Ageing Res Rev. 2014 Nov;18:53-73. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2014.08.002. Epub 2014 Aug 
24.

Aging and cardiovascular diseases: the role of gene-diet interactions.

Corella D(1), Ordovás JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y
Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of
Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Population Genetics, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain; IMDEA Alimentación,
Madrid, Spain; Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, JM-USDA Human Nutrition
Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic
address: jose.ordovas@tufts.edu.

In the study of longevity, increasing importance is being placed on the concept
of healthy aging rather than considering the total number of years lived.
Although the concept of healthy lifespan needs to be defined better, we know that
cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the main age-related diseases. Thus,
controlling risk factors will contribute to reducing their incidence, leading to 
healthy lifespan. CVDs are complex diseases influenced by numerous genetic and
environmental factors. Numerous gene variants that are associated with a greater 
or lesser risk of the different types of CVD and of intermediate phenotypes
(i.e., hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, diabetes) have been successfully
identified. However, despite the close link between aging and CVD, studies
analyzing the genes related to human longevity have not obtained consistent
results and there has been little coincidence in the genes identified in both
fields. The APOE gene stands out as an exception, given that it has been
identified as being relevant in CVD and longevity. This review analyzes the
genomic and epigenomic factors that may contribute to this, ranging from
identifying longevity genes in model organisms to the importance of gene-diet
interactions (outstanding among which is the case of the TCF7L2 gene).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25159268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Gene. 2014 Nov 1;551(1):55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.08.041. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

MicroRNA and mRNA cargo of extracellular vesicles from porcine adipose
tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Eirin A(1), Riester SM(2), Zhu XY(1), Tang H(1), Evans JM(3), O'Brien D(3), van
Wijnen AJ(2), Lerman LO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United
States. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United
States. (3)Health Sciences Research & Division of Biomedical Statistics and
Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. (4)Division of Nephrology
and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. Electronic address: 
Lerman.Lilach@Mayo.Edu.

Mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) are clinically useful for cell-based
therapy, but concerns regarding their ability to replicate limit their human
application. MSCs release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that mediate at least in
part the paracrine effects of the parental cells. To understand the molecular
basis of their biological properties, we characterized the RNA cargo of EVs from 
porcine adipose-tissue derived MSCs. Comprehensive characterization of mRNA and
miRNA gene expression using high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) revealed
that EVs are selectively enriched for distinct classes of RNAs. For example, EVs 
preferentially express mRNA for transcription factors (e.g. MDFIC, POU3F1, NRIP1)
and genes involved in angiogenesis (e.g. HGF, HES1, TCF4) and adipogenesis (e.g. 
CEBPA, KLF7). EVs also express Golgi apparatus genes (ARRB1, GOLGA4) and genes
involved in TGF-ß signaling. In contrast, mitochondrial, calcium signaling, and
cytoskeleton genes are selectively excluded from EVs, possibly because these
genes remain sequestered in organelles or intracellular compartments. RNA-seq
generated reads for at least 386 annotated miRNAs, but only miR148a, miR532-5p,
miR378, and let-7f were enriched in EVs compared to MSCs. Gene ontology analysis 
indicates that these miRNAs target transcription factors and genes that
participate in several cellular pathways, including angiogenesis, cellular
transport, apoptosis, and proteolysis. Our data suggest that EVs transport gene
regulatory information to modulate angiogenesis, adipogenesis, and other cell
pathways in recipient cells. These observations may contribute to development of 
regenerative strategies using EVs to overcome potential complications of
cell-based therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4174680
PMID: 25158130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1839(11):1151-60. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.009. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

CNBP modulates the transcription of Wnt signaling pathway components.

Margarit E(1), Armas P(1), García Siburu N(1), Calcaterra NB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET) - Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Ocampo y
Esmeralda,(S2000FHQ) Rosario, Argentina. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas (CONICET) - Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas,
Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Ocampo y Esmeralda,(S2000FHQ) Rosario,
Argentina. Electronic address: calcaterra@ibr-conicet.gov.ar.

BACKGROUND: Cellular nucleic acid binding protein (CNBP) is a small and highly
conserved protein with nucleic acid chaperone activity that binds single-stranded
nucleic acids. Data collected so far suggests that CNBP is required for proper
craniofacial development. Despite the advances achieved in the last decade, the
identity of the molecular targets of CNBP responsible for its role in rostral
head development remains elusive.
METHODS: In this work we used the CNBP single-stranded DNA-consensus binding
sequence to find out putative CNBP target genes present in the human, mouse,
chicken, Xenopus and zebrafish genomes.
RESULTS: Most of the identified genes are associated with embryonic developmental
processes, being three of them (cdk14, ptk7 and tcf7l2) members of the Wnt
signaling pathway. This finding, along with previous one showing that CNBP
down-regulates the transcription of Wnt5, aimed our work to address the role of
CNBP on the WNT signaling players and pathway regulation. Experiments carried out
in zebrafish developing embryos revealed that craniofacial morphology was more
adversely affected as CNBP abundance decreased. Furthermore, we observed that
CNBP up-regulated in a dose-dependent fashion the transcription of cdk14, ptk7
and tcf7l2, which in turn was reflected in c-myc, ccnd1 and axin2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: RESULTS reveal a role of CNBP in transcriptional control of
components of the Wnt signaling pathway, which might explain its requirement for 
proper craniofacial development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25151948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Haematologica. 2014 Dec;99(12):e257-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.110437. Epub
2014 Aug 22.

High expression of transcription factor 4 (TCF4) is an independent adverse
prognostic factor in acute myeloid leukemia that could guide treatment decisions.

in 't Hout FE(1), van der Reijden BA(2), Monteferrario D(1), Jansen JH(2), Huls
G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, RadboudUMC; and
Department of Hematology, RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Laboratory medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, RadboudUMC; and. (3)Department of 
Laboratory medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, RadboudUMC; and Department of
Hematology, RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, The Netherlands gerwin.huls@radboudumc.nl.

PMCID: PMC4258745
PMID: 25150259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Liver Int. 2015 Apr;35(4):1234-43. doi: 10.1111/liv.12660. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

MicroRNA-155 attenuates activation of hepatic stellate cell by simultaneously
preventing EMT process and ERK1 signalling pathway.

Dai W(1), Zhao J, Tang N, Zeng X, Wu K, Ye C, Shi J, Lu C, Ning B, Zhang J, Lin
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200003, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) signalling pathway play pivotal
roles in hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation, which is associated with the
altered expression patterns of microRNAs (miRNAs). miR-155 is considered a
typical multifunctional miRNA to regulate many biological processes. However,
little attention has been given to the contributions of miR-155 to simultaneous
regulation of EMT process and ERK1 pathway during HSC activation.
METHODS: Differential expression of miR-155 was assessed in activated HSC, sera
and liver tissues from cirrhotic patients. Whether miR-155 could directly
interact with 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of T cell factor 4 (TCF4) and
angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AGTR1) respectively was detected by luciferase
reporter assay. The effects of enhanced miR-155 on EMT process and ERK1 pathway, 
cell apoptosis in HSC activation were also evaluated.
RESULTS: A significant decrease in miR-155 expression was observed in activated
HSC, sera or liver tissues of cirrhotic patients. MiR-155 was found to
simultaneously interact with 3'-UTR of TCF4 and AGTR1 mRNAs, which are known as
important regulators associated with EMT and ERK1 pathway repectively. Inhibiting
miR-155 expression could stimulate the EMT state and ERK1 pathway activity, thus 
contributing to HSC activation. Forced miR-155 expression markedly decreased the 
mesenchymal markers and phosphorylated ERK1 level, and enhanced E-cadherin
expression, leading to the synchronous inhibitory effect on EMT and ERK1 pathway 
and inducing HSC apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate that miR-155 plays an important role in
regulating the pathological network involving EMT process and ERK1 pathway during
HSC activation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25142507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):983-90. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.020. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

A polymorphic enhancer near GREM1 influences bowel cancer risk through
differential CDX2 and TCF7L2 binding.

Lewis A(1), Freeman-Mills L(1), de la Calle-Mustienes E(2), Giráldez-Pérez RM(2),
Davis H(1), Jaeger E(1), Becker M(3), Hubner NC(4), Nguyen LN(4), Zeron-Medina
J(5), Bond G(5), Stunnenberg HG(4), Carvajal JJ(2), Gomez-Skarmeta JL(2), Leedham
S(1), Tomlinson I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (2)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC-Universidad Pablo de Olavide-Junta de
Andalucía, Carretera de Utrera Km1, 41013 Sevilla, Spain. (3)Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Science,
Geert Grooteplein 26/28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (5)Ludwig Institute
for Cancer Research, Ltd., Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ,
UK. (6)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
Electronic address: iant@well.ox.ac.uk.

A rare germline duplication upstream of the bone morphogenetic protein antagonist
GREM1 causes a Mendelian-dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer (CRC). The 
underlying disease mechanism is strong, ectopic GREM1 overexpression in the
intestinal epithelium. Here, we confirm that a common GREM1 polymorphism,
rs16969681, is also associated with CRC susceptibility, conferring ~20%
differential risk in the general population. We hypothesized the underlying cause
to be moderate differences in GREM1 expression. We showed that rs16969681 lies in
a region of active chromatin with allele- and tissue-specific enhancer activity. 
The CRC high-risk allele was associated with stronger gene expression, and higher
Grem1 mRNA levels increased the intestinal tumor burden in Apc(Min) mice. The
intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 and Wnt effector TCF7L2 bound near
rs16969681, with significantly higher affinity for the risk allele, and CDX2
overexpression in CDX2/GREM1-negative cells caused re-expression of GREM1.
rs16969681 influences CRC risk through effects on Wnt-driven GREM1 expression in 
colorectal tumors.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4471812
PMID: 25131200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:650393. doi: 10.1155/2014/650393. Epub 2014 Jul
10.

Sequence variants of ADIPOQ and association with type 2 diabetes mellitus in
Taiwan Chinese Han population.

Tsai MK(1), Wang HM(2), Shiang JC(1), Chen IH(1), Wang CC(1), Shiao YF(3), Liu
WS(3), Lin TJ(4), Chen TM(5), Chen YH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General
Hospital, Kaohsiung 80284, Taiwan. (2)Department of Fragrance and Cosmetic
Science, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan ; Graduate
Institute of Natural Products, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708,
Taiwan. (3)Asia-Pacific Biotech Developing, Inc., Kaohsiung 80681, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pharmacy and Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology,
Tajen University, Pingtung 90741, Taiwan. (5)Department of Physiology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan
; Department and Graduate Institute of Aquaculture, National Kaohsiung Marine
University, Kaohsiung 81157, Taiwan. (6)Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40477, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of
Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Cancer Center Building 8F, No. 6
Hsueh-Shih Road, Taichung 40477, Taiwan.

Diabetes is a serious global health problem. Large-scale genome-wide association 
studies identified loci for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), including
adiponectin (ADIPOQ) gene and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), but few
studies clarified the effect of genetic polymorphisms of ADIPOQ and TCF7L2 on
risk of T2DM. We attempted to elucidate association between T2DM and polymorphic 
variations of both in Taiwan's Chinese Han population, with our retrospective
case-control study genotyping single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ADIPOQ
and TCF7L2 genes both in 149 T2DM patients and in 139 healthy controls from
Taiwan. Statistical analysis gauged association of these polymorphisms with risk 
of T2DM to show ADIPOQ rs1501299 polymorphism variations strongly correlated with
T2DM risk (P = 0.042), with rs2241766 polymorphism being not associated with T2DM
(P = 0.967). However, both polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 of TCF7L2 were 
rarely detected in Taiwanese people. This study avers that ADIPOQ rs1501299
polymorphism contributes to risk of T2DM in the Taiwanese population.

PMCID: PMC4121223
PMID: 25121131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Aug 7;13(3):5865-72. doi: 10.4238/2014.August.7.1.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphisms and diabetic retinopathy: a
systematic review.

Sudchada P(1), Scarpace K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan 
University, Phitsanulok, Thailand psudchada@gmail.com. (2)School of Pharmacy,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

The global prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has increased, as well
as complications including diabetic retinopathy. Polymorphisms in transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have been associated with T2DM, with the strongest
association attributed to the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146. In this
review, we searched the current literature to determine whether an association
exists between TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146 with diabetic retinopathy. A
systematic search was performed of EMBASE, PubMed, and Scopus using the following
search terms: diabetic, retinopathy, polymorphism, genetic, transcription factor 
7-like 2, TCF7L2. A manual search was also performed. There was no language or
study design restriction. Three full articles and one abstract were reviewed. All
studies were retrospective case-control studies that compared the frequency of
the wild-type CC genotype and genotypes with the risk T allele. None of the
studies found a statistically significant odds ratio. While the number of studies
examined was small, this review suggests that there is no risk of diabetic
retinopathy among individuals with the TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146; however,
the polymorphism may play a small role in diabetic retinopathy. Future
prospective studies and trials involving diverse ethnicities that adjust for
confounding variables are required to understand the association between TCF7L2
polymorphisms and diabetic retinopathy.

PMID: 25117344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 7;10(8):e1004517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004517.
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in African Americans provides
insights into the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes.

Ng MC(1), Shriner D(2), Chen BH(3), Li J(4), Chen WM(5), Guo X(6), Liu J(7),
Bielinski SJ(8), Yanek LR(9), Nalls MA(10), Comeau ME(11), Rasmussen-Torvik
LJ(12), Jensen RA(13), Evans DS(14), Sun YV(15), An P(16), Patel SR(17), Lu
Y(18), Long J(19), Armstrong LL(20), Wagenknecht L(21), Yang L(22), Snively
BM(22), Palmer ND(23), Mudgal P(4), Langefeld CD(11), Keene KL(24), Freedman
BI(25), Mychaleckyj JC(5), Nayak U(5), Raffel LJ(26), Goodarzi MO(26), Chen
YD(6), Taylor HA Jr(27), Correa A(7), Sims M(7), Couper D(28), Pankow JS(29),
Boerwinkle E(30), Adeyemo A(2), Doumatey A(2), Chen G(2), Mathias RA(31), Vaidya 
D(32), Singleton AB(10), Zonderman AB(33), Igo RP Jr(34), Sedor JR(35); FIND
Consortium, Kabagambe EK(36), Siscovick DS(37), McKnight B(38), Rice K(38), Liu
Y(39), Hsueh WC(40), Zhao W(41), Bielak LF(41), Kraja A(16), Province MA(16),
Bottinger EP(42), Gottesman O(42), Cai Q(19), Zheng W(19), Blot WJ(43), Lowe
WL(20), Pacheco JA(44), Crawford DC(45); eMERGE Consortium; DIAGRAM Consortium,
Grundberg E(46); MuTHER Consortium, Rich SS(47), Hayes MG(20), Shu XO(19), Loos
RJ(48), Borecki IB(16), Peyser PA(41), Cummings SR(14), Psaty BM(49), Fornage
M(30), Iyengar SK(34), Evans MK(50), Becker DM(51), Kao WH(52), Wilson JG(53),
Rotter JI(6), Sale MM(54), Liu S(55), Rotimi CN(2), Bowden DW(23); MEta-analysis 
of type 2 DIabetes in African Americans Consortium.

Collaborators: Elston RC, Iyengar S, Goddard K, Olson J, Ialacci S, Edwards S,
Fondran C, Horvath A, Jun G, Kramp K, Slaughter M, Zaletel E, Sedor JR, Schelling
J, Sehgal A, Pickens A, Humbert L, Getz-Fradley L, Adler S, Collins-Schramm HE,
Ipp E, Li H, Pahl M, Seldin MF, LaPage J, Walker B, Garcia C, Gonzalez J,
Ingram-Drake L, Klag M, Coresh J, Kao L, Mead L, Parekh R, Fink N, Bayton P, Long
Y, Wei L, Whitehead T, Knowler WC, Hanson RL, Nelson RG, Jones L, Juan R,
Lovelace R, Luethe C, Phillips LM, Sewemaenewa J, Sili I, Waseta B, Saad MF, Guo 
X, Rotter J, Taylor K, Budgett M, Zager P, Shah V, Scavini M, Bobelu A, Abboud H,
Arar N, Duggirala R, Kasinath BS, Plaetke R, Stem M, Goyes C, Sartorio V,
Freedman BI, Bowden DW, Satko SC, Rich SS, Warren S, Viverette S, Brooks G, Young
R, Winkler C, Smith MW, Thompson M, Hanson R, Briggs JP, Kimmel PL, Rasooly R,
Warnock D, Chakraborty R, Dunston GM, Lifton RP, O'Brien SJ, Spielman R, McCarty 
CA, Starren J, Peissig P, Berg R, Rasmussen L, Linneman J, Miller A, Choudary V, 
Chen L, Waudby C, Kitchner T, Reeser J, Fost N, Ritchie M, Wilke RA, Chisholm RL,
Avila PC, Greenland P, Hayes M, Kho AN, Kibbe WA, Lemke AA, Lowe WL, Smith ME,
Wolf WA, Pacheco JA, Thompson WK, Humowiecki J, Law M, Rasmussen-Torvik L, Chute 
C, Kullo I, Koenig B, de Andrade M, Bielinski S, Pathak J, Savova G, Wu J,
Henriksen J, Ding K, Hart L, Palbicki J, Larson EB, Newton K, Ludman E, Spangler 
L, Hart G, Carrell D, Jarvik G, Crane P, Burke W, Fullerton SM, Brown Trinidad S,
Carlson C, McDavid A, Roden DM, Clayton E, Haines JL, Masys DR, Churchill LR,
Cornfield D, Crawford D, Darbar D, Denny JC, Malin BA, Ritchie MD, Schildcrout
JS, Xu H, Ramirez AH, Basford M, Pulley J, Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir 
V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, 
Mcculloch LJ, Ferreira T, Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S,
Mccarroll SA, Langenberg C, Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M,
Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle
E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB, Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier
G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott
AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin
S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU,
Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen 
T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM, Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, 
Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P, Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou
C, Proença C, Prokopenko I, Rathmann W, Rayner N, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G,
Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T,
Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van 
Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters G, Weedon 
MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL,
Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, laakso 
M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein
LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR,
Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ, Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS,
Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K,
Altshuler D, Boehnke M, Mccarthy MI.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is more prevalent in African Americans than in Europeans.
However, little is known about the genetic risk in African Americans despite the 
recent identification of more than 70 T2D loci primarily by genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) in individuals of European ancestry. In order to
investigate the genetic architecture of T2D in African Americans, the
MEta-analysis of type 2 DIabetes in African Americans (MEDIA) Consortium examined
17 GWAS on T2D comprising 8,284 cases and 15,543 controls in African Americans in
stage 1 analysis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) association analysis was
conducted in each study under the additive model after adjustment for age, sex,
study site, and principal components. Meta-analysis of approximately 2.6 million 
genotyped and imputed SNPs in all studies was conducted using an inverse
variance-weighted fixed effect model. Replications were performed to follow up 21
loci in up to 6,061 cases and 5,483 controls in African Americans, and 8,130
cases and 38,987 controls of European ancestry. We identified three known loci
(TCF7L2, HMGA2 and KCNQ1) and two novel loci (HLA-B and INS-IGF2) at genome-wide 
significance (4.15 × 10(-94)<P<5 × 10(-8), odds ratio (OR)<U+200A> = 1.09 to 1.36).
Fine-mapping revealed that 88 of 158 previously identified T2D or glucose
homeostasis loci demonstrated nominal to highly significant association (2.2 ×
10(-23) < locus-wide P<0.05). These novel and previously identified loci yielded 
a sibling relative risk of 1.19, explaining 17.5% of the phenotypic variance of
T2D on the liability scale in African Americans. Overall, this study identified
two novel susceptibility loci for T2D in African Americans. A substantial number 
of previously reported loci are transferable to African Americans after
accounting for linkage disequilibrium, enabling fine mapping of causal variants
in trans-ethnic meta-analysis studies.

PMCID: PMC4125087
PMID: 25102180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014 Oct;100(4):1188-97. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.114.089706. Epub 2014 
Aug 6.

Association between Mediterranean and Nordic diet scores and changes in weight
and waist circumference: influence of FTO and TCF7L2 loci.

Roswall N(1), Ängquist L(1), Ahluwalia TS(1), Romaguera D(1), Larsen SC(1),
Østergaard JN(1), Halkjaer J(1), Vimaleswaran KS(1), Wareham NJ(1), Bendinelli
B(1), Palli D(1), Boer JM(1), van der A DL(1), Boeing H(1), Loos RJ(1), Sørensen 
TI(1), Tjønneland A(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark (NR, JH,
and AT); the Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals-The Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark (LÄ, SCL, and TIAS); the Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic
Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark (TSA and TIAS); the
Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen and Danish Pediatric Asthma Center, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark (TSA); the Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom 
(DR); the Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Palma, Palma de Mallorca, Spain
(DR); the Centro de Investigacíon Biomédica en Red Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad 
y Nutrición, Mallorca, Spain (DR); the Medical Research Council Epidemiology
Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom (KSV, NJW, and RJFL);
the Hugh Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition, Department of Food and Nutritional
Sciences, School of Chemistry, Food and Pharmacy, University of Reading, Reading,
United Kingdom (KSV); the Section for Epidemiology, Department of Public Health, 
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (JNØ); the Cancer Research and Prevention
Institute-Istituto per lo Studio e la Prevenzione Oncologica, Florence, Italy (BB
and DP); the Center for Nutrition, Prevention and Health Services, National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment Bilthoven, Netherlands (JMAB and 
DLvdA); the Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, Nuthetal, Germany (HB); and
the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, The Charles Bronfman Institute for
Personalized Medicine, The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, The
Genetics of Obesity and Related Metabolic Traits Program, New York, NY (RJFL).

BACKGROUND: Several studies have shown that adherence to the Mediterranean Diet
measured by using the Mediterranean diet score (MDS) is associated with lower
obesity risk. The newly proposed Nordic Diet could hold similar beneficial
effects. Because of the increasing focus on the interaction between diet and
genetic predisposition to adiposity, studies should consider both diet and
genetics.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether FTO rs9939609 and TCF7L2 rs7903146 modified
the association between the MDS and Nordic diet score (NDS) and changes in weight
(<U+0394>weight), waist circumference (<U+0394>WC), and waist circumference adjusted for body
mass index (BMI) (<U+0394>WCBMI).
DESIGN: We conducted a case-cohort study with a median follow-up of 6.8 y that
included 11,048 participants from 5 European countries; 5552 of these subjects
were cases defined as individuals with the greatest degree of unexplained weight 
gain during follow-up. A randomly selected subcohort included 6548 participants, 
including 5496 noncases. Cases and noncases were compared in analyses by using
logistic regression. Continuous traits (ie, <U+0394>weight, <U+0394>WC, and <U+0394>WCBMI) were
analyzed by using linear regression models in the random subcohort. Interactions 
were tested by including interaction terms in models.
RESULTS: A higher MDS was significantly inversely associated with case status
(OR: 0.98; 95% CI: 0.96, 1.00), <U+0394>WC (ß = -0.010 cm/y; 95% CI: -0.020, -0.001
cm/y), and <U+0394>WCBMI (ß = -0.008; 95% CI:-0.015, -0.001) per 1-point increment but
not <U+0394>weight (P = 0.53). The NDS was not significantly associated with any
outcome. There was a borderline significant interaction between the MDS and
TCF7L2 rs7903146 on weight gain (P = 0.05), which suggested a beneficial effect
of the MDS only in subjects who carried 1 or 2 risk alleles. FTO did not modify
observed associations.
CONCLUSIONS: A high MDS is associated with a lower <U+0394>WC and <U+0394>WCBMI, regardless of 
FTO and TCF7L2 risk alleles. For <U+0394>weight, findings were less clear, but the
effect may depend on the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant. The NDS was not associated
with anthropometric changes during follow-up.

© 2014 American Society for Nutrition.

PMID: 25099543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;136(6):1475-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29123. Epub 2014 Aug
14.

Neurotensin, a novel target of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, promotes growth of
neuroendocrine tumor cells.

Kim JT(1), Liu C, Zaytseva YY, Weiss HL, Townsend CM Jr, Evers BM.

Author information: 
(1)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays a pivotal role in regulating cell growth and
differentiation by activation of the ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) complex and
subsequent regulation of a set of target genes that have one or more TCF-binding 
elements (TBEs). Hyperactivation of this pathway has been implicated in numerous 
malignancies including human neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Neurotensin (NT), an
intestinal hormone, induces proliferation of several gastrointestinal (GI)
cancers including cancers of the pancreas and colon. Here, we analyzed the human 
NT promoter in silico and found at least four consensus TBEs within the proximal 
promoter region. Using a combination of ChIP and luciferase reporter assays, we
identified one TBE (located ~900 bp proximal from the transcription start site)
that was immunoprecipitated efficiently by TCF4-targeting antibody; mutation of
this site attenuated the responsiveness to ß-catenin. We also confirmed that the 
promoter activity and the mRNA and protein expression levels of NT were increased
by various Wnt pathway activators and decreased by Wnt inhibitors in NET cell
lines BON and QGP-1, which express and secrete NT. Similarly, the intracellular
content and secretion of NT were induced by Wnt3a in these cells. Finally,
inhibition of NT signaling suppressed cell proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth and decreased expression levels of growth-related
proteins in NET cells. Our results indicate that NT is a direct target of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and may be a mediator for NET cell growth.

© 2014 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4289421
PMID: 25098665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;28(9):1558-70. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1065. Epub 2014 Jul 
24.

Differential transcriptional and posttranslational transcription factor 7-like
regulation among nondiabetic individuals and type 2 diabetic patients.

Pradas-Juni M(1), Nicod N, Fernández-Rebollo E, Gomis R.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory (M.P.-J., N.N., E.F-R., R.G.),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, 08036 Barcelona, Spain;
Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases 
(M.P.-J., N.N., E.F.-R., R.G.), 08017 Barcelona, Spain; Department of Medicine
(R.G.), University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain; and Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona (R.G.), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Human genetic studies have revealed that the T minor allele of single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs7903146 in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is
strongly associated with an increased risk of diabetes by 30%-40%. Molecular and 
clinical studies are of great importance for understanding how this unique
variation in TCF7L2 influences type 2 diabetes (T2D) onset and progression. At
the molecular level, some studies have been performed in diabetic mice and
pancreatic islets from healthy human donors. Whereas TCF7L2 mRNA levels are
up-regulated in islets, protein levels are down-regulated. We performed studies
on TCF7L2 splicing, mRNA expression, and protein levels in immortalized human
lymphocytes from nondiabetic individuals and T2D patients carrying the C/C or the
at-risk T/T genotype. Our results show differential expression of TCF7L2 splice
variants between nondiabetic and T2D patients carrying the at-risk genotype, as
well as differences in protein levels. Therefore, we investigated the regulation 
of splice variants, and our results propose that splicing of exon 4 is under
control of the serine-arginine-rich factor transformer 2 ß (TRA2B). Finally, we
studied the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways, looking for a
posttranslational explanation. We saw a shift in the activation of these pathways
between nondiabetic individuals and T2D patients carrying the at-risk genotype.
These results suggest that, in human immortalized lymphocytes carrying the
at-risk T/T genotype, first the differential expression of TCF7L2 splice variants
implies a regulation, at least for exon 4, by TRA2B and second, the differential 
protein levels between both T/T carriers point to a different activation of
endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways.

PMID: 25058603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 15;74(18):5287-300. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0284. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 promotes the invasion and metastasis of
hepatocellular carcinoma by modifying ß-catenin degradation.

Yuan R(1), Wang K(1), Hu J(2), Yan C(2), Li M(2), Yu X(1), Liu X(3), Lei J(1),
Guo W(4), Wu L(1), Hong K(5), Shao J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, China. Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center of
Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Second 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China. (3)Department of
General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang,
China. Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang, China.
(4)Department of Digestion, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China. (5)Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine,
Nanchang, China. shao5022@163.com Hongkui88@163.com. (6)Department of General
Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, 
China. Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang, China.
shao5022@163.com Hongkui88@163.com.

The ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 and the homeobox protein HOXB9 each promote
metastatic progression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we
investigated the clinicopathologic significance of FAT10 and HOXB9 in HCC and
investigated a mechanistic role for FAT10 in HOXB9-mediated invasiveness and
metastasis. Relative to adjacent normal tissues, FAT10 and HOXB9 were markedly
overexpressed in HCC, where a positive correlation in their expression and
associated malignant characteristics were found. RNAi-mediated silencing of FAT10
decreased HOXB9 expression and inhibited HCC invasion and metastasis in vitro and
in vivo. The effects of FAT10 silencing were reversed by HOXB9 overexpression,
whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of HOXB9 decreased HCC invasion and metastasis
driven by FAT10 overexpression. Mechanistically, FAT10 regulated HOXB9 expression
by modulating the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway, directly binding to ß-catenin and
preventing its ubiquitination and degradation. Together, our results identified a
novel HCC regulatory circuit involving FAT10, ß-catenin/TCF4, and HOXB9, the
dysfunction of which drives invasive and metastatic character in HCC. Cancer Res;
74(18); 5287-300. ©2014 AACR.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25056121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Diabetes. 2014 Dec;63(12):4230-8. doi: 10.2337/db14-0425. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Differential transcriptome analysis of diabetes-resistant and -sensitive mouse
islets reveals significant overlap with human diabetes susceptibility genes.

Kluth O(1), Matzke D(1), Schulze G(1), Schwenk RW(1), Joost HG(2), Schürmann
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human Nutrition,
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg,
Germany. (2)German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany Department
of Pharmacology, German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke,
Germany. (3)Department of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human
Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany schuermann@dife.de.

Type 2 diabetes in humans and in obese mice is polygenic. In recent genome-wide
association studies, genetic markers explaining a small portion of the genetic
contribution to the disease were discovered. However, functional evidence linking
these genes with the pathogenesis of diabetes is scarce. We performed RNA
sequencing-based transcriptomics of islets from two obese mouse strains, a
diabetes-susceptible (NZO) and a diabetes-resistant (B6-ob/ob) mouse, after a
short glucose challenge and compared these results with human data. Alignment of 
2,328 differentially expressed genes to 106 human diabetes candidate genes
revealed an overlap of 20 genes, including TCF7L2, IGFBP2, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, GRB10,
and PRC1. The data provide a functional validation of human diabetes candidate
genes, including those involved in regulating islet cell recovery and
proliferation, and identify additional candidates that could be involved in human
ß-cell failure.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25053586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Oncol. 2014 Oct;45(4):1715-23. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2550. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce attenuation of Wnt signaling and TCF7L2
depletion in colorectal carcinoma cells.

Götze S(1), Coersmeyer M(2), Müller O(3), Sievers S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany. (2)Swiss
Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)University 
of Applied Sciences, Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) specifically affect cancer cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest, activate apoptotic pathways and re-activate
epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes, but their pleiotropic mode of
action is not fully understood. Despite the clinical effects of HDIs in the
treatment of hematological malignancies, their potency against solid tumors is
still unclear. We investigated the effects and mechanisms of HDI action in
colorectal carcinoma cell lines with an activated Wnt signaling pathway, which is
implicated in different aspects of tumorigenesis, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. We assessed the effects of HDI treatment 
in colorectal carcinoma cell lines by measuring histone hyperacetylation, cell
viability and expression of Wnt target genes. Upon treatment with HDIs of the
hydroxamate class, we found attenuation of Wnt signaling with concomitant
induction of apoptosis and colorectal cancer cell death. Strikingly, the effects 
of HDIs on Wnt signaling were independent of histone hyperacetylation, thus we
investigated the role of non-histone target proteins of histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The compounds TSA and SAHA induced a rapid proteasome-dependent
depletion of the Wnt transcription factor TCF7L2, which may be mediated by
inhibition of HDAC 6 and 10. Our findings provide a molecular rationale for the
use of HDIs against colorectal carcinomas with activated Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25050608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2014 Sep;180:77-82. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2014.06.024. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

A gene variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is associated with
an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Pagán A(1), Sabater-Molina M(2), Olza J(3), Prieto-Sánchez MT(4), Blanco-Carnero 
JE(4), Parrilla JJ(4), Gil Á(3), Larqué E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Department, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, Spain.
(2)Clinical Analysis Service, Virgen de la Arrixaca Hospital, Murcia, Spain.
Electronic address: mariasm@um.es. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology II, University of Granada, Spain. (4)Gynecology Service, Virgen de la
Arrixaca Hospital, Murcia, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Adipokines play an important role in the pathogenesis of insulin
resistance during pregnancy. We studied the association of genetic variants
linked with type 2 diabetes in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) subjects and
its influence on maternal adipokines.
STUDY DESIGN: We recruited 25 healthy pregnant women (Controls) and 45 women with
GDM at 24-28 weeks of gestation. Maternal blood samples were collected at
recruitment and delivery. Adipokines were determined at both sampling times.
Genomic DNA was extracted from recruitment samples and FTO rs9939609, TCF7L2
rs4506565, rs7901695, rs12243326, rs12255372 and rs7903146, INSIG2 rs7566605,
SREBF1 rs114001633, rs45535737 and rs12941356 and FATP4 rs2003560 genotyped.
RESULTS: Serum adiponectin was significantly lower in GDM than Controls at
recruitment and showed a similar trend at delivery (p=0.060). In contrast,
resistin tended to higher levels in GDM only at recruitment. TCF7L2 rs4506565
(OR=2.31, 95% CI: 1.97-5.01; p=0.031) and FTO rs9939609 (OR=2.17, 95% CI:
1.07-4.41; p=0.039) were associated with GDM risk. Women carrying the T allele of
TCF7L2 rs4506565 had increases in plasma resistin of 9.38 µg/L (95% CI
1.39-17.37; p=0.022) per allele; this association remained significant after
adjusting for pre-gestational body weight.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 rs4506565 variant (T/T) is associated with increased risk of
GDM and plasma resistin concentrations in women with GDM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25048152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Tumour Biol. 2014 Oct;35(10):10319-24. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2210-8. Epub 2014 
Jul 19.

Oncogenicity of LHX4 in colorectal cancer through Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 cascade.

Cha N(1), Liu W, Yang N, Xie S, Gao Y, Chen X, Wang X, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Capital Medical University Cancer Center, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital
Medical University, No. 10, Tieyi Road, Hangfangdian, Haidian District, Beijing, 
100038, People's Republic of China.

The LHX genes play an important role in a number of developmental processes.
Potential roles of LHXs have been demonstrated in various neoplastic tissues as
tumor suppressors or promoters depending on tumor status and types. The aim of
this study was to investigate the function role of LHXs in the human colorectal
cancer (CRC). The gene expression changes of LHXs in CRC tissues compared with
noncancerous colorectal tissues was detected using real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) analysis and
immunohositochemistry. And we identified the gene LHX4 that were significantly
upregulated in CRC by QRT-PCR analysis and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, we 
discovered that LHX4 promoted cancer cell proliferation in vitro, and LHX4
expression correlated with elevated ß-catenin levels in CRC and ß-catenin
function was required for LHX4's oncogenic effects. Mechanistically, LHX4
facilitate TCF4 to bind to ß-catenin and form a stable LHX4/TCF4/ß-catenin
complex and transactive its downstream target gene. LHX4 mutations that disrupt
the LHX4-ß-catenin interaction partially prevent its function in tumor cells. All
in all, LHX4 is a commonly activated tumor promoter that activate Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in cancer cells of CRC.

PMID: 25034524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jul 15. pii: IOVS-14-14023. doi:
10.1167/iovs.14-14023. [Epub ahead of print]

Serine Proteinase Inhibitor SERPINA3K Suppresses Corneal Neovascularization via
Inhibiting Wnt Signaling and VEGF.

Zhou T(1), Chen L(2), Huang CH(3), Lin Z(2), Zong R(2), Zhu C(1), Pan F(2), Ma
JX(4), Liu ZG(3), Zhou Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Eye
Institute of Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361005, China. (2)Eye Institute
of Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. (3)Medical College, Eye Institute of
Xiamen University, South Xiang'an Road, Xiamen, Fujian, 361102, China.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 941
Stanton L. young Blvd, BSEB328B, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, United States.
(5)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Eye
Institute of Xiamen University, 422 South Siming Road, Xiamen, Fujian, 361005,
China ypzhou@yahoo.com.

Purpose: To evaluate the anti-neovascularization effects and investigate the
possible mechanisms of SERPINA3K, a member of serine proteinase inhibitor family,
using a specific rat model of suture-induced corneal neovascularization. Methods:
A rat corneal suture model was set up and SERPINA3K was topically administered
three times daily for 7 days. The clinical indications were evaluated on day 2, 5
and 7, including area of neovascularization and inflammation index. The eyeballs 
were collected after day 7 and the following examinations were performed:
histological investigation, immunostaining, western blot and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Wnt3a, a Wnt pathway ligand, was
added to cultured Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC), followed by
detecting cell migration and western blot. Meanwhile, an in vitro
VEGF165-stimulated HUVEC model was applied and the following measurements were
conducted: cell proliferation, cell migration and tube formation. Results:
SERPINA3K significantly suppressed corneal neovascularization and inhibited
corneal inflammation. SERPINA3K downregulated the levels of ß-catenin,
non-pi-ß-catenin and transcription factor 4 (TCF4), but upregulated the level of 
pi-ß-catenin of the corneas induced by suture. SERPINA3K also decreased the gene 
expression and protein level of VEGF. Meanwhile, induction of Wnt3a increased the
cell migration, activated the Wnt signaling and upregulated VEGF in cultured
HUVEC, which were antagonized by SERPINA3K. In addition, SERPINA3K significantly 
inhibited VEGF165-induced cell proliferation and migration of HUVEC, SERPINA3K
also specifically suppressed the VEGF165-induced tube formation of HUVEC.
Conclusions: SERPINA3K has therapeutic potential for corneal neovascularization. 
The underlying mechanism may be through inhibiting Wnt signaling pathway and
VEGF.

Copyright © 2014 by Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.

PMID: 25028361  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


222. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Aug;7(4):505-13. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000386. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Analysis of metabolic syndrome components in >15 000 african americans identifies
pleiotropic variants: results from the population architecture using genomics and
epidemiology study.

Carty CL, Bhattacharjee S, Haessler J, Cheng I, Hindorff LA, Aroda V, Carlson CS,
Hsu CN, Wilkens L, Liu S, Selvin E, Jackson R, North KE, Peters U, Pankow JS,
Chatterjee N, Kooperberg C.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) refers to the clustering of cardiometabolic
risk factors, including dyslipidemia, central adiposity, hypertension, and
hyperglycemia, in individuals. Identification of pleiotropic genetic factors
associated with MetS traits may shed light on key pathways or mediators
underlying MetS.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using the Metabochip array in 15 148 African Americans from 
the Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study, we
identify susceptibility loci and investigate pleiotropy among genetic variants
using a subset-based meta-analysis method, ASsociation-analysis-based-on-subSETs 
(ASSET). Unlike conventional models that lack power when associations for MetS
components are null or have opposite effects,
Association-analysis-based-on-subsets uses 1-sided tests to detect positive and
negative associations for components separately and combines tests accounting for
correlations among components. With Association-analysis-based-on-subsets, we
identify 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 1 glucose and 4 lipids loci
(TCF7L2, LPL, APOA5, CETP, and APOC1/APOE/TOMM40) significantly associated with
MetS components overall, all P<2.5e-7, the Bonferroni adjusted P value. Three
loci replicate in a Hispanic population, n=5172. A novel African
American-specific variant, rs12721054/APOC1, and rs10096633/LPL are associated
with =3 MetS components. We find additional evidence of pleiotropy for APOE,
TOMM40, TCF7L2, and CETP variants, many with opposing effects (eg, the same
rs7901695/TCF7L2 allele is associated with increased odds of high glucose and
decreased odds of central adiposity).
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight a method to increase power in large-scale genomic
association analyses and report a novel variant associated with all MetS
components in African Americans. We also identify pleiotropic associations that
may be clinically useful in patient risk profiling and for informing
translational research of potential gene targets and medications.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4142758
PMID: 25023634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6419-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu359. Epub 2014 Jul
11.

TCF7L2 is a master regulator of insulin production and processing.

Zhou Y(1), Park SY(2), Su J(3), Bailey K(4), Ottosson-Laakso E(1), Shcherbina
L(1), Oskolkov N(1), Zhang E(1), Thevenin T(1), Fadista J(1), Bennet H(1), Vikman
P(1), Wierup N(1), Fex M(1), Rung J(5), Wollheim C(6), Nobrega M(4), Renström
E(1), Groop L(1), Hansson O(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine and. (3)European Bioinformatics Institute, Functional
Genomics, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. (4)Department of Human Genetics,
University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75185, Sweden and.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden,
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Université de Genève, University
Medical Centre, 1 rue Michel-Servet, Geneva 4 1211, Switzerland. (7)Department of
Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden,
Ola.Hansson@med.lu.se.

Genome-wide association studies have revealed >60 loci associated with type 2
diabetes (T2D), but the underlying causal variants and functional mechanisms
remain largely elusive. Although variants in TCF7L2 confer the strongest risk of 
T2D among common variants by presumed effects on islet function, the molecular
mechanisms are not yet well understood. Using RNA-sequencing, we have identified 
a TCF7L2-regulated transcriptional network responsible for its effect on insulin 
secretion in rodent and human pancreatic islets. ISL1 is a primary target of
TCF7L2 and regulates proinsulin production and processing via MAFA, PDX1, NKX6.1,
PCSK1, PCSK2 and SLC30A8, thereby providing evidence for a coordinated regulation
of insulin production and processing. The risk T-allele of rs7903146 was
associated with increased TCF7L2 expression, and decreased insulin content and
secretion. Using gene expression profiles of 66 human pancreatic islets donors', 
we also show that the identified TCF7L2-ISL1 transcriptional network is regulated
in a genotype-dependent manner. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
not only synthesis of proinsulin is regulated by TCF7L2 but also processing and
possibly clearance of proinsulin and insulin. These multiple targets in key
pathways may explain why TCF7L2 has emerged as the gene showing one of the
strongest associations with T2D.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4240194
PMID: 25015099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2014 Apr-Jun;27(2):253-60.

Local rhBMP-2 injection after drill-hole injury in rats: does it have systemic
effects?

Demirkan N(1), Demirkan F(2), Aksoy A(3), Ozdemir M(4), Akman A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School of Pamukkale University, Denizli,
Turkey. (2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Medical School of
Pamukkale University Denizli, Turkey. (3)Department of Pathology, Ankara
University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey. (4)Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Ozel Mardin Park Hastanesi, Mardin, Turkey.

The aim of this study is to investigate the histopathological findings of drill
hole healing and interactions of parathyroid hormone (PTH), &#946;-catenin and
transcription factor-4 (TCF7L2/Tcf-4) after local application of recombinant
human bone morphogenic protein-2 (rhBMP-2). Sprague Dawley rats were used in two 
groups of <U+0091>femoral cortex hole model<U+0092>. In the non-treated group, a hole was
opened with a 3 mm K-wire in the distal and mid third junction of the right
femur. In the treated group, local rhBMP-2 protein was injected into the similar 
femoral hole. Sterile 18M H2O was injected into the femoral hole at contralateral
femur. There was more subperiosteal membranous bone reaction in the group treated
with rhBMP-2 injection compared to the non-treated group. This was also proven
immunohistochemically in both ipsilateral and contralateral femur with increased 
anti bone morphogenic protein-2 (anti BMP-2) expression. Moreover, there was an
increased subperiosteal reaction at the contralateral femur. Also, in the treated
group, PTH expression was increased in cells that form callus, and nuclear
beta-catenin expression was increased in chondrocytes of periosteal ossification.
Future studies should try to find whether the effects of rhBMP-2 on PTH and Wnt
signaling pathway changes with different fracture models, also the systemic
effects of local rhBMP-2 application should be investigated.

PMID: 25004837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Tumour Biol. 2014 Oct;35(10):9935-40. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1893-1. Epub 2014
Jul 8.

SOX10 is a novel oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma through Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 
cascade.

Zhou D(1), Bai F, Zhang X, Hu M, Zhao G, Zhao Z, Liu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, No. 28 Fuxing
Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100853, People's Republic of China.

SOX (high mobility group) genes play an important role in a number of
developmental processes. Potential roles of SOXs have been demonstrated in
various neoplastic tissues as tumor suppressors or promoters depending on tumor
status and types. The aim of this study was to investigate the function role of
SOXs in the human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The gene expression changes of 
SOXs in HCC tissues compared with those in noncancerous hepatic tissues were
detected using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (QRT-PCR) analysis and immunohistochemistry. In addition, we identified 
the gene SOX10 that was significantly upregulated in HCC by QRT-PCR analysis and 
immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, we discovered that SOX10 promoted cancer cell 
proliferation in vitro, and SOX10 expression correlated with elevated ß-catenin
levels in HCC, and ß-catenin function was required for SOX10's oncogenic effects.
Mechanistically, SOX10 facilitates TCF4 to bind to ß-catenin and form a stable
SOX10/TCF4/ß-catenin complex and trans-activate its downstream target gene. SOX10
mutations that disrupt the SOX10-ß-catenin interaction partially prevent its
function in tumor cells. All in all, SOX10 is a commonly activated tumor promoter
that activates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in cancer cells of HCC.

PMID: 25001176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):6275-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu347. Epub 2014 Jul 
3.

Altered expression of the imprinted transcription factor PLAGL1 deregulates a
network of genes in the human IUGR placenta.

Iglesias-Platas I(1), Martin-Trujillo A(2), Petazzi P(3), Guillaumet-Adkins A(4),
Esteller M(5), Monk D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neonatología, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de
Déu, Barcelona 08950, Spain, iiglesias@hsjdbcn.org dmonk@idibell.cat.
(2)Imprinting and Cancer Group. (3)Cancer Epigenetics Group, Cancer Epigenetic
and Biology Program, Institut D'Investigació Biomedica de Bellvitge, Hospital
Duran i Reynals, Barcelona 08907, Spain. (4)Servicio de Neonatología, Hospital
Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona 08950, Spain, Imprinting
and Cancer Group. (5)Cancer Epigenetics Group, Cancer Epigenetic and Biology
Program, Institut D'Investigació Biomedica de Bellvitge, Hospital Duran i
Reynals, Barcelona 08907, Spain, Department of Physiological Sciences II, School 
of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08097, Spain and Institucio
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia 08010,
Spain. (6)Imprinting and Cancer Group, iiglesias@hsjdbcn.org dmonk@idibell.cat.

Genomic imprinting is the epigenetic process that results in monoallelic
expression of genes depending on parental origin. These genes are known to be
critical for placental development and fetal growth in mammals. Aberrant
epigenetic profiles at imprinted loci, such as DNA methylation defects, are
surprisingly rare in pregnancies with compromised fetal growth, while variations 
in transcriptional output from the expressed alleles of imprinted genes are more 
commonly reported in pregnancies complicated with intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR). To determine if PLAGL1 and HYMAI, two imprinted transcripts deregulated
in Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus, are involved in non-syndromic IUGR we
compared the expression and DNA methylation levels in a large cohort of placental
biopsies from IUGR and uneventful pregnancies. This revealed that despite
appropriate maternal methylation at the shared PLAGL1/HYMAI promoter, there was a
loss of correlation between PLAGL1 and HYMAI expression in IUGR. This incongruity
was due to higher HYMAI expression in IUGR gestations, coupled with PLAGL1
down-regulation in placentas from IUGR girls, but not boys. The PLAGL1 protein is
a zinc-finger transcription factor that has been shown to be a master coordinator
of a genetic growth network in mice. We observe PLAGL1 binding to the H19/IGF2
shared enhancers in placentae, with significant correlations between PLAGL1
levels with H19 and IGF2 expression levels. In addition, PLAGL1 binding and
expression also correlate with expression levels of metabolic regulator genes
SLC2A4, TCF4 and PPAR<U+03B3>1. Our results strongly suggest that fetal growth can be
influenced by altered expression of the PLAGL1 gene network in human placenta.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4334785
PMID: 24993786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Pharmacogn Mag. 2014 Apr;10(Suppl 2):S264-71. doi: 10.4103/0973-1296.133269.

Molecular docking studies of flavonoids for their inhibition pattern against
ß-catenin and pharmacophore model generation from experimentally known flavonoids
to fabricate more potent inhibitors for Wnt signaling pathway.

Iftikhar H(1), Rashid S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, National Center for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Canonical Wnt signaling plays a key role in tumor cell proliferation,
which correlates with the accumulation of ß-catenin in cell due to inactivation
of glycogen synthetase kinase-3 ß. However, uncontrolled expression of ß-catenin 
leads to fibromatosis, sarcoma and mesenchymal tumor formation. Recently, a
number of polyphenolic compounds of naturally occurring flavonoid family have
been screened for the inhibition of Wnt signaling.
OBJECTIVE: Elucidation of the binding mode of inhibitors to ß-catenin, reporting 
more potent inhibitors for the disease-causing protein and designing a
pharmacophore model based on naturally occurring compounds, flavonoids.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, a comparative molecular docking analysis
was performed to elucidate the binding mode of experimentally reported and
unknown inhibitors. Based on the knowledge of geometry, binding affinity and drug
score, we described a subset of novel inhibitors.
RESULTS: The binding energy of known inhibitors (isorhamnetin, fisetin, genistein
and silibinin) was observed in a range of -5.68 to -4.98 kcal/mol, while novel
inhibitors (catechin, luteolin, coumestrol and ß-naphthoflavone) exhibited -6.50 
to -5.22 kcal/mol. We observed good placement and strong interactions of selected
compounds inside the binding pocket of ß-catenin. Moreover, flavonoid family
members and T cell factors 4 (TCF4) compete for ß-catenin binding by sharing
common binding residues.
CONCLUSION: This study will largely help in understanding the molecular basis of 
ß-catenin/TCF4 inhibition through flavonoids by exploring their structural
details. Finally, the novel inhibitors proposed in this study need further
attention to uncover cancer treatment and with the generated pharmacophore model,
more and potent ß-catenin inhibitors can be easily screened.

PMCID: PMC4078341
PMID: 24991101  [PubMed]


228. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22589-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.560979. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

CREPT/RPRD1B, a recently identified novel protein highly expressed in tumors,
enhances the ß-catenin·TCF4 transcriptional activity in response to Wnt
signaling.

Zhang Y(1), Liu C(1), Duan X(2), Ren F(1), Li S(3), Jin Z(1), Wang Y(1), Feng
Y(1), Liu Z(3), Chang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for 
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, the State Key
Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, and. (2)The Second People's
Hospital of Zhuhai, Guangdong 519000, China. (3)From the State Key Laboratory of 
Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School of Life
Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084. (4)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and
Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National
Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 
100084, the State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center
for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, and
zhijiec@tsinghua.edu.cn.

CREPT (cell cycle-related and expression elevated protein in tumor)/RPRD1B
(regulation of nuclear pre-mRNA domain-containing protein 1B), highly expressed
during tumorigenesis, was shown to enhance transcription of CCND1 and to promote 
cell proliferation by interacting with RNA polymerase II. However, which
signaling pathway is involved in CREPT-mediated activation of gene transcription 
remains unclear. In this study, we reveal that CREPT participates in
transcription of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling activated genes through the
ß-catenin and the TCF4 complex. Our results demonstrate that CREPT interacts with
both ß-catenin and TCF4, and enhances the association of ß-catenin with TCF4, in 
response to Wnt stimulation. Furthermore, CREPT was shown to occupy at TCF4
binding sites (TBS) of the promoters of Wnt-targeted genes under Wnt stimulation.
Interestingly, depletion of CREPT resulted in decreased occupancy of ß-catenin on
TBS, and over-expression of CREPT enhances the activity of the ß-catenin·TCF4
complex to initiate transcription of Wnt target genes, which results in
up-regulated cell proliferation and invasion. Our study suggests that CREPT acts 
as an activator to promote transcriptional activity of the ß-catenin·TCF4 complex
in response to Wnt signaling.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132767
PMID: 24982424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):899-905. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.076. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

DEPDC1B enhances migration and invasion of non-small cell lung cancer cells via
activating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Yang Y(1), Liu L(2), Cai J(2), Wu J(2), Guan H(3), Zhu X(2), Yuan J(4), Li M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun Yat-Sen University), Ministry 
of Education, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan 
School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun Yat-Sen University), Ministry of
Education, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Department of Microbiology, Zhongshan
School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Center, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Tropical Disease Control (Sun Yat-Sen University), Ministry of Education,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Department of Biochemistry, Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (5)Key Laboratory 
of Tropical Disease Control (Sun Yat-Sen University), Ministry of Education,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Department of Microbiology, Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic
address: limf@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains a highly challenging and deadly
malignancy with limited improvements in prognosis over years. Further
understanding the molecular events involved in NSCLC oncogenesis and progression 
will help develop new and effective therapeutic strategies. In this study, we
identified a ubiquitous up-regulation of DEPDC1B in NSCLC cell lines and clinical
specimens, as well as its inverse correlation with patient survival. Ectopic
expression of DEPDC1B endowed NSCLC cells with enhanced migration and invasion,
while silencing its expression suppressed these traits. Mechanistic study showed 
that DEPDC1B was able to activate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, and that depletion of 
TCF4 or LEF1 abrogated the biological effects of DEPDC1B on cellular migration
and invasion. Taken together, our data demonstrate that DEPDC1B might confer
metastasis-related malignant phenotype to NSCLC in a Wnt/ß-catenin dependent
manner, providing new insights in developing novel anti-NSCLC strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24971537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Prostate. 2014 Sep;74(12):1161-70. doi: 10.1002/pros.22832. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes risk variant, lifestyle factors, and incidence of prostate
cancer.

Drake I(1), Wallström P, Hindy G, Ericson U, Gullberg B, Bjartell A, Sonestedt E,
Orho-Melander M, Wirfält E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Research Group in Nutritional
Epidemiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), the strongest
genetic risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D), may play a role in prostate cancer
(PCa) depending on lifestyle factors. The aims of this study were to determine if
TCF7L2 rs7903146 is associated with risk of PCa and if the association is
modified by lifestyle factors independently of T2D status.
METHODS: We prospectively followed 8,558 men in the Malmö Diet and Cancer Study
from baseline 1991-1996 until end of 2009. Cox regression models were used to
assess the association between rs7903146 T2D-risk allele (T) and PCa. Effect
modification by incident T2D status, fasting glucose levels, dietary, and
lifestyle risk factors were tested.
RESULTS: During follow-up 855 incident PCa cases were registered. We observed a
non-significant tendency for the TCF7L2 variant to associate with higher risk of 
PCa, which was unaffected by adjustment for incident T2D (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.24; 95% CI:
0.96, 1.60; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.079) but more pronounced among subjects who developed T2D
(HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.91, 95% CI: 0.88, 4.14; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.064). In a sub-sample of hyperglycemic men 
we observed an increased risk of PCa among T-allele carriers (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.72, 95% CI: 
1.22, 6.04; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014; P(interaction) <U+2009>=<U+2009>0.056). T-allele carriers with higher
number of lifestyle risk factors had an increased risk of PCa (P(interaction)
<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no independent association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and PCa
risk. However, among hyperglycemic men we observed that the risk allele may
increase risk of PCa. The association between rs7903146 and PCa risk may also be 
modified by lifestyle factors.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24961829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;16(7):695-707. doi: 10.1038/ncb2992. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

The transcription factor GATA6 enables self-renewal of colon adenoma stem cells
by repressing BMP gene expression.

Whissell G(1), Montagni E(2), Martinelli P(3), Hernando-Momblona X(1), Sevillano 
M(1), Jung P(1), Cortina C(1), Calon A(1), Abuli A(4), Castells A(5),
Castellvi-Bel S(5), Nacht AS(6), Sancho E(1), Stephan-Otto Attolini C(1), Vicent 
GP(6), Real FX(7), Batlle E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)1] Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona,
Spain [2]. (3)1] Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid,
Spain [2]. (4)1] Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Clínic, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain [2] Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hospital del Mar-IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical Research Centre), Pompeu Fabra
University, 08003 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. (5)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hospital Clínic, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August
Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain. (6)Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
E-08003 Barcelona, Spain. (7)1] Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
28029 Madrid, Spain [2] Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (8)1]
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona, Spain [2]
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona,
Spain.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Aug 18;33(16):1737-9.

Aberrant activation of WNT signalling and loss of BMP signals represent the two
main alterations leading to the initiation of colorectal cancer (CRC). Here we
screen for genes required for maintaining the tumour stem cell phenotype and
identify the zinc-finger transcription factor GATA6 as a key regulator of the WNT
and BMP pathways in CRC. GATA6 directly drives the expression of LGR5 in adenoma 
stem cells whereas it restricts BMP signalling to differentiated tumour cells.
Genetic deletion of Gata6 from mouse colon adenomas increases the levels of BMP
factors, which signal to block self-renewal of tumour stem cells. In human
tumours, GATA6 competes with ß-catenin/TCF4 for binding to a distal regulatory
region of the BMP4 locus that has been linked to increased susceptibility to
development of CRC. Hence, GATA6 creates an environment permissive for CRC
initiation by lowering the threshold of BMP signalling required for tumour stem
cell expansion.

PMID: 24952462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2014 Nov;34(11):858-69. doi: 10.1089/jir.2013.0124.
Epub 2014 Jun 20.

FoxO3a nuclear localization and its association with ß-catenin and Smads in
IFN-a-treated hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Ceballos MP(1), Parody JP, Quiroga AD, Casella ML, Francés DE, Larocca MC,
Carnovale CE, Alvarez Mde L, Carrillo MC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y
Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario , Rosario, Argentina .

Interferon-a2b (IFN-a2b) reduces proliferation and increases apoptosis in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells by decreasing ß-catenin/TCF4/Smads interaction.
Forkhead box O-class 3a (FoxO3a) participates in proliferation and apoptosis and 
interacts with ß-catenin and Smads. FoxO3a is inhibited by Akt, I<U+03BA>B kinase ß
(IKKß), and extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (Erk), which promote FoxO3a
sequestration in the cytosol, and accumulates in the nucleus upon phosphorylation
by c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated kinase (p38 MAPK). We 
analyzed FoxO3a subcellular localization, the participating kinases,
FoxO3a/ß-catenin/Smads association, and FoxO3a target gene expression in
IFN-a2b-stimulated HepG2/C3A and Huh7 cells. Total FoxO3a and Akt-phosphorylated 
FoxO3a levels decreased in the cytosol, whereas total FoxO3a levels increased in 
the nucleus upon IFN-a2b stimulus. IFN-a2b reduced Akt, IKKß, and Erk activation,
and increased JNK and p38 MAPK activation. p38 MAPK inhibition blocked
IFN-a2b-induced FoxO3a nuclear localization. IFN-a2b enhanced FoxO3a association 
with ß-catenin and Smad2/3/7. Two-step coimmunoprecipitation experiments suggest 
that these proteins coexist in the same complex. The expression of several FoxO3a
target genes increased with IFN-a2b. FoxO3a knockdown prevented the induction of 
these genes, suggesting that FoxO3a acts as mediator of IFN-a2b action. Results
suggest a ß-catenin/Smads switch from TCF4 to FoxO3a. Such events would
contribute to the IFN-a2b-mediated effects on cellular proliferation and
apoptosis. These results demonstrate new mechanisms for IFN-a action, showing the
importance of its application in antitumorigenic therapies.

PMCID: PMC4217017
PMID: 24950290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2014 Feb;30(2):182-93.

[Effect of over-expressed miR-155 on inhibiting C2C12 myogenic differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong Y, Wang Y, Wei N, Xu R, Yang G, Pang W.

To clarify the function and molecular mechanism of miR-155 in myogenic
differentiation of C2C12, we constructed adenovirus over-expression vector of
miR-155, then C2C12 cells were infected by adenovirus and induced myogenic
differentiation. First, we observed the morphology of C2C12 after
differentiation. Then the mRNA and protein expressions of myogenic markers (MyoD,
MyoG and MyHC) were detected by qPCR and western blotting. Subsequently, the dual
luciferase reporter gene assay was carried out to validate putative target gene
(TCF4) of miR-155. Meanwhile, mRNA level of TCF4 was analyzed after
over-expressing miR-155. The results show that over-expressed miR-155 reduced
myotubes formation. Moreover, the mRNA and protein expression of MyoG and MyHC
decreased significantly (P < 0.01). Further research demonstrated miR-155 bound
the one (4532-4538) of three putative sites (1487-1493,1516-1522, 4532-4583) of
TCF4 by luciferase reporter gene assay and the mRNA level of TCF4 decreased
notably (P < 0.05). The data suggest that miR-155 inhibited myogenic
differentiation of C2C12 through targeted TCF4.

PMID: 24941740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Sci Rep. 2014 Jun 13;4:5296. doi: 10.1038/srep05296.

Clinical and non-targeted metabolomic profiling of homozygous carriers of
Transcription Factor 7-like 2 variant rs7903146.

Wagner R(1), Li J(2), Kenar E(3), Kohlbacher O(4), Machicao F(5), Häring HU(5),
Fritsche A(5), Xu G(6), Lehmann R(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology and Nephrology,
Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital Tuebingen, Germany [2]
Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholtz Zentrum
München at the University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [3] German Center for 
Diabetes Research (DZD), Tübingen [4]. (2)1] CAS Key Laboratory of Separation
Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China [2]. (3)1] Applied Bioinformatics, Center for 
Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center, and Department of Computer Science, 
University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany [2]. (4)Applied
Bioinformatics, Center for Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center, and
Department of Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076
Tuebingen, Germany. (5)1] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology and
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital Tuebingen,
Germany [2] Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the
Helmholtz Zentrum München at the University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [3] 
German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Tübingen. (6)CAS Key Laboratory of
Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China. (7)1] Institute for Diabetes
Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholtz Zentrum München at the
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [2] German Center for Diabetes
Research (DZD), Tübingen [3] Division of Clinical Chemistry and
Pathobiochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

An important role of the type 2 diabetes risk variant rs7903146 in TCF7L2 in
metabolic actions of various tissues, in particular of the liver, has recently
been demonstrated by functional animal studies. Accordingly, the TT diabetes risk
allele may lead to currently unknown alterations in human. Our study revealed no 
differences in the kinetics of glucose, insulin, C-peptide and non-esterified
fatty acids during an OGTT in homozygous participants from a German diabetes risk
cohort (n = 1832) carrying either the rs7903146 CC (n = 15) or the TT (n = 15)
genotype. However, beta-cell function was impaired for TT carriers. Covering more
than 4000 metabolite ions the plasma metabolome did not reveal any differences
between genotypes. Our study argues against a relevant impact of TCF7L2 rs7903146
on the systemic level in humans, but confirms the role in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes in humans as a mechanism impairing insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC4055885
PMID: 24925104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jun 10;55(7):4577-84. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-13517.

Mitochondrial polymorphism A10398G and Haplogroup I are associated with Fuchs'
endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Li YJ(1), Minear MA(2), Qin X(2), Rimmler J(2), Hauser MA(2), Allingham RR(3),
Igo RP(4), Lass JH(4), Iyengar SK(4), Klintworth GK(5), Afshari NA(6), Gregory
SG(2); FECD Genetics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States Duke Molecular Physiology
Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States.
(2)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, United States. (3)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States. (4)Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States.
(5)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, United States. (6)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States Shiley Eye Center, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States.

PURPOSE: We investigated whether mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants affect the
susceptibility of Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).
METHODS: Ten mtDNA variants defining European haplogroups were genotyped in a
discovery dataset consisting of 530 cases and 498 controls of European descent
from the Duke FECD cohort. Association tests for mtDNA markers and haplogroups
were performed using logistic regression models with adjustment of age and sex.
Subset analyses included controlling for additional effects of either the TCF4
SNP rs613872 or cigarette smoking. Our replication dataset was derived from the
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of the FECD Genetics Consortium, where
genotypes for three of 10 mtDNA markers were available. Replication analyses were
performed to compare non-Duke cases to all GWAS controls (GWAS1, N = 3200), and
to non-Duke controls (GWAS2, N = 3043).
RESULTS: The variant A10398G was significantly associated with FECD (odds ratio
[OR] = 0.72; 95% confidence interval [CI] = [0.53, 0.98]; P = 0.034), and remains
significant after adjusting for smoking status (min P = 0.012). This variant was 
replicated in GWAS1 (P = 0.019) and GWAS2 (P = 0.036). Haplogroup I was
significantly associated with FECD (OR = 0.46; 95% CI = [0.22, 0.97]; P = 0.041) 
and remains significant after adjusting for the effect of smoking (min P = 0.008)
or rs613872 (P = 0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: The 10398G allele and Haplogroup I appear to confer significant
protective effects for FECD. The effect of A10398G and Haplogroup I to FECD is
likely independent of the known TCF4 variant. More data are needed to decipher
the interaction between smoking and mtDNA haplogroups.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4109404
PMID: 24917144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 10;9(6):e99310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099310. eCollection
2014.

Differential methylation of TCF7L2 promoter in peripheral blood DNA in newly
diagnosed, drug-naïve patients with type 2 diabetes.

Canivell S(1), Ruano EG(2), Sisó-Almirall A(3), Kostov B(4), González-de Paz
L(4), Fernandez-Rebollo E(2), Hanzu FA(5), Párrizas M(6), Novials A(7), Gomis
R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Les Corts Primary Health Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona,
Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Diabetes
and Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Les Corts Primary Health Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, 
Spain; University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Les Corts Primary Health
Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and
Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Diabetes and Obesity
Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of Endocrinology and
Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain. (8)Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and
Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain;
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

TCF7L2 is the susceptibility gene for Type 2 diabetes (T2D) with the largest
effect on disease risk that has been discovered to date. However, the mechanisms 
by which TCF7L2 contributes to the disease remain largely elusive. In addition,
epigenetic mechanisms, such as changes in DNA methylation patterns, might have a 
role in the pathophysiology of T2D. This study aimed to investigate the
differences in terms of DNA methylation profile of TCF7L2 promoter gene between
type 2 diabetic patients and age- and Body Mass Index (BMI)- matched controls. We
included 93 type 2 diabetic patients that were recently diagnosed for T2D and
exclusively on diet (without any pharmacological treatment). DNA was extracted
from whole blood and DNA methylation was assessed using the Sequenom EpiTYPER
system. Type 2 diabetic patients were more insulin resistant than their matched
controls (mean HOMA IR 2.6 vs 1.8 in controls, P<0.001) and had a poorer
beta-cell function (mean HOMA B 75.7 vs. 113.6 in controls, P<0.001). Results
showed that 59% of the CpGs analyzed in TCF7L2 promoter had significant
differences between type 2 diabetic patients and matched controls. In addition,
fasting glucose, HOMA-B, HOMA-IR, total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol
correlated with methylation in specific CpG sites of TCF7L2 promoter. After
adjustment by age, BMI, gender, physical inactivity, waist circumference, smoking
status and diabetes status uniquely fasting glucose, total cholesterol and
LDL-cholesterol remained significant. Taken together, newly diagnosed, drug-naïve
type 2 diabetic patients display specific epigenetic changes at the TCF7L2
promoter as compared to age- and BMI-matched controls. Methylation in TCF7L2
promoter is further correlated with fasting glucose in peripheral blood DNA,
which sheds new light on the role of epigenetic regulation of TCF7L2 in T2D.

PMCID: PMC4051650
PMID: 24914535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;115(11):1974-84. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24869.

MiR-29b downregulates canonical Wnt signaling by suppressing coactivators of
ß-catenin in human colorectal cancer cells.

Subramanian M(1), Rao SR, Thacker P, Chatterjee S, Karunagaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu, 600036, India.

The ß-catenin/Wnt signaling pathway is activated in many cancers and its
constitutive activation has a central role in colorectal cancer pathogenesis.
Recent studies have highlighted the role of microRNAs as novel regulators of gene
expression including that of signaling intermediates from the Wnt signaling
pathway. The purpose of our study was to determine the role of miR-29b in the
regulation of Wnt signaling in human colorectal cancer cells. TOPFlash/FOPFlash
reporter assays, gene expression studies by quantitative RT-PCR and western blot 
analysis were used to study the effect of ectopic expression of miR-29b on
canonical Wnt signaling. miR-29b antagonized transactivation of ß-catenin target 
genes by downregulating coactivators of ß-catenin (TCF7L2, Snail, and BCL9L) in
SW480 cells. miR-29b targeted the 3'UTR of BCL9L and decreased its expression
with a consequent decrease in nuclear translocation of ß-catenin. Ectopic
expression of miR-29b inhibited anchorage independent cell growth, promoted
reversal of epithelial to mesenchymal transition and reduced the ability of
conditioned medium from SW480 cells to induce in vitro tube formation in
endothelial cells. These results have unraveled a novel role of miR-29b in Wnt
signaling in human colorectal cancer cells with implications in the treatment of 
colorectal cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24913975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Prostate. 2014 Aug;74(11):1118-31. doi: 10.1002/pros.22828. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Androgen receptor (AR) suppresses normal human prostate epithelial cell
proliferation via AR/ß-catenin/TCF-4 complex inhibition of c-MYC transcription.

Antony L(1), van der Schoor F, Dalrymple SL, Isaacs JT.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Therapeutics Program and Prostate Cancer Program, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of 
Urology, The Brady Urological Institute, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.

INTRODUCTION: Physiologic testosterone continuously stimulates prostate stromal
cell secretion of paracrine growth factors (PGFs), which if unopposed would
induce hyperplastic overgrowth of normal prostate epithelial cells (PrECs).
METHODS: Lentiviral shRNA stable knock down of c-MYC, ß-catenin, or TCF-4
completely inhibits normal (i.e., non-transformed) human PrECs growth. c-MYC
enhancer driven reporter expression and growth is inhibited by two chemically
distinct molecules, which prevent ß-catenin signaling either by blocking TCF-4
binding (i.e., toxoflavin) or by stimulating degradation (i.e., AVX939).
Recombinant DKK1 protein at a dose, which inhibits activation of canonical Wnt
signaling does not inhibit PrEC growth. Nuclear ß-catenin translocation and PrEC 
growth is prevented by both lack of PGFs or Akt inhibitor-I. Growth inhibition
induced by lack of PGFs, toxoflavin, or Akt inhibitor-I is overcome by
constitutive c-MYC transcription.
RESULTS: In the presence of continuous PGF signaling, PrEC hyperplasia is
prevented by androgen binding to AR suppressing c-MYC transcription, resulting in
G0 arrest/terminal differentiation independent of Rb, p21, p27, FoxP3, or down
regulation of growth factors receptors and instead involves androgen-induced
formation of AR/ß-catenin/TCF-4 complexes, which suppress c-MYC transcription.
Such suppression does not occur when AR is mutated in its zinc-finger binding
domain.
DISCUSSION: Proliferation of non-transformed human PrECs is dependent upon c-MYC 
transcription via formation/binding of ß-catenin/TCF-4 complexes at both 5' and
3' c-MYC enhancers stimulated by Wnt-independent, PGF induced Akt signaling. In
the presence of continuous PGF signaling, PrEC hyperplasia is prevented by
androgen-induced formation of AR/ß-catenin/TCF-4 complexes, which retains binding
to 3' c-MYC enhancer, but now suppresses c-MYC transcription.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24913829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Diabetologia. 2014 Sep;57(9):1869-75. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3276-y. Epub 2014
Jun 7.

Influence of TCF7L2 gene variants on the therapeutic response to the
dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitor linagliptin.

Zimdahl H(1), Ittrich C, Graefe-Mody U, Boehm BO, Mark M, Woerle HJ, Dugi KA.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Development, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma
GmbH & Co. KG, Birkendorfer Straße 65, 88397, Biberach/Riss, Germany,
heike.zimdahl-gelling@boehringer-ingelheim.com.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Individuals carrying variants of the transcription factor 7-like
2 gene (TCF7L2) are at increased risk for type 2 diabetes. These metabolic
genetic risk factors have been linked to diminished pancreatic islet-cell
responsiveness to incretins, thus pharmacological interventions aimed at
amplifying endogenous incretin biology may be affected. However, clinical
evidence from randomised controlled trials so far is lacking. We investigated the
influence of TCF7L2 risk alleles on the response to treatment with the
dipeptidylpeptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor linagliptin from four 24 week, phase III,
placebo-controlled trials.
METHODS: Pharmacogenomic samples and clinical data were available from 961
patients with type 2 diabetes. Whole-blood DNA samples were genotyped for TCF7L2 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in conjunction with assessments of 24 week
changes in HbA1c.
RESULTS: Linagliptin lowered HbA1c meaningfully in all three genotypes of
rs7903146 (non-risk variant carriers CC [n = 356]: -0.82% [-9.0 mmol/mol], p <
0.0001; heterozygous CT [n = 264]: -0.77% [-8.4 mmol/mol], p < 0.0001; homozygous
risk variant carriers TT [n = 73]: -0.57% [-6.2 mmol/mol], p < 0.0006). No
significant treatment differences were seen between CC and CT patients, although 
HbA1c response was reduced in TT compared with CC patients (~0.26% [~2.8
mmol/mol], p = 0.0182).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Linagliptin significantly improved hyperglycaemia in 
patients with type 2 diabetes both with and without the TCF7L2 gene diabetes risk
alleles. However, differences in treatment response were observed, indicating
that diabetes susceptibility genes may be an important contributor to the
inter-individual variability of treatment response.

PMCID: PMC4119242
PMID: 24906949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun 5;94(6):870-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.05.004.

Transcriptional consequences of 16p11.2 deletion and duplication in mouse cortex 
and multiplex autism families.

Blumenthal I(1), Ragavendran A(1), Erdin S(1), Klei L(2), Sugathan A(1), Guide
JR(1), Manavalan P(1), Zhou JQ(3), Wheeler VC(1), Levin JZ(4), Ernst C(5), Roeder
K(3), Devlin B(2), Gusella JF(6), Talkowski ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (3)Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (4)Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Douglas Hospital Research
Institute, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada. (6)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics, Psychiatry, and Pathology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02141, USA.
(7)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics,
Psychiatry, and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02141, USA. Electronic address:
talkowski@chgr.mgh.harvard.edu.

Reciprocal copy-number variation (CNV) of a 593 kb region of 16p11.2 is a common 
genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), yet it is not completely
penetrant and can manifest in a wide array of phenotypes. To explore its
molecular consequences, we performed RNA sequencing of cerebral cortex from mouse
models with CNV of the syntenic 7qF3 region and lymphoblast lines from 34 members
of 7 multiplex ASD-affected families harboring the 16p11.2 CNV. Expression of all
genes in the CNV region correlated well with their DNA copy number, with no
evidence of dosage compensation. We observed effects on gene expression outside
the CNV region, including apparent positional effects in cis and in trans at
genomic segments with evidence of physical interaction in Hi-C chromosome
conformation data. One of the most significant positional effects was telomeric
to the 16p11.2 CNV and includes the previously described "distal" 16p11.2
microdeletion. Overall, 16p11.2 CNV was associated with altered expression of
genes and networks that converge on multiple hypotheses of ASD pathogenesis,
including synaptic function (e.g., NRXN1, NRXN3), chromatin modification (e.g.,
CHD8, EHMT1, MECP2), transcriptional regulation (e.g., TCF4, SATB2), and
intellectual disability (e.g., FMR1, CEP290). However, there were differences
between tissues and species, with the strongest effects being consistently within
the CNV region itself. Our analyses suggest that through a combination of
indirect regulatory effects and direct effects on nuclear architecture,
alteration of 16p11.2 genes disrupts expression networks that involve other genes
and pathways known to contribute to ASD, suggesting an overlap in mechanisms of
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4121471
PMID: 24906019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Anticancer Drugs. 2014 Sep;25(8):908-16. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000118.

TCF4 silencing sensitizes the colon cancer cell line to oxaliplatin as a common
chemotherapeutic drug.

Gheidari F(1), Bakhshandeh B, Teimoori-Toolabi L, Mehrtash A, Ghadir M, Zeinali
S.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Biotechnology, College of Science, University of Tehran
bMolecular Medicine Department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute 
of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Colon cancer is among the most prevalent cancers worldwide. Although the main
modality of treatment is surgery, resistance to chemoradiotherapy raises
concerns. Hence, we aimed to determine the effect of RNA-mediated silencing of
tcf4, the downstream effector of the wnt signaling pathway, on the response of
the SW480 cell line to oxaliplatin, a common chemotherapeutic drug. For this, two
different silencing sequences against TCF4 mRNA were selected and cloned into
pSilencer neo2.1. The SW480 cell line was stably transfected with the silencing
constructs (namely p1396, p1874, and p silencer containing a scrambled sequence) 
and labeled SW1396, SW1874, and SW-Sc, respectively. Subsequently, the effect of 
oxaliplatin (from 0 to 11.25 µmol/l) on these cells was studied using
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide proliferation
assay. Suppression of tcf4 expression in stable transfected cells with p1396 and 
p1874 was confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR and western blot
analysis. Although oxaliplatin was not toxic to SW480 and SW-sc in the range
tested, in SW1396 and SW1874 cells, a toxic effect was evident at 3.75 and 4.375 
µmol/l. Also, SW1396 and SW1874 cells appeared to have a round shape in
comparison with SW480 and SW-Sc cells. Only for SW1396, the number of apoptotic
cells was significantly different before and after the addition of oxaliplatin
(LC50 of oxaliplatin). The proliferating cells in SW480, SW1874, and SW-Sc
increased after treatment with oxaliplatin; however, this was not observed in
SW1396. Although silencing the tcf4 gene would confer sensitivity to oxaliplatin 
in SW1874 and especially SW1396, in SW480 and SW-Sc, the lethal effect of
oxaliplatin was compensated by its effect in increasing the proliferation of
cells. This sensitization effect may be because of different mechanisms including
TCF4 motifs in the ABCB1 promoter or defects in nucleotide excision repair or
double-strand break repair systems after tcf4 silencing.

PMID: 24869759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2014 Mar 27;68:343-9. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1095857.

Is TCF7L2 variant associated with non-diabetic chronic kidney disease
progression? Results of a family-based study.

Kilis-Pstrusinska K(1), Zwolinska D(1), Szczepanska M(2), Grzeszczak W(3); Study 
Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland. (2)Department of Paediatrics, Clinic of Paediatrics, Nephrology and
Endocrinology, Silesian Medical University, Zabrze, Poland. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Diabetology and Nephrology, Silesian Medical University,
Zabrze, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: It is assumed that genetic factors may play a significant role in
CKD development. The aim of the study was to investigate the role of rs7903146
polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene in development and progression of non-diabetic
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
MATERIAL/METHODS: 109 children and young adults with CKD caused by primary
glomerulopathy and tubulointerstitial nephropathy, stages 3-5, and their 218
biological parents with no renal dysfunction were included in the study. We
tested the transmission of alleles of rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene
from heterozygous parents to offspring affected with CKD using the
transmission/disequilibrium test. We also analysed whether rs7903146 polymorphism
had any impact on the loss of glomerular filtration rate.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 polymorphism in TCF7L2 allele transmission from
heterozygous parents to their affected children was not different from a random
proportion expected for no association, in the whole group of subjects, and in
the subgroups, depending on CKD aetiology. Lack of association between the
analysed polymorphism and the loss of glomerular filtration rate was found in the
total group of patients as well as in the subgroups, regarding the cause of CKD.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found no association between rs7903146 polymorphism in
the TCF7L2 gene and the increased risk for development of CKD caused by primary
glomerulopathy and analysed tubulointerstitial nephropathy. The progression rate 
of CKD of non-diabetic aetiology does not depend on this polymorphism.

PMID: 24864085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Curr HIV Res. 2014;12(3):164-73.

ß-Catenin/TCF-4 signaling regulates susceptibility of macrophages and resistance 
of monocytes to HIV-1 productive infection.

Aljawai Y, Richards MH, Seaton MS, Narasipura SD, Al-Harthi L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
1735 W. Harrison Street, 614 Cohn, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. lalharth@rush.edu.

Cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage are an important target for HIV-1
infection. They are often at anatomical sites linked to HIV-1 transmission and
are an important vehicle for disseminating HIV-1 throughout the body, including
the central nervous system. Monocytes do not support extensive productive HIV-1
replication, but they become more susceptible to HIV-1infection as they
differentiate into macrophages. The mechanisms guiding susceptibility of HIV-1
replication in monocytes versus macrophages are not entirely clear. We determined
whether endogenous activity of ß-catenin signaling impacts differential
susceptibility of monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) to productive
HIV-1 replication. We show that monocytes have an approximately 4-fold higher
activity of ß-catenin signaling than MDMs. Inducing ß-catenin in MDMs suppressed 
HIV-1 replication by 5-fold while inhibiting endogenous ß-catenin signaling in
monocytes by transfecting with a dominant negative mutant for the downstream
effector of ß- catenin (TCF-4) promoted productive HIV-1 replication by 6-fold.
These findings indicate that ß-catenin/TCF-4 is an important pathway for
restricted HIV-1 replication in monocytes and plays a significant role in
potentiating HIV-1 replication as monocytes differentiate into macrophages.
Targeting this pathway may provide a novel strategy to purge the latent reservoir
from monocytes/macrophages, especially in sanctuary sites for HIV-1 such as the
central nervous system.

PMCID: PMC4331035
PMID: 24862328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1246. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.219.

Wnt inhibitory factor 1 suppresses cancer stemness and induces cellular
senescence.

Ramachandran I(1), Ganapathy V(1), Gillies E(2), Fonseca I(3), Sureban SM(4),
Houchen CW(4), Reis A(5), Queimado L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (3)Serviço de Anatomia
Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Francisco Gentil and Instituto de
Anatomia Patológica, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (4)1] US 
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [2] Peggy
and Charles Stephenson Oklahoma Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [3] Department of Medicine, The
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (6)1] Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [2] US Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [3] Peggy and Charles
Stephenson Oklahoma Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [4] Department of Cell Biology, The University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [5] Department of
Pediatrics, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
USA [6] The Oklahoma Tobacco Research Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Hyperactivation of the Wingless-type (Wnt)/ß-catenin pathway promotes tumor
initiation, tumor growth and metastasis in various tissues. Although there is
evidence for the involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activation in salivary
gland tumors, the precise mechanisms are unknown. Here we report for the first
time that downregulation of the Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) is a widespread
event in salivary gland carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma (CaExPA). We also show
that WIF1 downregulation occurs in the CaExPA precursor lesion pleomorphic
adenoma (PA) and indicates a higher risk of progression from benign to malignant 
tumor. Our results demonstrate that diverse mechanisms including WIF1 promoter
hypermethylation and loss of heterozygosity contribute to WIF1 downregulation in 
human salivary gland tumors. In accordance with a crucial role in suppressing
salivary gland tumor progression, WIF1 re-expression in salivary gland tumor
cells inhibited cell proliferation, induced more differentiated phenotype and
promoted cellular senescence, possibly through upregulation of tumor-suppressor
genes, such as p53 and p21. Most importantly, WIF1 significantly diminished the
number of salivary gland cancer stem cells and the anchorage-independent cell
growth. Consistent with this observation, WIF1 caused a reduction in the
expression of pluripotency and stemness markers (OCT4 and c-MYC), as well as
adult stem cell self-renewal and multi-lineage differentiation markers, such as
WNT3A, TCF4, c-KIT and MYB. Furthermore, WIF1 significantly increased the
expression of microRNAs pri-let-7a and pri-miR-200c, negative regulators of
stemness and cancer progression. In addition, we show that WIF1 functions as a
positive regulator of miR-200c, leading to downregulation of BMI1, ZEB1 and ZEB2,
with a consequent increase in downstream targets such as E-cadherin. Our study
emphasizes the prognostic and therapeutic potential of WIF1 in human salivary
gland CaExPA. Moreover, our findings demonstrate a novel mechanism by which WIF1 
regulates cancer stemness and senescence, which might have major implications in 
the field of cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC4047921
PMID: 24853424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Aug;20(8):756-66. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau038. Epub 2014 May 
21.

Notch-dependent RBPJ<U+03BA> inhibits proliferation of human cytotrophoblasts and their 
differentiation into extravillous trophoblasts.

Velicky P(1), Haider S(1), Otti GR(1), Fiala C(2), Pollheimer J(1), Knöfler M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive Biology
Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna A-1090,
Austria. (2)Gynmed Clinic, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna A-1090, Austria
martin.knoefler@meduniwien.ac.at.

Abnormal development of invasive trophoblasts has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of human pregnancy diseases such as pre-eclampsia. However, critical
signalling pathways controlling formation and differentiation of these cells have
been poorly elucidated. Here, we provide evidence that the canonical Notch
pathway, operating through Notch-dependent activation of its key regulatory
transcription factor RBPJ<U+03BA>, controls proliferation and differentiation in villous
explant cultures and primary trophoblasts of early pregnancy. Immunofluorescence 
of first trimester placental tissue revealed expression of RBPJ<U+03BA> and its
co-activators, the MAML proteins, in nuclei of proliferative cell column
trophoblasts (CCT) and differentiated, extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs). However,
RBPJ<U+03BA> expression, transcript levels of the Notch target gene HES1 and activity of
a Notch/RBPJ<U+03BA>-dependent luciferase reporter decreased during in vitro
differentiation of primary cytotrophoblasts on fibronectin. Silencing of RBPJ<U+03BA>
using silencing RNAs (siRNAs) increased proliferation of CCTs in floating villous
explant cultures analysed by outgrowth and BrdU labelling. Similarly,
down-regulation of the transcription factor enhanced BrdU incorporation in
isolated primary cultures. However, motility of these cells was not affected. In 
addition, gene silencing of RBPJ<U+03BA> increased cyclin D1 expression in the two
trophoblast model systems as well as markers of the differentiated, EVT, i.e.
integrin a1, ADAM12 and T-cell factor 4. In summary, the data suggest that
Notch-dependent RBPJ<U+03BA> activity could be required for balanced rates of
trophoblast proliferation and differentiation in human placental anchoring villi 
preventing exaggerated trophoblast overgrowth as well as premature formation of
EVTs.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24850908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Gastroenterology. 2014 Aug;147(2):430-442.e8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.04.047. 
Epub 2014 May 15.

ITF2 prevents activation of the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex in colon cancer cells and 
levels decrease with tumor progression.

Shin HW(1), Choi H(2), So D(3), Kim YI(3), Cho K(4), Chung HJ(5), Lee KH(6), Chun
YS(7), Cho CH(1), Kang GH(8), Kim WH(8), Park JW(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea; Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacology,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of
Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea;
Department of Biomedical Science, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Biomedical Science, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Seoul National University Biomedical
Informatics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Physiology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (7)Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Biomedical
Science, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department 
of Physiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. (9)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Biomedical
Science, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic 
address: parkjw@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Immunoglobulin transcription factor 2 (ITF2) was believed to
promote neoplastic transformation via activation of ß-catenin. However, ITF2
recently was reported to suppress colon carcinogenesis. We investigated the roles
of ITF2 in colorectal cancer cell lines and tumor formation and growth in mice.
METHODS: Levels of ITF2, ß-catenin, and c-Myc were measured in 12 human
colorectal tumor samples and by immunohistochemistry. ITF2 regulation of
ß-catenin and T-cell factor (TCF) were analyzed using luciferase reporter,
reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction, flow cytometry, and
immunoblot analyses. Mice were given subcutaneous injections of human colorectal 
cancer cell lines that stably express ITF2, small hairpin RNAs to reduce levels
of ITF2, or control plasmids; xenograft tumor growth was assessed. Human
colorectal carcinoma tissue arrays were used to associate levels of ITF2
expression and clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Levels of ß-catenin, cMyc, and ITF2 were increased in areas of human
colon adenomas and carcinomas, compared with nontumor areas of the same tissues. 
ITF2 levels were reduced and cMyc levels were increased in areas of carcinoma,
compared with adenoma. In human colorectal cancer cell lines, activation of the
ß-catenin-TCF4 complex and expression of its target genes were regulated
negatively by ITF2. ITF2 inhibited formation of the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex by
competing with TCF4 for ß-catenin binding. Stable transgenic expression of ITF2
in human colorectal cancer cell lines reduced their proliferation and tumorigenic
potential in mice, whereas small hairpin RNA knockdown of ITF2 promoted growth of
xenograft tumors in mice. In an analysis of colorectal tumor tissue arrays, loss 
of ITF2 from colorectal tumor tissues was associated with poor outcomes of
patients. A gene set enrichment analysis supported the negative correlation
between the level of ITF2 and activity of the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex.
CONCLUSIONS: In human colorectal cancer cell lines and tissue samples, ITF2
appears to prevent activation of the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex and transcription of 
its gene targets. Loss of ITF2 promotes the ability of colorectal cancer cells to
form xenograft tumors, and is associated with tumor progression and shorter
survival times of patients.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24846398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014 Jul;58(7):1561-73. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201300729. Epub 2014
May 19.

Interspecies communication between plant and mouse gut host cells through edible 
plant derived exosome-like nanoparticles.

Mu J(1), Zhuang X, Wang Q, Jiang H, Deng ZB, Wang B, Zhang L, Kakar S, Jun Y,
Miller D, Zhang HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, James Graham Brown Cancer Center,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.

SCOPE: Exosomes, small vesicles participating in intercellular communication,
have been extensively studied recently; however, the role of edible plant derived
exosomes in interspecies communication has not been investigated. Here, we
investigate the biological effects of edible plant derived exosome-like
nanoparticles (EPDENs) on mammalian cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, exosome-like nanoparticles from four edible
plants were isolated and characterized. We show that these EPDENs contain
proteins, lipids, and microRNA. EPDENs are taken up by intestinal macrophages and
stem cells. The results generated from EPDEN-transfected macrophages indicate
that ginger EPDENs preferentially induce the expression of the antioxidation
gene, heme oxygenase-1 and the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10; whereas
grapefruit, ginger, and carrot EPDENs promote activation of nuclear factor like
(erythroid-derived 2). Furthermore, analysis of the intestines of canonical
Wnt-reporter mice, i.e. B6.Cg-Tg(BAT-lacZ)3Picc/J mice, revealed that the numbers
of ß-galactosidase(+) (ß-Gal) intestinal crypts are increased, suggesting that
EPDEN treatment of mice leads to Wnt-mediated activation of the TCF4
transcription machinery in the crypts.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest a role for EPDEN-mediated interspecies communication
by inducing expression of genes for anti-inflammation cytokines, antioxidation,
and activation of Wnt signaling, which are crucial for maintaining intestinal
homeostasis.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24842810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Jun;166C(2):140-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31400. Epub 2014 May 16.

Genetic disorders associated with postnatal microcephaly.

Seltzer LE, Paciorkowski AR.

Several genetic disorders are characterized by normal head size at birth,
followed by deceleration in head growth resulting in postnatal microcephaly.
Among these are classic disorders such as Angelman syndrome and MECP2-related
disorder (formerly Rett syndrome), as well as more recently described clinical
entities associated with mutations in CASK, CDKL5, CREBBP, and EP300
(Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome), FOXG1, SLC9A6 (Christianson syndrome), and TCF4
(Pitt-Hopkins syndrome). These disorders can be identified clinically by
phenotyping across multiple neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral realms, and
enough data are available to recognize these postnatal microcephaly disorders as 
separate diagnostic entities in their own right. A second diagnostic grouping,
comprised of Warburg MICRO syndrome, Cockayne syndrome, and Cerebral-oculo-facial
skeletal syndrome, share similar features of somatic growth failure,
ophthalmologic, and dysmorphologic features. Many postnatal microcephaly
syndromes are caused by mutations in genes important in the regulation of gene
expression in the developing forebrain and hindbrain, although important synaptic
structural genes also play a role. This is an emerging group of disorders with a 
fascinating combination of brain malformations, specific epilepsies, movement
disorders, and other complex neurobehavioral abnormalities.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24839169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1109-13. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1370076. Epub
2014 May 13.

[Phenotypes of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes].

[Article in German]

Wagner R(1), Häring HU(1), Fritsche A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innere Medizin IV, Abteilung für Endokrinologie, Diabetologie, Vaskuläre
Medizin, Nephrologie und Klinische Chemie, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen.

Comment in
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1095-6.

Type 2 Diabetes is a heterogeneous disease which harbors several different
pathomechanistic entities. For a successful prevention, it is important to
understand the exact pathomechanisms. Overt type 2 Diabetes usually develops
through an intermediary state called prediabetes, which is also heterogeneous.
This state is especially important, because it already confers a higher risk for 
diabetes-associated complications. Therefore, detection of prediabetes and
prevention of its progression to diabetes would be desirable. In this review, we 
describe the phenotypes of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. We also try to
envision the first steps of a future phenotype-oriented diabetes therapy.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24823979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3331-3.

Genetic polymorphisms of TCF7L2 lack influence on risk of the polycystic ovary
syndrome - a systemic analysis.

Lin L(1), Yang J, Ding Y, Wang J, Ting L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, China E-mail : Xjll20102010@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The results of previous researches that analyzed the association
between genetic polymorphisms of transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2,
rs7903146) and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) were conflicting. Current
systematic analysis was conducted to re-explore this association using updated
materials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PubMed database was used for data collection and the
final search was conducted on January 3, 2014. For TCF7L2 rs7903146, a
non-significant slight increase in risk of PCOS development was observed under
three genetic models (dominant model: OR=1.06, 95%CI: 0.93-1.21, p>0.05;
recessive model: OR=1.12, 95%CI: 0.87-1.43, p> 0.05; homozygous model: OR=1.14,
95%CI: 0.87-1.47, p>0.05). In the subgroup analyses in Asian group, allele
susceptibility of PCOS was calculated (allele model: OR=1.00, 95%CI: 0.74-1.35,
p>0.05; dominant model: OR=0.98, 95%CI: 0.71-1.35, p>0.05; recessive model:
OR=1.79, 95%CI: 0.33-9.84, p>0.05; homozygous model: OR=1.78, 95%CI: 0.32-9.80,
p>0.05), the differences were again not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this systemic analysis suggest that the polymorphism
of TCF7L2 rs7903146 may not be associated with the susceptibility to PCOS.

PMID: 24815492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Oct;54(10):1014-25. doi: 10.1002/mc.22170. Epub 2014 May 5.

Acute and chronic cadmium exposure promotes E-cadherin degradation in MCF7 breast
cancer cells.

Ponce E(1), Louie MC(1,)(2), Sevigny MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Dominican University of
California, San Rafael, California. (2)College of Pharmacy, Touro University of
California, Vallejo, California.

Cadmium is an environmental carcinogen that usually enters the body at minute
concentrations through diet or cigarette smoke and bioaccumulates in soft
tissues. In past studies, cadmium has been shown to contribute to the development
of more aggressive cancer phenotypes including increased cell migration and
invasion. This study aims to determine if cadmium exposure-both acute and
chronic-contributes to breast cancer progression by interfering with the normal
functional relationship between E-cadherin and ß-catenin. An MCF7 breast cancer
cell line (MCF7-Cd) chronically exposed to 10(-7) <U+2009>M CdCl2 was previously
developed and used as a model system to study chronic exposures, whereas parental
MCF7 cells exposed to 10(-6) <U+2009>M CdCl2 for short periods of time were used to
study acute exposures. Cadmium exposure of MCF7 cells led to the degradation of
the E-cadherin protein via the ubiquitination pathway. This resulted in fewer
E-cadherin/ß-catenin complexes and the relocation of active ß-catenin to the
nucleus, where it interacted with transcription factor TCF-4 to modulate gene
expression. Interestingly, only cells chronically exposed to cadmium showed a
significant decrease in the localization of ß-catenin to the plasma membrane and 
an increased distance between cells. Our data suggest that cadmium exposure
promotes breast cancer progression by (1) down-regulating E-cadherin, thus
decreasing the number of E-cadherin/ß-catenin adhesion complexes, and (2)
enhancing the nuclear translocation of ß-catenin to increase expression of
cancer-promoting proteins (i.e., c-Jun and cyclin D1).

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24798214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Apr;164A(4):975-92.

If not Angelman, what is it? A review of Angelman-like syndromes.

Tan WH, Bird LM, Thibert RL, Williams CA.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is caused by a lack of expression of the maternally
inherited UBE3A gene in the brain. However, about 10% of individuals with a
clinical diagnosis of AS do not have an identifiable molecular defect. It is
likely that most of those individuals have an AS-like syndrome that is clinically
and molecularly distinct from AS. These AS-like syndromes can be broadly
classified into chromosomal microdeletion and microduplication syndromes, and
single-gene disorders. The microdeletion/microduplication syndromes are now
easily identified by chromosomal microarray analysis and include PhelanMcDermid 
syndrome (chromosome 22q13.3 deletion), MBD5 haploinsufficiency syndrome
(chromosome 2q23.1 deletion), and KANSL1 haploinsufficiency syndrome (chromosome 
17q21.31 deletion). The single-gene disorders include PittHopkins syndrome
(TCF4), Christianson syndrome (SLC9A6), MowatWilson syndrome (ZEB2), Kleefstra
syndrome (EHMT1), and Rett (MECP2) syndrome. They also include disorders due to
mutations in HERC2, adenylosuccinase lyase (ADSL), CDKL5, FOXG1, MECP2
(duplications), MEF2C, and ATRX. Although many of these single-gene disorders can
be caused by chromosomal microdeletions resulting in haploinsufficiency of the
critical gene, the individual disorders are often caused by intragenic mutations 
that cannot be detected by chromosomal microarray analysis. We provide an
overview of the clinical features of these syndromes, comparing and contrasting
them with AS, in the hope that it will help guide clinicians in the diagnostic
work-up of individuals with AS-like syndromes.

PMID: 24779060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1661-73. doi: 10.1002/stem.1674.

Barx2 and Pax7 have antagonistic functions in regulation of wnt signaling and
satellite cell differentiation.

Zhuang L(1), Hulin JA, Gromova A, Tran Nguyen TD, Yu RT, Liddle C, Downes M,
Evans RM, Makarenkova HP, Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University, Bedford Park,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

The canonical Wnt signaling pathway is critical for myogenesis and can induce
muscle progenitors to switch from proliferation to differentiation; how Wnt
signals integrate with muscle-specific regulatory factors in this process is
poorly understood. We previously demonstrated that the Barx2 homeobox protein
promotes differentiation in cooperation with the muscle regulatory factor (MRF)
MyoD. Pax7, another important muscle homeobox factor, represses differentiation. 
We now identify Barx2, MyoD, and Pax7 as novel components of the Wnt effector
complex, providing a new molecular pathway for regulation of muscle progenitor
differentiation. Canonical Wnt signaling induces Barx2 expression in muscle
progenitors and perturbation of Barx2 leads to misregulation of Wnt target genes.
Barx2 activates two endogenous Wnt target promoters as well as the Wnt reporter
gene TOPflash, the latter synergistically with MyoD. Moreover, Barx2 interacts
with the core Wnt effectors ß-catenin and T cell-factor 4 (TCF4), is recruited to
TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor sites, and promotes recruitment of ß-catenin. In
contrast, Pax7 represses the Wnt reporter gene and antagonizes the activating
effect of Barx2. Pax7 also binds ß-catenin suggesting that Barx2 and Pax7 may
compete for interaction with the core Wnt effector complex. Overall, the data
show for the first time that Barx2, Pax7, and MRFs can act as direct
transcriptional effectors of Wnt signals in myoblasts and that Barx2 and Wnt
signaling participate in a regulatory loop. We propose that antagonism between
Barx2 and Pax7 in regulation of Wnt signaling may help mediate the switch from
myoblast proliferation to differentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4134105
PMID: 24753152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 1;135(11):2579-92. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28921. Epub 2014 Apr
30.

HS3ST2 modulates breast cancer cell invasiveness via MAP kinase- and Tcf4
(Tcf7l2)-dependent regulation of protease and cadherin expression.

Vijaya Kumar A(1), Salem Gassar E, Spillmann D, Stock C, Sen YP, Zhang T, Van
Kuppevelt TH, Hülsewig C, Koszlowski EO, Pavao MS, Ibrahim SA, Poeter M, Rescher 
U, Kiesel L, Koduru S, Yip GW, Götte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Münster University Hospital, Münster,
Germany.

Heparan sulfate 3-O-sulfotransferase 2 (HS3ST2), an enzyme mediating
3-O-sulfation of heparan sulfate (HS), is silenced by hypermethylation in breast 
cancer. As HS has an important co-receptor function for numerous signal
transduction pathways, the phenotypical changes due to HS3ST2 reexpression were
investigated in vitro using high and low invasive breast cancer cell lines.
Compared to controls, highly invasive HS3ST2-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells showed
enhanced Matrigel invasiveness, transendothelial migration and motility.
Affymetrix screening and confirmatory real-time PCR and Western blotting analysis
revealed increased expression of several matrix metalloproteinases, cadherin-11, 
E-cadherin and CEACAM-1, while protease inhibitor and annexin A10 expression were
decreased. Low invasive HS3ST2 -expressing MCF-7 cells became even less invasive,
with no change in gelatinolytic MMP activity. HS3ST2 expression increased
HS-dependent basal and FGF2-specific signaling through the constitutively active 
p44/42 MAPK pathway in MDA-MB-231 cells. Increased MAPK activation was
accompanied by upregulation of ß-catenin in MDA-MB-231, and of the transcription 
factor Tcf4 in both cell lines. Dysregulation of Tcf4-regulated ion transporters 
and increased cytosolic acidification were observed in HS3ST2-expressing
MDA-MB-231 cells, which is a possible underlying cause of increased
chemosensitivity towards doxorubicine and paclitaxel in these cells. This study
provides the first in vitro evidence of the involvement of HS3ST2 in breast
cancer cell invasion and chemosensitivity.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24752740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jun;44(6):2077-84. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2367. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

HIF-1a activation under glucose deprivation plays a central role in the
acquisition of anti-apoptosis in human colon cancer cells.

Nishimoto A(1), Kugimiya N(1), Hosoyama T(1), Enoki T(1), Li TS(2), Hamano K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Clinical Science, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan. (2)Department of Stem Cell
Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan.

A poor vascular network development in a tumor mass leads to poor oxygen and
nutrient supply. To adapt to a hypoxic microenvironment, it is well-known that
cancer cells activate the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a). HIF-1a plays a central role in hypoxia-induced metabolic switching,
anti-apoptosis, angiogenesis and drug resistance. Glucose deprivation, another
major stressful microenvironment, protects cancer cells from drug-induced
apoptosis. However, the molecular mechanisms by which cancer cells adapt to poor 
nutrient conditions remain poorly understood. In this study, we focused on
HIF-1a, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and
trans-cription factor 4 (TCF4), which are involved in cell survival,
anti-apoptosis and drug resistance. We examined their activities and the
relationships among these transcription factors under glucose deprivation. Our
results showed that glucose deprivation increased HIF-1a, STAT3 and TCF4
DNA-binding activity, as well as the expression levels of their target genes
OCT4, BCL-2 and VEGF. HIF-1a knockdown significantly increased poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP-1) cleavage at higher levels than STAT3 knockdown under
glucose deprivation. Furthermore, HIF-1a knockdown led to a significant decrease 
in the expression levels of both STAT3 and TCF4, although STAT3 knockdown
decreased only HIF-1a expression level. Our data indicated that activation of the
HIF-1a signaling pathway under glucose deprivation leads to the acquisition of
anti-apoptotic properties in human colon cancer cells, and targeting the HIF-1a
signaling pathway may provide an effective avenue for treating cancers resistant 
to conventional therapy.

PMID: 24718784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 9;9(4):e94398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094398. eCollection 
2014.

Are genetic risk factors for psychosis also associated with dimension-specific
psychotic experiences in adolescence?

Sieradzka D(1), Power RA(2), Freeman D(3), Cardno AG(4), McGuire P(5), Plomin
R(2), Meaburn EL(1), Dudbridge F(6), Ronald A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London,
London, United Kingdom. (2)King's College London, Medical Research Council
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, De 
Crespigny Park, London, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Psychiatry, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (4)Academic Unit of Psychiatry and Behavioural
Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. (5)Institute of Psychiatry,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom. (6)Faculty of Epidemiology and
Population Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.

Psychosis has been hypothesised to be a continuously distributed quantitative
phenotype and disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder represent its 
extreme manifestations. Evidence suggests that common genetic variants play an
important role in liability to both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Here we
tested the hypothesis that these common variants would also influence psychotic
experiences measured dimensionally in adolescents in the general population. Our 
aim was to test whether schizophrenia and bipolar disorder polygenic risk scores 
(PRS), as well as specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously
identified as risk variants for schizophrenia, were associated with adolescent
dimension-specific psychotic experiences. Self-reported Paranoia, Hallucinations,
Cognitive Disorganisation, Grandiosity, Anhedonia, and Parent-rated Negative
Symptoms, as measured by the Specific Psychotic Experiences Questionnaire (SPEQ),
were assessed in a community sample of 2,152 16-year-olds. Polygenic risk scores 
were calculated using estimates of the log of odds ratios from the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium GWAS stage-1 mega-analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder. The polygenic risk analyses yielded no significant associations between
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder PRS and the SPEQ measures. The analyses on the
28 individual SNPs previously associated with schizophrenia found that two SNPs
in TCF4 returned a significant association with the SPEQ Paranoia dimension,
rs17512836 (p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.57×10<U+207B>4) and rs9960767 (p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.23×10<U+207B>4). Replication
in an independent sample of 16-year-olds (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>3,427) assessed using the
Psychotic-Like Symptoms Questionnaire (PLIKS-Q), a composite measure of multiple 
positive psychotic experiences, failed to yield significant results. Future
research with PRS derived from larger samples, as well as larger adolescent
validation samples, would improve the predictive power to test these hypotheses
further. The challenges of relating adult clinical diagnostic constructs such as 
schizophrenia to adolescent psychotic experiences at a genetic level are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC3981778
PMID: 24718684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Apr 9;7:226. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-226.

Butyrate induced changes in Wnt-signaling specific gene expression in colorectal 
cancer cells.

Lazarova DL, Chiaro C, Bordonaro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, The Commonwealth Medical College, 525 Pine
Street, Scranton, PA 18509, USA. mbordonaro@tcmedc.org.

BACKGROUND: We have determined that butyrate, which is derived from the
fermentation of dietary fiber in the colonic lumen, hyperactivates Wnt activity
in colorectal (CRC) cells, and that this upregulation of Wnt signaling is
causatively related to the induction of apoptosis. To better understand the
genetic program regulated by butyrate-mediated Wnt hyperactivation, we performed 
total human genome microarray analyses on HCT-116 CRC cells in the presence or
absence of a physiologically relevant concentration of butyrate. To evaluate
changes in Wnt-specific gene expression, Wnt activity was suppressed with
inducible dominant negative Tcf4 (DN-Tcf4). Six biological replicates of a full
human genome microarray were performed, and the data deposited into the Gene
Expression Omnibus database, according to Minimum Information About A Microarray 
Experiment standards.
RESULTS: Reporter assay and western blot data confirm that DN-Tcf4 is expressed
at high levels in stably transfected HCT-116 cells upon cotreatment with
doxycycline and butyrate, and that these cells exhibit a marked repression of
butyrate-mediated Wnt hyperactivation. Analysis of six biological replicates of
microarray analyses indicated that 1008 genes are modulated by butyrate
(>two-fold, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) in a Wnt signaling-specific manner, while 1587 genes are
similarly modulated at P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. The modulated genes include members of a variety
of gene families; including the Biological Process category, such as regulation
of development, regulation of metabolism, cytokine and chemokine mediated
signaling pathways, and DNA replication; the Cellular Component category such as 
cytoskeleton and organelle factors, and intermediate filaments; and the Molecular
Function category, such as GTPase activator activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified, for the first time, in CRC cells, the total
array of direct and indirect Wnt-target genes whose expression is modulated by
butyrate. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms determining the response of CRC
cells to butyrate in vitro may assist in determining more effective preventive
and therapeutic strategies against CRC.

PMCID: PMC4022274
PMID: 24716727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Bioessays. 2014 May;36(5):526-37. doi: 10.1002/bies.201300180. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

How does the Mediterranean diet promote cardiovascular health? Current progress
toward molecular mechanisms: gene-diet interactions at the genomic,
transcriptomic, and epigenomic levels provide novel insights into new mechanisms.

Corella D(1), Ordovás JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y
Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Epidemiological evidence supports a health-promoting effect of the Mediterranean 
Diet (MedDiet), especially in the prevention of cardiovascular diseases. These
cardiovascular benefits have been attributed to a number of components of the
MedDiet such as monounsaturated fatty acids, antioxidant vitamins and
phytochemicals. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Likewise,
little is known about the genes that define inter-individual variation in
response to the MedDiet, although the TCF7L2 gene is emerging as an illustrative 
candidate for determining relative risk of cardiovascular events in response to
the MedDiet. Moreover, omics technologies are providing evidence supporting
potential mechanisms, some of them implicating epigenetics (i.e. microRNAs,
methylation), and certain data suggest that some traditional foods could
contribute via microRNAs possibly acting as exogenous regulators of gene
expression. Future research should aim at increasing and consolidating the
nutrigenetic and nutrigenomic knowledge of the MedDiet in order to provide sound,
personalized and optimized nutritional recommendations.

© 2014 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24706458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hepatology. 2014 Sep;60(3):964-76. doi: 10.1002/hep.27082. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

ß-catenin signaling in murine liver zonation and regeneration: a Wnt-Wnt
situation!

Yang J(1), Mowry LE, Nejak-Bowen KN, Okabe H, Diegel CR, Lang RA, Williams BO,
Monga SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA.

Liver-specific ß-catenin knockout (ß-Catenin-LKO) mice have revealed an essential
role of ß-catenin in metabolic zonation where it regulates pericentral gene
expression and in initiating liver regeneration (LR) after partial hepatectomy
(PH), by regulating expression of Cyclin-D1. However, what regulates ß-catenin
activity in these events remains an enigma. Here we investigate to what extent
ß-catenin activation is Wnt-signaling-dependent and the potential cell source of 
Wnts. We studied liver-specific Lrp5/6 KO (Lrp-LKO) mice where Wnt-signaling was 
abolished in hepatocytes while the ß-catenin gene remained intact. Intriguingly, 
like ß-catenin-LKO mice, Lrp-LKO exhibited a defect in metabolic zonation
observed as a lack of glutamine synthetase (GS), Cyp1a2, and Cyp2e1. Lrp-LKO also
displayed a significant delay in initiation of LR due to the absence of
ß-catenin-TCF4 association and lack of Cyclin-D1. To address the source of Wnt
proteins in liver, we investigated conditional Wntless (Wls) KO mice, which
lacked the ability to secrete Wnts from either liver epithelial cells (Wls-LKO), 
or macrophages including Kupffer cells (Wls-MKO), or endothelial cells (Wls-EKO).
While Wls-EKO was embryonic lethal precluding further analysis in adult hepatic
homeostasis and growth, Wls-LKO and Wls-MKO were viable but did not show any
defect in hepatic zonation. Wls-LKO showed normal initiation of LR; however,
Wls-MKO showed a significant but temporal deficit in LR that was associated with 
decreased ß-catenin-TCF4 association and diminished Cyclin-D1
expression.CONCLUSION: Wnt-signaling is the major upstream effector of ß-catenin 
activity in pericentral hepatocytes and during LR. Hepatocytes, cholangiocytes,
or macrophages are not the source of Wnts in regulating hepatic zonation.
However, Kupffer cells are a major contributing source of Wnt secretion necessary
for ß-catenin activation during LR.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4139486
PMID: 24700412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Oct;20(4):847-51. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9763-0. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

HMGA1 interacts with ß-catenin to positively regulate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in 
colorectal cancer cells.

Xing J(1), Cao G, Fu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein plays an important role in numerous
biological processes, such as embryogenesis, cell proliferation, differentiation,
apoptosis and carcinogenesis. Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway plays a key role in
development and cancer. Although previous reports have shown HMGA1 protein level 
can be induced by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, however, the specific
mechanism of HMGA1 on regulating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling remains unclear. Here,
we reported that HMGA1 interacted with ß-catenin by using coimmunoprecipitation
approach with exogenous and endogenous protein samples. HMGA1 positively
regulated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, as determined by that HMGA1 increased the
TOP-FLASH activity in a dose-dependent manner and ß-catenin downstream target
gene expression. Moreover, HMGA1 induced proliferation of colorectal cancer
cells. Mechanistically, HMGA1 increased the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex formation.
Importantly, there was a correlation between HMGA1 and ß-catenin expression in
human colorectal cancer tissues. In summary, HMGA1 positively regulates
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through interacting with ß-catenin, which leads to
increase the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex formation. This suggests that targeting HMGA1
may be a useful therapeutic option in clinical application.

PMID: 24696416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neurosci Lett. 2014 May 7;568:12-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.03.031. Epub 2014 
Mar 28.

Expression analysis of the genes identified in GWAS of the postmortem brain
tissues from patients with schizophrenia.

Umeda-Yano S(1), Hashimoto R(2), Yamamori H(3), Weickert CS(4), Yasuda Y(5), Ohi 
K(5), Fujimoto M(5), Ito A(1), Takeda M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropsychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 5650871, Japan. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 5650871, Japan; Molecular
Research Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate School of
Child Development, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 5650871, Japan. Electronic
address: hashimor@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Molecular
Neuropsychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka
5650871, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 5650871, Japan. (4)Schizophrenia Research Institute,
Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia; Neuroscience Research Australia, Barker St,
Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia; School of Psychiatry, University of New South
Wales, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 5650871, Japan.

Many gene expression studies have examined postmortem brain tissues of patients
with schizophrenia. However, only a few expression studies of the genes
identified in genome-wide association study (GWAS) have been published to date.
We measured the expression levels of the genes identified in GWAS (ZNF804A,
OPCML, RPGRIP1L, NRGN, and TCF4) of the postmortem brain tissues of patients with
schizophrenia and controls from two separate sample sets (i.e., the Australian
Tissue Resource Center and Stanley Medical Research Institute). We also
determined whether the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified in the
GWAS were related to the gene expression changes in the prefrontal cortex. No
difference was observed between the patients with schizophrenia and controls from
the Australian Tissue Resource Center samples in the mRNA levels of ZNF804A,
OPCML, RPGRIP1L, NRGN, or TCF4. The lack of mRNA change for these five
transcripts was also found in the brain samples from the Stanley Medical Research
Institute. In addition, no relationship between the schizophrenia-associated SNPs
identified in the GWAS and the corresponding gene expression was observed in
either sample set. Our results suggest that major changes in the transcript
levels of the five candidate genes identified in the GWAS may not occur in adult 
patients with schizophrenia. The lack of linkage between the risk gene
polymorphisms and the expression levels of their major transcripts suggests that 
the control of pan mRNA levels may not be a prominent mechanism by which the
genes identified in the GWAS contribute to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. 
Further studies are needed to examine how the genes identified in the GWAS
contribute to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24686180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 1;89(3):340-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.03.006. Epub
2014 Mar 23.

DIF-1 inhibits tumor growth in vivo reducing phosphorylation of GSK-3ß and
expressions of cyclin D1 and TCF7L2 in cancer model mice.

Takahashi-Yanaga F(1), Yoshihara T(2), Jingushi K(2), Igawa K(3), Tomooka K(3),
Watanabe Y(4), Morimoto S(2), Nakatsu Y(5), Tsuzuki T(5), Nakabeppu Y(6),
Sasaguri T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Global Medical Science Education Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. Electronic address: yanaga@cliphrarm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular and Material Science,
Institute for Materials Chemistry and Engineering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (4)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Ehime
University, Matsuyama, Japan. (5)Department of Medical Biophysics and Radiation
Biology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and
Neuroscience, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (7)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
sasaguri@cliphrarm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

We reported that differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), synthesized by
Dictyostelium discoideum, inhibited proliferation of various tumor cell lines in 
vitro by suppressing the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. However, it remained
unexplored whether DIF-1 also inhibits tumor growth in vivo. In the present
study, therefore, we examined in-vivo effects of DIF-1 using three cancer models:
Mutyh-deficient mice with oxidative stress-induced intestinal tumors and nude
mice xenografted with the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116 and cervical
cancer cell line HeLa. In exploration for an appropriate route of administration,
we found that orally administered DIF-1 was absorbed through the digestive tract 
to elevate its blood concentration to levels enough to suppress tumor cell
proliferation. Repeated oral administration of DIF-1 markedly reduced the number 
and size of intestinal tumors that developed in Mutyh-deficient mice, reducing
the phosphorylation level of GSK-3ß Ser(9) and the expression levels of early
growth response-1 (Egr-1), transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and cyclin D1. 
DIF-1 also inhibited the growth of HCT-116- and HeLa-xenograft tumors together
with decreasing phosphorylation level of GSK-3ß Ser(9), although it was not
statistically significant in HeLa-xenograft tumors. DIF-1 also suppressed the
expressions of Egr-1, TCF7L2 and cyclin D1 in HCT-116-xenograft tumors and those 
of ß-catenin, TCF7L2 and cyclin D1 in HeLa-xenograft tumors. This is the first
report to show that DIF-1 inhibits tumor growth in vivo, consistent with its
in-vitro action, suggesting that this compound may have potential as a novel
anti-tumor agent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24670930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;23(1):103-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.48. Epub 2014 Mar
26.

Characterization of the transcriptional machinery bound across the widely
presumed type 2 diabetes causal variant, rs7903146, within TCF7L2.

Xia Q(1), Deliard S(1), Yuan CX(2), Johnson ME(1), Grant SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Proteomics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)1] Division of Human
Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2]
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and
Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Resolving the underlying functional mechanism to a given genetic association has 
proven extremely challenging. However, the strongest associated type 2 diabetes
(T2D) locus reported to date, TCF7L2, presents an opportunity for translational
analyses, as many studies in multiple ethnicities strongly point to SNP rs7903146
in intron 3 as being the causal variant within this gene. We carried out oligo
pull-down combined with mass spectrophotometry (MS) to elucidate the specific
transcriptional machinery across this SNP using protein extracts from HCT116
cells. We observed that poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is by far the
most abundant binding factor. Pursuing the possibility of a feedback mechanism,
we observed that PARP-1, along with the next most abundant binding proteins, DNA 
topoisomerase I and ATP-dependent RNA helicase A, dimerize with the TCF7L2
protein and with each other. We uncovered further evidence of a feedback
mechanism using a luciferase reporter approach, including observing expression
differences between alleles for rs7903146. We also found that there was an
allelic difference in the MS results for proteins with less abundant binding,
namely X-ray repair cross-complementing 5 and RPA/p70. Our results point to a
protein complex binding across rs7903146 within TCF7L2 and suggests a possible
mechanism by which this locus confers its T2D risk.

PMCID: PMC4266734
PMID: 24667787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Br J Cancer. 2014 Apr 15;110(8):2144-58. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.53. Epub 2014 Mar 
25.

ERRß signalling through FST and BCAS2 inhibits cellular proliferation in breast
cancer cells.

Sengupta D(1), Bhargava DK(1), Dixit A(2), Sahoo BS(3), Biswas S(4), Biswas G(5),
Mishra SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of Gene Function and Regulation,
Institute of Life Sciences (an Institute under the Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India), Nalco Square, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751023,
India. (2)Drug Design and Discovery, Department of Translational Research and
Technology Development, Institute of Life Sciences (an Institute under the
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India), Nalco Square,
Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751023, India. (3)Confocal Microscopic
Facility, Institute of Life Sciences (an Institute under the Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India), Nalco Square, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha 751023, India. (4)Department of Pathology, Sparsh Hospitals and Critical
Care, A/407, Saheed Nagar, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751007, India. (5)Department of
Medical Oncology, Sparsh Hospitals and Critical Care, A/407, Saheed Nagar,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751007, India.

BACKGROUND: The overexpression of oestrogen-related receptor-ß (ERRß) in breast
cancer patients is correlated with improved prognosis and longer relapse-free
survival, and the level of ERRß mRNA is inversely correlated with the S-phase
fraction of cells from breast cancer patients.
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) cloning of ERRß transcriptional
targets and gel supershift assays identified breast cancer amplified sequence 2
(BCAS2) and Follistatin (FST) as two important downstream genes that help to
regulate tumourigenesis. Confocal microscopy, co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP),
western blotting and quantitative real-time PCR confirmed the involvement of ERRß
in oestrogen signalling.
RESULTS: Overexpressed ERRß induced FST-mediated apoptosis in breast cancer
cells, and E-cadherin expression was also enhanced through upregulation of FST.
However, this anti-proliferative signalling function was challenged by
ERRß-mediated BCAS2 upregulation, which inhibited FST transcription through the
downregulation of ß-catenin/TCF4 recruitment to the FST promoter. Interestingly, 
ERRß-mediated upregulation of BCAS2 downregulated the major G1-S transition
marker cyclin D1, despite the predictable oncogenic properties of BCAS2.
INTERPRETATION: Our study provides the first evidence that ERRß, which is a
coregulator of ERa also acts as a potential tumour-suppressor molecule in breast 
cancer. Our current report also provides novel insights into the entire cascade
of ERRß signalling events, which may lead to BCAS2-mediated blockage of the G1/S 
transition and inhibition of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition through
FST-mediated regulation of E-cadherin. Importantly, matrix metalloprotease 7,
which is a classical mediator of metastasis and E-cadherin cleavage, was also
restricted as a result of ERRß-mediated FST overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3992508
PMID: 24667650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Mol Histol. 2014 Oct;45(5):487-96. doi: 10.1007/s10735-014-9572-5. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Expression patterns of WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling molecules during human tooth
development.

Wang B(1), Li H, Liu Y, Lin X, Lin Y, Wang Y, Hu X, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, People's Republic of 
China, bmwang@fjnu.edu.cn.

The WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling has been demonstrated to play critical roles in mouse
tooth development, but little is known about the status of these molecules in
human embryonic tooth. In this study, expression patterns of WNT/ß-CATENIN
signaling components, including WNT ligands (WNT3, WNT5A), receptors (FZD4, FZD6,
LRP5), transducers (ß-CATENIN), transcription factors (TCF4, LEF1) and
antagonists (DKK1, SOSTDC1) were investigated in human tooth germ at the bud, cap
and bell stages by in situ hybridization. All these genes exhibited similar but
slightly distinct expression patterns in human tooth germ in comparison with
mouse. Furthermore the mRNA expression of these genes in incisors and molars at
the bell stage was also examined by real-time PCR. Our results reveal the status 
of active WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling in the human tooth germ and suggest these
components may also play an essential role in the regulation of human tooth
development.

PMID: 24647585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2014 Nov;30(8):701-6. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2538.

Metabolic, hormonal characteristics and genetic variants of TCF7L2 associated
with development of gestational diabetes mellitus in Mexican women.

Reyes-López R(1), Pérez-Luque E, Malacara JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Médicas, División Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad
de Guanajuato, 20 de Enero 929, Colonia Obregón, León, Guanajuato, 37320, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Variation in TCF7L2 gene is associated with type 2 diabetes and with 
gestational diabetes mellitus in several populations, but there are no data in
Mexican women with gestational diabetes mellitus. In this study, we examined
metabolic and hormonal measurements as well as TCF7L2 genetic variants.
METHODS: We selected 108 pregnant women with normal glucose tolerance and 90 with
gestational diabetes mellitus according to 2010 American Diabetes Association
criteria matched for gestational week. We collected data on blood pressure, body 
mass index (BMI) and concentrations of blood glucose, HbA1c , lipids profile,
insulin and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). The genotyping of rs7903146 and
rs12255372 polymorphisms were made with polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: Actual and pre-gestational BMI, fasting glucose and HbA1c were higher
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02) in
gestational diabetes mellitus women than euglycemic women. No significant
differences were found for lipids, insulin and homeostasis model
assessment-insulin resistance. Gestational diabetes mellitus women had high GLP-1
levels (32 vs 24, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.004) and decreased ß-cell function (266 vs 438,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). The frequency of rs12255372 risk allele in gestational diabetes women
was significantly higher than that in euglycemic women (<U+03C7>² <U+2009>=<U+2009>8.96; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003)
and confers a risk for gestational diabetes mellitus (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.1, 95% CI 2.8-29,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0002; and OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.3, 95% CI 1.6-11.4, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003 based on dominant and
co-dominant model, respectively). The generalized linear model showed that low
beta function, high pre-gestational BMI and rs12255372 risk allele are
independently associated with gestational diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: The elevated GLP-1 levels in gestational diabetes women suggested
some abnormality in insulin secretion. The low ß-cell function, high
pre-gestational BMI and rs12255372 risk allele are risk factors independently
associated with the development of gestational diabetes.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24639413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;20(12):3078-86. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1597. 
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

EZH2 mutations in follicular lymphoma from different ethnic groups and associated
gene expression alterations.

Guo S(1), Chan JK(2), Iqbal J(2), McKeithan T(2), Fu K(2), Meng B(2), Pan Y(2),
Cheuk W(2), Luo D(2), Wang R(2), Zhang W(2), Greiner TC(2), Chan WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of Pathology,
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology, Tianjin
Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NebraskaAuthors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska jochan@coh.org.

PURPOSE: Gain-of-function mutations of enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) occur
frequently in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and in follicular lymphomas.
However, the frequency of EZH2 mutation in Chinese follicular lymphomas and the
potential targets affected by this mutation are unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We determined EZH2 codon 641 mutations in Chinese follicular
lymphomas (n = 124) and compared them with Western follicular lymphomas (n = 70) 
using a sensitive pyrosequencing assay. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was
performed to determine differential gene expression between the mutated versus
unmutated subgroups, and selected genes were validated using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Our results showed similar frequencies of EZH2 codon 641 mutations in
Chinese and Western follicular lymphoma cohorts (16.9% vs. 18.6%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 
0.773), including all five reported mutation variants. We observed significant
association of EZH2 mutation with low morphologic grade follicular lymphomas
(grade 1-2, 23.6% vs. grade 3, 7.7%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.02). EZH2 mutations also
showed significant association with BCL2 rearrangement in the Chinese cohort
(26.8% vs. 8.8%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.008) and combined cohorts (26.3% vs. 9.1%, <U+03C7>(2)
test, P = 0.002). GEP analysis identified several genes, including TCF4, FOXP1,
TCL1A, BIK, and RASSF6P, with significantly lower mRNA expression (P < 0.01) in
mutated cases, and the potential target TCL1A showed consistent results at the
protein level.
CONCLUSION: Similar prevalence of EZH2 mutation in two ethnic groups suggests
shared pathogenetic mechanisms. The much lower frequency of EZH2 mutation in
cases without BCL2 translocation suggests a different pattern of evolution of
this subtype of follicular lymphoma. GEP studies showed a set of differentially
expressed genes and suggested that EZH2 mutation may help to lock the tumor cells
at the germinal center stage of differentiation.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24634383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Sep;54(9):789-99. doi: 10.1002/mc.22146. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Autocrine fibroblast growth factor 18 signaling mediates Wnt-dependent
stimulation of CD44-positive human colorectal adenoma cells.

Koneczny I(1), Schulenburg A(2), Hudec X(1), Knöfler M(3), Holzmann K(1), Piazza 
G(4), Reynolds R(5), Valent P(6), Marian B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Institute of Cancer Research, Medical University
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (2)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department
of Medicine 1, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama.
(5)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Drug Discovery Division, Southern Research 
Institute, Birmingham, Alabama. (6)Department of Medicine 1, Division of
Hematology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Expansion of a stem-like subpopulation with increased growth and survival
potential is thought to drive colorectal tumor growth and progression. We
investigated a CD44-positive (CD44((+))) subpopulation with extended growth and
survival capacity in the human colon adenoma cell line LT97. This subpopulation
expressed elevated levels of fibroblast growth factor 18 (FGF18) and fibroblast
growth factor receptor FGFR3-IIIc. Expression levels of the FGFR3-IIIb, which
does not bind FGF18, were similar in CD44((+)) and CD44((-)). Addition of FGF18
to the medium or its overexpression from an adenoviral vector increased the
colony formation capacity of CD44((+)) threefold, and stimulated phosphorylation 
of ERK and GSK3ß in both total LT97 populations and CD44((+)) cells. FGFR3
signaling blockade by expression of a dominant-negative FGFR3-IIIc mutant led to 
inhibition of both colony formation and down-stream signaling in the CD44((+))
cells. CD44((-)) cells did not respond. Blockade of the wnt-pathway by a
dominant-negative Tcf4-mutant inhibited FGFR3 activation in LT97 cells as well as
in HT29 colorectal cancer cells. The chemical wnt-inhibitor sulindac sulfide
amide inhibited expression of FGF18 and FGFR3-IIIc and led to inhibition of
receptor activation to less than 30% of control treated cells, both in LT97 and
HT29 cultures. Our results demonstrate that an FGF18/FGFR3-IIIc autocrine growth 
and survival loop is up-regulated in a wnt-dependent manner and drives tumor cell
growth in a subpopulation of colon adenoma cells. This subpopulation can be
regarded as a precursor of colon cancer development and can be targeted for
CRC-prevention by blocking either wnt- or FGFR3-signaling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162857 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 24619956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 18;289(16):11230-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.544999. Epub
2014 Mar 10.

Insulin receptor substrate 1/2 (IRS1/2) regulates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through
blocking autophagic degradation of dishevelled2.

Geng Y(1), Ju Y, Ren F, Qiu Y, Tomita Y, Tomoeda M, Kishida M, Wang Y, Jin L, Su 
F, Wei C, Jia B, Li Y, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Wnt signaling plays a pivotal role in cell proliferation, tissue homeostasis, and
tumorigenesis. Dishevelled (Dvl) is a central node of Wnt signaling. Insulin
receptor substrates (IRSs), as a critical component of insulin signaling, are
involved in cell proliferation, metabolism, and cancer development. In this
study, we report that IRS1/2 promotes Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by stabilizing
Dvl2. We found that IRS1/2 interacts with Dvl2. Overexpression of IRS1/2
increased the protein level of Dvl2 and promoted canonical Wnt signaling, as
evidenced by the increased T cell-specific factor 4 transcriptional activity and 
the up-regulation of expression of CYCLIN D1 and c-MYC, two Wnt target genes
critical for cell growth, whereas depletion of IRS1/2 reduced the level of Dvl2
and attenuated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Biochemical analyses revealed that IRS1/2
decreased Lys-63-linked ubiquitination of Dvl2 and stabilized Dvl2 protein via
suppressing its autophagy-mediated degradation. We further revealed that IRS1/2
blocks autophagy-induced formation of the Dvl2-p62/SQSTM1 complex, resulting in
disabled association of Dvl2 to autophagosomes. We demonstrated that IRS1/2
promoted the induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell
proliferation in response to Wnt stimulation, whereas depletion of Dvl2 impaired 
the IRS1/2-mediated EMT and cell growth. Our findings revealed that IRS1/2
promotes EMT and cell proliferation through stabilizing Dvl2.

PMCID: PMC4036261
PMID: 24616100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2014 May;12(4):210-9. doi: 10.1089/met.2014.0004. Epub 
2014 Mar 10.

Relationships between TCF7L2 genetic polymorphisms and polycystic ovary syndrome 
risk: a meta-analysis.

Shen WJ(1), Li TR, Hu YJ, Liu HB, Song M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Gynecology, The First Hospital of China Medical University ,
Shenyang, People's Republic of China .

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between
genetic polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
risk.
METHODS: The PubMed, Centralised Information Service for Complementary Medicine
(CISCOM), Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), Web 
of Science, Google Scholar, EBSCO, Cochrane Library, and Common Biorepository
Model (CBM) databases were searched for relevant articles published before
November 1st, 2013, without language restrictions. Meta-analysis was conducted
using the STATA 12.0 software. The relationships were evaluated by calculating
the pooled odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Seven
case-control studies with a total 2458 PCOS patients and 5109 healthy subjects'
met our inclusion criteria for qualitative data analysis. Two common
polymorphisms (rs7903146 C<U+2192>T and rs12255372 G<U+2192>T) in the TCF7L2 gene were
assessed.
RESULTS: The results of our meta-analysis suggested that TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms might be strongly correlated with an increased risk of PCOS (allele
model, OR=1.33, 95% CI=1.15-1.54, P<0.001; dominant model, OR=1.40, 95%
CI=1.12-1.75, P=0.003), especially for the rs7903146 C<U+2192>T polymorphism. A subgroup
analysis was done to investigate the effect of ethnicity on an individual's risk 
of PCOS. Our results revealed positive significant correlations between TCF7L2
genetic polymorphisms and an increased risk of PCOS among Caucasians (allele
model, OR=1.26, 95% CI=1.08-1.47, P=0.004; dominant model, OR=1.33, 95%
CI=1.00-1.76, P=0.046) and Asians (allele model, OR=2.02, 95% CI=1.42-2.89,
P<0.001; dominant model, OR=2.02, 95% CI=1.40-2.92, P<0.001), but not among
Africans (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide convincing evidence that TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms may contribute to susceptibility to PCOS, especially for the
rs7903146 C<U+2192>T polymorphism among Caucasians and Asians.

PMID: 24611738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e91264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091264. eCollection 
2014.

High frequency of fusion transcripts involving TCF7L2 in colorectal cancer: novel
fusion partner and splice variants.

Nome T(1), Hoff AM(1), Bakken AC(1), Rognum TO(2), Nesbakken A(3), Skotheim
RI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research, Norwegian
Radium Hospital - Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer
Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (2)University
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of forensic pathology and clinical forensic
medicine, Division for forensic medicine, The Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, Oslo, Norway. (3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Oslo
University Hospital-Aker, Oslo, Norway.

VTI1A-TCF7L2 was reported as a recurrent fusion gene in colorectal cancer (CRC), 
found to be expressed in three out of 97 primary cancers, and one cell line,
NCI-H508, where a genomic deletion joins the two genes [1]. To investigate this
fusion further, we analyzed high-throughput DNA and RNA sequencing data from
seven CRC cell lines, and identified the gene RP11-57H14.3 (ENSG00000225292) as a
novel fusion partner for TCF7L2. The fusion was discovered from both genome and
transcriptome data in the HCT116 cell line. By triplicate nested RT-PCR, we
tested both the novel fusion transcript and VTI1A-TCF7L2 for expression in a
series of 106 CRC tissues, 21 CRC cell lines, 14 normal colonic mucosa, and 20
normal tissues from miscellaneous anatomical sites. Altogether, 42% and 45% of
the CRC samples expressed VTI1A-TCF7L2 and TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3 fusion
transcripts, respectively. The fusion transcripts were both seen in 29% of the
normal colonic mucosa samples, and in 25% and 75% of the tested normal tissues
from other organs, revealing that the TCF7L2 fusion transcripts are neither
specific to cancer nor to the colon and rectum. Seven different splice variants
were detected for the VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion, of which three are novel. Four
different splice variants were detected for the TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3 fusion. In
conclusion, we have identified novel variants of VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion transcripts,
including a novel fusion partner gene, RP11-57H14.3, and demonstrated detectable 
levels in a large fraction of CRC samples, as well as in normal colonic mucosa
and other tissue types. We suggest that the fusion transcripts observed in a high
frequency of samples are transcription induced chimeras that are expressed at low
levels in most samples. The similar fusion transcripts induced by genomic
rearrangements observed in individual cancer cell lines may yet have oncogenic
potential as suggested in the original study by Bass et al.

PMCID: PMC3946716
PMID: 24608966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Endocrinology. 2014 May;155(5):1908-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2042. Epub 2014 Feb 
26.

Wnt-dependent T-cell factor-4 controls human etravillous trophoblast motility.

Meinhardt G(1), Haider S, Haslinger P, Proestling K, Fiala C, Pollheimer J,
Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine (G.M., S.H., P.H., J.P., 
M.K.), Reproductive Biology Unit, and Department of Gynecology (K.P.), Medical
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; and Gynmed Clinic (C.F.), A-1150
Vienna, Austria.

Formation of migratory extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) is critical for human
placentation and hence embryonic development. However, key regulatory growth
factors, hormones, and nuclear proteins controlling the particular
differentiation process remain poorly understood. Here, the role of the Wingless 
(Wnt)-dependent transcription factor T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) in proliferation and
motility was investigated using different trophoblast cell models.
Immunofluorescence of first-trimester placental tissues revealed induction of
TCF-4 and nuclear recruitment of its coactivator ß-catenin in nonproliferating
EVTs, whereas membrane-associated ß-catenin decreased upon differentiation. In
addition, EVTs expressed the TCF-4/ß-catenin coactivator Pygopus 2 as well as
repressors of the Groucho/transducin-like enhancer of split family. Western
blotting revealed Pygopus 2 expression and up-regulation of integrin a1 and
nuclear TCF-4 in purified first-trimester cytotrophoblasts (CTBs) differentiating
on fibronectin. Concomitantly, elevated TCF-4 mRNA, quantitated by real-time PCR,
and increased TCF-dependent luciferase reporter activity were noticed in EVTs of 
villous explant cultures and differentiated primary CTBs. Gene silencing using
specific small interfering RNA decreased TCF-4 transcript and protein levels,
TCF-dependent reporter activity as well as basal and Wnt3a-stimulated migration
of trophoblastic SGHPL-5 cells and primary CTBs through fibronectin-coated
transwells. In contrast, proliferation of SGHPL-5 cells and primary cells,
measured by cumulative cell numbers and 5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine labeling,
respectively, was not affected. Moreover, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of TCF-4
in primary CTBs diminished markers of the differentiated EVT, such as integrin a1
and a5, Snail1, and Notch2. In summary, the data suggest that Wnt/TCF-4-dependent
signaling could play a role in EVT differentiation promoting motility and
expression of promigratory genes.

PMID: 24605829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Immunol. 2014 Jun;59(2):128-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.02.002. Epub 2014 
Mar 4.

A Wnt/ß-catenin negative feedback loop represses TLR-triggered inflammatory
responses in alveolar epithelial cells.

Li Y(1), Shi J(1), Yang J(1), Ma Y(1), Cheng L(1), Zeng J(1), Hao X(1), Ma C(1), 
Wang Y(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization of
Special Biological Resources in the Western China, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 
Ningxia 750021, China; College of Life Science, Ningxia University, Yinchuan,
Ningxia 750021, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for
Conservation and Utilization of Special Biological Resources in the Western
China, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China; College of Life
Science, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China. Electronic address:
lxm1966@nxu.edu.cn.

Increasing evidence has demonstrated that the epithelial cells in the lung play
crucial roles in regulating certain inflammatory responses by modulating Wnt
signaling during microbial infection. However, the anti-microbial functions of
Wnt signaling in alveolar epithelial cells remain elusive. In this report, we
show that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is repressed in A549 alveolar epithelial cells 
during a Toll-like receptor ligand stimulation with Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus 
Calmette-Guerin (BCG) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In addition to activating TLR 
signaling, a stimulation of BCG or LPS led to the up-regulation of a Wnt receptor
Frizzled-1, cytosolic GSK3ß and Axin, and the down-regulation of nuclear
ß-catenin, lymphoid enhancer factor 1 and transcription factor 4. While an
enhancement of ß-catenin activity suppressed the TLR signal response, and
substantially led to alleviate the TLR ligand-induced pro-inflammatory responses.
Importantly, gain and loss of function studies by overexpressing or silencing of 
TLR signaling adaptor, myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88)
further demonstrated an inverse relationship between TLR signaling and canonical 
Wnt signaling in A549 cells. These data imply that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling acts
as a negative feedback loop to suppress inflammation in alveolar epithelial
cells, and averts cell injury from excessive inflammatory reactions. This study
thus reveals a novel immunoregulatory mechanism in alveolar epithelial cells in
response to bacterial infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24603120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jul;96(1):83-91. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB1013-559R. Epub 2014 Mar
5.

Interleukin-3-mediated regulation of ß-catenin in myeloid transformation and
acute myeloid leukemia.

Sadras T(1), Perugini M(2), Kok CH(2), Iarossi DG(3), Heatley SL(4), Brumatti
G(5), Samuel MS(6), To LB(7), Lewis ID(2), Lopez AF(8), Ekert PG(5), Ramshaw
HS(4), D'Andrea RJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Molecular and Biomedical Science and
Centre for Stem Cell Research and Departments of Haematology and Department of
Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The University of South Australia, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (2)Centre for Cancer Biology and Departments of Haematology
and School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia; (3)Centre for Cancer Biology and Departments of Haematology and
Department of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The University of South Australia,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (4)Centre for Cancer Biology and
Immunology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (5)Division of
Cell Signalling and Cell Death, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia; and. (6)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Molecular
and Biomedical Science and Centre for Stem Cell Research and Immunology, SA
Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (7)Departments of Haematology
and School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia; (8)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Medicine, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Immunology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (9)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of 
Molecular and Biomedical Science and Centre for Stem Cell Research and
Departments of Haematology and Department of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia School of
Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
richard.dandrea@unisa.edu.au.

Aberrant activation of ß-catenin is a common event in AML and is an independent
predictor of poor prognosis. Although increased ß-catenin signaling in AML has
been associated with oncogenic translocation products and activating mutations in
the FLT3R, the mechanisms that activate ß-catenin in AML more broadly are still
unclear. Here, we describe a novel link between IL-3 signaling and the regulation
of ß-catenin in myeloid transformation and AML. In a murine model of HoxB8 and
IL-3 cooperation, we show that ß-catenin protein levels are modulated by IL-3 and
that Cre-induced deletion of ß-catenin abolishes IL-3-dependent growth and colony
formation. In IL-3-dependent leukemic TF-1.8 cells, we observed increased
ß-catenin protein levels and nuclear localization in response to IL-3, and this
correlated with transcriptional induction of ß-catenin target genes. Furthermore,
IL-3 promoted ß-catenin accumulation in a subset of AML patient samples, and
gene-expression profiling of these cells revealed induction of WNT/ß-catenin and 
TCF4 gene signatures in an IL-3-dependent manner. This study is the first to link
ß-catenin activation to IL-3 and suggests that targeting IL-3 signaling may be an
effective approach for the inhibition of ß-catenin activity in some patients with
AML.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24598054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Trends Mol Med. 2014 Jun;20(6):322-31. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2014.01.010. Epub
2014 Mar 1.

The emerging roles of TCF4 in disease and development.

Forrest MP(1), Hill MJ(1), Quantock AJ(2), Martin-Rendon E(3), Blake DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK. (2)Structural Biophysics Group, School of Optometry and Vision
Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. (3)Nuffield Division of Clinical
Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK; Stem Cell Research Laboratory, NHS Blood and Transplant, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK. (4)Institute of Psychological Medicine and
Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. Electronic address:
blakedj@cardiff.ac.uk.

Genome-wide association studies have identified common variants in transcription 
factor 4 (TCF4) as susceptibility loci for schizophrenia, Fuchs' endothelial
corneal dystrophy, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. By contrast, rare TCF4
mutations cause Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, a disorder characterized by intellectual
disability and developmental delay, and have also been described in patients with
other neurodevelopmental disorders. TCF4 therefore sits at the nexus between
common and rare disorders. TCF4 interacts with other basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, forming transcriptional networks that regulate the differentiation of
several distinct cell types. Here, we review the role of TCF4 in these seemingly 
diverse disorders and discuss recent data implicating TCF4 as an important
regulator of neurodevelopment and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24594265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Genes Dev. 2014 Mar 15;28(6):622-36. doi: 10.1101/gad.233239.113. Epub 2014 Mar
3.

Molecular basis underlying histone H3 lysine-arginine methylation pattern readout
by Spin/Ssty repeats of Spindlin1.

Su X(1), Zhu G, Ding X, Lee SY, Dou Y, Zhu B, Wu W, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China;

Histone modification patterns and their combinatorial readout have emerged as a
fundamental mechanism for epigenetic regulation. Here we characterized Spindlin1 
as a histone effector that senses a cis-tail histone H3 methylation pattern
involving trimethyllysine 4 (H3K4me3) and asymmetric dimethylarginine 8
(H3R8me2a) marks. Spindlin1 consists of triple tudor-like Spin/Ssty repeats.
Cocrystal structure determination established concurrent recognition of H3K4me3
and H3R8me2a by Spin/Ssty repeats 2 and 1, respectively. Both H3K4me3 and
H3R8me2a are recognized using an "insertion cavity" recognition mode,
contributing to a methylation state-specific layer of regulation. In vivo
functional studies suggest that Spindlin1 activates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
downstream from protein arginine methyltransferase 2 (PRMT2) and the MLL complex,
which together are capable of generating a specific H3 "K4me3-R8me2a" pattern.
Mutagenesis of Spindlin1 reader pockets impairs activation of Wnt target genes.
Taken together, our work connects a histone "lysine-arginine" methylation pattern
readout by Spindlin1-to-Wnt signaling at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC3967050
PMID: 24589551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jun;41(6):4063-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3275-6. Epub 2014
Feb 27.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism and clinical phenotype
in end-stage renal disease patients.

Buraczynska M(1), Zukowski P, Ksiazek P, Kuczmaszewska A, Janicka J, Zaluska W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for DNA Analysis and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of
Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Dr K. Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin,
Poland, monika.buraczynska@umlub.pl.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been associated 
with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in different populations. Here we
investigated the potential association of the rs7903146 polymorphism in the
TCF7L2 gene with clinical profile of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients. We 
examined a cohort of 1065 ESRD patients with diabetic and non-diabetic renal
disease. The control group consisted of 924 healthy individuals. All subjects
were genotyped for the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism by polymerase
chain reaction. The genotype distribution and allele frequencies were
significantly different between ESRD patients and controls (p < 0.01). The OR for
the TT genotype was 2.81 (95% CI 2.08-3.79). Genotype and allele frequencies were
compared between subgroups of patients with different clinical phenotypes. The
frequency of the T allele was significantly higher in patients with diabetic
nephropathy versus non-diabetic renal disease (p = 0.007, OR 1.70, 95% CI
1.36-2.11). The statistically significant differences were demonstrated between
patients with and without cardiovascular disease, with the OR for T allele 1.57
(95% CI 1.31-1.90). The odds ratio for TT genotype was 2.38 (95% CI 1.62-3.51).
In our study the T allele of the rs7903146 SNP in the TCF7L2 gene confers the
risk of developing diabetic nephropathy. We described for the first time a strong
relationship between the TCF7L2 gene variant rs7903146 and cardiovascular disease
in end-stage renal disease patients.

PMCID: PMC4033800
PMID: 24574000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 8:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S8-S3. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

QChIPat: a quantitative method to identify distinct binding patterns for two
biological ChIP-seq samples in different experimental conditions.

Liu B, Yi J, Sv A, Lan X, Ma Y, Huang TH, Leone G, Jin VX.

BACKGROUND: Many computational programs have been developed to identify enriched 
regions for a single biological ChIP-seq sample. Given that many biological
questions are often asked to compare the difference between two different
conditions, it is important to develop new programs that address the comparison
of two biological ChIP-seq samples. Despite several programs designed to address 
this question, these programs suffer from some drawbacks, such as inability to
distinguish whether the identified differential enriched regions are indeed
significantly enriched, lack of distinguishing binding patterns, and neglect of
the normalization between samples.
RESULTS: In this study, we developed a novel quantitative method for comparing
two biological ChIP-seq samples, called QChIPat. Our method employs a new global 
normalization method: nonparametric empirical Bayes (NEB) correction
normalization, utilizes pre-defined enriched regions identified from
single-sample peak calling programs, uses statistical methods to define
differential enriched regions, then defines binding (histone modification)
pattern information for those differential enriched regions. Our program was
tested on a benchmark data: histone modifications data used by ChIPDiffs. It was 
then applied on two study cases: one to identify differential histone
modification sites for ChIP-seq of H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 data in AKT1-transfected 
MCF10A cells; the other to identify differential binding sites for ChIP-seq of
TCF7L2 data in MCF7 and PANC1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Several advantages of our program include: 1) it considers a control
(or input) experiment; 2) it incorporates a novel global normalization strategy: 
nonparametric empirical Bayes correction normalization; 3) it provides the
binding pattern information among different enriched regions. QChIPat is
implemented in R, Perl and C++, and has been tested under Linux. The R package is
available at http://motif.bmi.ohio-state.edu/QChIPat.

PMCID: PMC4042236
PMID: 24564479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;16(3):268-80. doi: 10.1038/ncb2910.

MicroRNA-146a directs the symmetric division of Snail-dominant colorectal cancer 
stem cells.

Hwang WL, Jiang JK, Yang SH, Huang TS, Lan HY, Teng HW, Yang CY, Tsai YP, Lin CH,
Wang HW, Yang MH.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;16(4):383.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;16(3):212-4.

Asymmetrical cell division (ACD) maintains the proper number of stem cells to
ensure self-renewal. In cancer cells, the deregulation of ACD disrupts the
homeostasis of the stem cell pool and promotes tumour growth. However, this
mechanism is unclear. Here, we show a reduction of ACD in spheroid-derived
colorectal cancer stem cells (CRCSCs) compared with differentiated cancer cells. 
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) inducer Snail is responsible for the 
ACD-to-symmetrical cell division (SCD) switch in CRCSCs. Mechanistically, Snail
induces the expression of microRNA-146a (miR-146a) through the ß-catenin-TCF4
complex. miR-146a targets Numb to stabilize ß-catenin, which forms a feedback
circuit to maintain Wnt activity and directs SCD. Interference with the
Snail-miR-146aß-catenin loop by inhibiting the MEK or Wnt activity reduces the
symmetrical division of CRCSCs and attenuates tumorigenicity. In colorectal
cancer patients, the Snail(High)Numb(Low) profile is correlated with cetuximab
resistance and a poorer prognosis. This study elucidates a unique mechanism of
EMT-induced CRCSC expansion.

PMID: 24561623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2014 Feb;122(2):71-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1363231. 
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation variations caused by chronic
glucolipotoxicity in beta-cells.

Hu Y(1), Xu XH(1), He K(1), Zhang LL(1), Wang SK(2), Pan YQ(3), He BS(3), Feng
TT(1), Mao XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Science and Education,
Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. 
(3)Central Laboratory, Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

There is a growing body of literature suggesting the role of interactions between
genes and the environment in development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
However, the interplay between environment and genetic in developing and
progressing T2MD is not fully understood. To determine the effects of
high-glucose-lipid on the status of DNA methylation in beta cells, and clarify
the mechanism of glucolipotoxicity on beta-cell deterioration, the DNA
methylation profile was detected in beta-cells cultured with high-glucose-lipid
medium.We utilized a high throughput NimbleGen RN34 CpG Island & Promoter
Microarray to investigate the DNA methylation profile in beta-cells cultured with
high-glucose-lipid medium. To validate the results of microarray, the
immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) PCR was used to test the methylation status of some
selected genes. The mRNA and protein expression of insulin and Tcf7l2 in these
cells were quantified by RT-PCR and western blot, respectively.We have identified
a lot of loci which experienced aberrant DNA methylation in beta-cells cultured
with high-glucose-lipid medium. The results of MeDIP PCR were consistency to the 
microarray. An opposite regulation in transcription and translation of Tcf7l2
gene was found. Furthermore, the insulin mRNA and protein expression in
beta-cells also decreased after cultured with high-glucose-lipid medium compared 
with the control cells.We conclude that chronic glucolipotoxicity could induce
aberrant DNA methylation of some genes and may affect these genes expression in
beta-cells, which might contribute to beta-cell function failure in T2DM and be
helpful to explain, at least partially, the mechanism of glucolipotoxicity on
beta-cells deterioration.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24554506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 4;111(9):3472-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309342111.
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Shp2/MAPK signaling controls goblet/paneth cell fate decisions in the intestine.

Heuberger J(1), Kosel F, Qi J, Grossmann KS, Rajewsky K, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction in Development and Cancer and Immune
Regulation and Cancer, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany.

In the development of the mammalian intestine, Notch and Wnt/ß-catenin signals
control stem cell maintenance and their differentiation into absorptive and
secretory cells. Mechanisms that regulate differentiation of progenitors into the
three secretory lineages, goblet, paneth, or enteroendocrine cells, are not fully
understood. Using conditional mutagenesis in mice, we observed that Shp2-mediated
MAPK signaling determines the choice between paneth and goblet cell fates and
also affects stem cells, which express the leucine-rich repeat-containing
receptor 5 (Lgr5). Ablation of the tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in the intestinal
epithelium reduced MAPK signaling and led to a reduction of goblet cells while
promoting paneth cell development. Conversely, conditional mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase 1 (Mek1) activation rescued the Shp2 phenotype, promoted
goblet cell and inhibited paneth cell generation. The Shp2 mutation also expanded
Lgr5+ stem cell niches, which could be restricted by activated Mek1 signaling.
Changes of Lgr5+ stem cell quantities were accompanied by alterations of paneth
cells, indicating that Shp2/MAPK signaling might affect stem cell niches directly
or via paneth cells. Remarkably, inhibition of MAPK signaling in intestinal
organoids and cultured cells changed the relative abundance of Tcf4 isoforms and 
by this, promoted Wnt/ß-catenin activity. The data thus show that Shp2-mediated
MAPK signaling controls the choice between goblet and paneth cell fates by
regulating Wnt/ß-catenin activity.

PMCID: PMC3948231
PMID: 24550486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Fertil Steril. 2014 May;101(5):1441-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.01.017.
Epub 2014 Feb 15.

Inhibition of canonical WNT signaling attenuates human leiomyoma cell growth.

Ono M(1), Yin P(1), Navarro A(1), Moravek MB(1), Coon V JS(1), Druschitz SA(1),
Gottardi CJ(2), Bulun SE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine at
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (2)Department of Medicine, Feinberg
School of Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (3)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address: Sbulun@nmh.org.

Comment in
    Fertil Steril. 2014 May;101(5):1254.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of three WNT/ß-catenin pathway
inhibitors-inhibitor of ß-catenin and TCF4 (ICAT), niclosamide, and XAV939-on the
proliferation of primary cultures of human uterine leiomyoma cells.
DESIGN: Prospective study of human leiomyoma cells obtained from myomectomy or
hysterectomy.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Women (n = 38) aged 27-53 years undergoing surgery.
INTERVENTION(S): Adenoviral ICAT overexpression or treatment with varying
concentrations of niclosamide or XAV939.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Cell proliferation, cell death, WNT/-catenin target gene
expression or reporter gene regulation, ß-catenin levels, and cellular
localization.
RESULT(S): Inhibitor of ß-catenin and TCF4, niclosamide, or XAV939 inhibit
WNT/ß-catenin pathway activation and exert antiproliferative effects in primary
cultures of human leiomyoma cells.
CONCLUSION(S): Three WNT/-catenin pathway inhibitors specifically block human
leiomyoma growth and proliferation, suggesting that the canonical WNT pathway may
be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of uterine leiomyoma. Our
findings provide rationale for further preclinical and clinical evaluation of
ICAT, niclosamide, and XAV939 as candidate antitumor agents for uterine
leiomyoma.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4008647
PMID: 24534281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):8881-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.538835. Epub 2014
Feb 14.

Thymine DNA glycosylase is a positive regulator of Wnt signaling in colorectal
cancer.

Xu X(1), Yu T, Shi J, Chen X, Zhang W, Lin T, Liu Z, Wang Y, Zeng Z, Wang C, Li
M, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506.

Wnt signaling plays an important role in colorectal cancer (CRC). Although the
mechanisms of ß-catenin degradation have been well studied, the mechanism by
which ß-catenin activates transcription is still not fully understood. While
screening a panel of DNA demethylases, we found that thymine DNA glycosylase
(TDG) up-regulated Wnt signaling. TDG interacts with the transcription factor
TCF4 and coactivator CREB-binding protein/p300 in the Wnt pathway. Knocking down 
TDG by shRNAs inhibited the proliferation of CRC cells in vitro and in vivo. In
CRC patients, TDG levels were significantly higher in tumor tissues than in the
adjacent normal tissues. These results suggest that TDG warrants consideration as
a potential biomarker for CRC and as a target for CRC treatment.

PMCID: PMC3979391
PMID: 24532795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Mar;103(3):e3-6. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.051. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism rs7903146 is associated 
with stroke in type 2 diabetes patients with long disease duration.

Choi HJ(1), Lee DH(1), Jeon HJ(1), Kim DS(2), Lee YH(2), Oh T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University College of
Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Chungbuk
National University College of Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University College of
Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
tgohkjs@chungbuk.ac.kr.

Associations between TCF7L2 SNP and diabetic complications and diabetes-related
factors were investigated. Subjects with rs7903146 variant had significantly
higher prevalence of stroke (24.1% vs. 11.1%; P=0.039) among subjects exhibiting 
a long disease duration (=10 years). In conclusion, the TCF7L2 SNP variant may
confer a higher risk of stroke in diabetic patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24529562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(1):215-20.

Expression of the E-cadherin/ß-catenin/tcf-4 pathway in gastric diseases with
relation to Helicobacter pylori infection: clinical and pathological
implications.

Yu XW(1), Xu Q, Xu Y, Gong YH, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Etiology and Screening Department of Cancer Institute and General
Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, and Key
Laboratory of Cancer Etiology and Prevention (China Medical University), Liaoning
Provincial Education Department, Shenyang, China E-mail : yyuan@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the expression of E-cadherin, ß-catenin, and
transcription factor 4 (TCF4) proteins in gastric diseases with relation to
Helicobacter pylori infection.
METHODS: A total of 309 patients including 60 with superficial gastritis (SG), 57
with atrophic gastritis (AG) and 192 with gastric cancer (GC), were enrolled. The
expression of E-cadherin, ß-catenin, TCF4 proteins in the gastric mucosa was
detected by immunohistochemistry and H. pylori infection by immunohistochemistry 
and PCR.
RESULTS: The expression rates of E-cadherin were significantly higher in SG and
AG than in GC (P<0.01), while those of ß-catenin in the nucleus were
significantly lower in SG and AG than in GC (P<0.05). In GC cases, the expression
rates of E-cadherin, ß-catenin and TCF4 were significantly higher in the
intestinal type than in the diffuse type (P<0.05). In GC patients, the expression
rate of E-cadherin was significantly higher in the presence of H. pylori than in 
the absence of infection (P=0.011). Moreover, the expression level of TCF4 and
ß-catenin protein was significantly higher in the nucleus and cytoplasm in H.
pylori positive than in H. pylori negative GC patients, especially in those with 
the intestinal type (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The expression of E-cadherin and ß-catenin progressively decreases
during the process of GC tumorigenesis, while overexpression of TCF4 occurs. H.
pylori infection is associated with a significant increase in the expression of
E-cadherin and ß-catenin in the cytoplasm and nucleus in GC patients, especially 
those with the intestinal type.

PMID: 24528029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Nov;22(11):1243-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.17. Epub 2014 Feb
12.

Redundant enhancers and causal variants in the TCF7L2 gene.

Ruiz-Narváez EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Slone Epidemiology Center at Boston University, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA.

PMCID: PMC4200428
PMID: 24518834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014 Apr 1;132(4):377-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.7993.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy: a neurodegenerative disorder?

Zhu AY(1), Eberhart CG(2), Jun AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. (2)Wilmer
Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.

PMCID: PMC4324604
PMID: 24504267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:351895. doi: 10.1155/2013/351895. Epub 2013 Dec
31.

Tanshinol attenuates the deleterious effects of oxidative stress on osteoblastic 
differentiation via Wnt/FoxO3a signaling.

Yang Y(1), Su Y(2), Wang D(3), Chen Y(2), Wu T(2), Li G(4), Sun X(3), Cui L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, State Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China ; Department of Pharmacology, Guangdong Key
Laboratory for R&D of Natural Drug, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang 524023, 
China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Guangdong Key Laboratory for R&D of Natural
Drug, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang 524023, China. (3)The Key Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. (4)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Faculty of
Medicine, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

There is now increasing evidence which suggests a pivotal role for oxidative
stress in the development and progression of osteoporosis. We confirm herein the 
protective effects of natural antioxidant Tanshinol against oxidative stress in
osteoblastic differentiation and the underlying mechanism. Our results show that 
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) leads to accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
decrease in cell viability, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in a
caspase-3-dependent manner, and inhibition of osteoblastic differentiation.
Tanshinol reverses these deleterious consequence triggered by oxidative stress.
Moreover, under the condition of oxidative stress, Tanshinol suppresses the
activation of FoxO3a transcription factor and expressions of its target genes
Gadd45a and catalase (CAT) and simultaneously counteracts the inhibition of Wnt
signalling and expressions of target genes Axin2, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and
Osteoprotegerin (OPG). The findings are further consolidated using FoxO3a siRNA
interference and overexpression of Tcf4. The results illustrate that Tanshinol
attenuates oxidative stress via down-regulation of FoxO3a signaling, and rescues 
the decrease of osteoblastic differentiation through upregulation of Wnt signal
under oxidative stress. The present findings suggest that the beneficial effects 
of Tanshinol may be adopted as a novel therapeutic approach in recently
recognized conditions of niche targeting osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC3893867
PMID: 24489983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Mar;103(3):e40-3. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.040. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Gender-dependent associations of CDKN2A/2B, KCNJ11, POLI, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2
variants with type 2 diabetes in (North African) Tunisian Arabs.

Turki A(1), Al-Zaben GS(2), Khirallah M(3), Marmouch H(4), Mahjoub T(1), Almawi
WY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Biology and Genetics of Hematological and Autoimmune
diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir,
Tunisia. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, 
Bahrain. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir,
Tunisia. (4)Department of Endocrinology, CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir,
Tunisia. (5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, 
Bahrain. Electronic address: wassim@agu.edu.bh.

We investigated the impact of gender on T2DM association with confirmed
susceptibility loci. CDKN2A/2B rs10811661, KCNJ11 rs5219, and TCF7L2 rs7903146
were associated with T2DM in females, while POLI rs488846 was associated with
T2DM among males; the association of SLC30A8 rs13266634 and TCF7L2 rs4506565,
rs12243326, and rs12255372 with T2DM was gender-independent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24485399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Oncol. 2014 Apr;44(4):1341-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2279. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Stimulation of ß-catenin and colon cancer cell growth by the KDM4B histone
demethylase.

Berry WL(1), Kim TD(1), Janknecht R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The linchpin of colorectal cancer is the oncoprotein and transcriptional cofactor
ß-catenin, whose overexpression is causative for the neoplastic transformation of
colon cells. However, the molecular details of ß-catenin dependent gene
transcription in cancer cells are still not comprehensively explored. Here, we
show that the histone demethylase KDM4B was upregulated in colon and rectal
adenocarcinomas and required for efficient growth and clonogenic activity of
human HT-29 colon cancer cells. Moreover, KDM4B formed complexes with ß-catenin
in vitro and in vivo, which involved its central amino acids 353-740. In
addition, KDM4B also interacted with the DNA-binding protein TCF4, which is the
main factor recruiting ß-catenin to chromatin in the intestine. KDM4B
downregulation resulted in reduced expression of the ß-catenin/TCF4 target genes 
JUN, MYC and Cyclin D1, all of which encode for oncoproteins. Collectively, our
data indicate that KDM4B overexpression supports ß-catenin mediated gene
transcription and thereby contributes to the genesis of colorectal tumors.
Accordingly, inhibition of the KDM4B histone demethylase may represent a novel
avenue of fighting colorectal cancer, one of the major causes of cancer death
throughout the world.

PMID: 24481461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cell Signal. 2014 May;26(5):1048-59. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.022. Epub
2014 Jan 25.

Mutual inhibition between YAP and SRSF1 maintains long non-coding RNA,
Malat1-induced tumourigenesis in liver cancer.

Wang J(1), Wang H(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhen N(1), Zhang L(1), Qiao Y(4), Weng W(1),
Liu X(5), Ma L(1), Xiao W(3), Yu W(1), Chu Q(1), Pan Q(3), Sun F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University,
Shanghai 200072, China; Institute of Bioengineering, College of Life Science and 
Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (3)Department of Central
Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai
200072, China. (4)School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (5)Faculty of Medical Laboratory Science,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai 200072, China. Electronic address:
sunfenyong@126.com.

Emerging studies have revealed that Malat1 is overexpressed in many malignant
diseases, including liver cancer, and contributes to enhancing cell migration or 
facilitating proliferation. However, the mechanism underlying its regulation has 
largely remained elusive. Here, we characterised the oncoprotein Yes-associated
protein (YAP), which up-regulated metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma
transcript 1 (Malat1) expression at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional
levels, whereas serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) played an opposing
role. SRSF1 inhibited YAP activity by preventing its co-occupation with
TCF/ß-catenin on the Malat1 promoter. In contrast, overexpression of YAP impaired
the nuclear retention of both SRSF1 and itself via an interaction with Angiomotin
(AMOT). This effect removed the inhibitory role of SRSF1 on Malat1 in the
nucleus. Furthermore, higher expression of YAP was consistent with a lower SRSF1 
nuclear accumulation in human liver cancer tissues. We also revealed that
overexpression of YAP combined with a knockdown of SRSF1 resulted in
conspicuously enhanced transwell cell mobility, accelerated tumour growth rate,
and loss of body weight in a tail vein-injected mouse models. Taken together,
these data provided a novel mechanism underlying the balance between SRSF1, YAP
and Malat1 and uncovered a new role of YAP in regulating long non-coding RNA
(lncRNA). Thus, disrupting the interaction between YAP and SRSF1 may serve as a
crucial therapeutic method in liver cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24468535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086582. eCollection
2014.

Identification of two Wnt-responsive elements in the intron of RING finger
protein 43 (RNF43) gene.

Takahashi N(1), Yamaguchi K(1), Ikenoue T(1), Fujii T(1), Furukawa Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Genome Research, Advanced Clinical Research Center,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

RING finger protein 43 (RNF43), an E3-type ubiquitin ligase, is frequently
up-regulated in human colorectal cancer. It has been shown that expression of
RNF43 is regulated by the Wnt-signaling pathway. However the regulatory region(s)
for its transcriptional activation has not been clarified. In this study, we have
shown for the first time that RNF43 is a direct target of TCF4/ß-catenin complex,
and that its expression is regulated by a regulatory region containing two
Wnt-responsive elements (WREs) in intron2. A reporter gene assay revealed that
nucleotide substitutions in the WREs decreased the reporter activity in colon
cancer cells, suggesting that both WREs are involved in the transcriptional
activation. Knockdown of ß-catenin by siRNA suppressed the reporter activity. In 
addition, ChIP assay showed that both elements associate with TCF4/ß-catenin
complex in colon cancer cells. These data indicate that expression of RNF43 is
regulated by the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway through binding of the WREs with
TCF4/ß-catenin complex. These findings should be useful for the understanding of 
the regulatory mechanism of RNF43 and may contribute to the clarification of
signaling pathways regulated by RNF43.

PMCID: PMC3899290
PMID: 24466159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Diabetologia. 2014 Apr;57(4):785-96. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3154-z. Epub 2014
Jan 26.

Alternative human liver transcripts of TCF7L2 bind to the gluconeogenesis
regulator HNF4a at the protein level.

Neve B(1), Le Bacquer O, Caron S, Huyvaert M, Leloire A, Poulain-Godefroy O,
Lecoeur C, Pattou F, Staels B, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), Lille, France,
bernadette.neve@good.ibl.fr.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Gene polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are associated with increased risk 
of type 2 diabetes and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) plays a role in
hepatic glucose metabolism. We therefore addressed the impact of TCF7L2 isoforms 
on hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and the regulation of gluconeogenesis
genes.
METHODS: Liver TCF7L2 transcripts were analysed by quantitative PCR in 33
non-diabetic and 31 type 2 diabetic obese individuals genotyped for TCF7L2
rs7903146. To analyse transcriptional regulation by TCF7L2, small interfering RNA
transfection, luciferase reporter and co-immunoprecipitation assays were
performed in human hepatoma HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: In livers of diabetic compared with normoglycaemic individuals, five
C-terminal TCF7L2 transcripts showed increased expression. The type 2 diabetes
risk allele of rs7903146 positively correlated with TCF7L2 expression in livers
from normoglycaemic individuals only. In HepG2 cells, transcript and TCF7L2
protein levels were increased upon incubation in high glucose and insulin. Of the
exon 13 transcripts, six were increased in a glucose dose-responsive manner.
TCF7L2 transcriptionally regulated 29 genes related to glucose metabolism,
including glucose-6-phosphatase. In cultured HepG2 cells, TCF7L2 did not regulate
HNF4<U+0391> and FOXO1 transcription, but did affect HNF4a protein expression. The
TCF7L2 isoforms T6 and T8 (without exon 13 and with exon 15/14, respectively)
specifically interacted with HNF4a.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The different levels of expression of alternative
C-terminal TCF7L2 transcripts in HepG2 cells, in livers of normoglycaemic
individuals carrying the rs7901346 type 2 diabetes risk allele and in livers of
diabetic individuals suggest that these transcripts play a role in the
pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. We also report for the first time a protein
interaction in HepG2 cells between HNF4a and the T6 and T8 isoforms of TCF7L2,
which suggests a distinct role for these specific alternative transcripts.

PMID: 24463962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;16(2):179-90. doi: 10.1038/ncb2903. Epub 2014 Jan 26.

In vivo transcriptional governance of hair follicle stem cells by canonical Wnt
regulators.

Lien WH(1), Polak L(2), Lin M(3), Lay K(2), Zheng D(4), Fuchs E(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller UniversityNew York New York 10065 USA [2]. (2)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development,
The Rockefeller UniversityNew York New York 10065 USA. (3)Department of Genetics,
Albert Einstein College of MedicineBronx New York 10461 USA. (4)1] Department of 
Genetics, Albert Einstein College of MedicineBronx New York 10461 USA [2]
Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of MedicineBronx New York 10461 
USA [3] Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of MedicineBronx New 
York 10461 USA.

Hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs) regenerate hair in response to Wnt signalling.
Here, we unfold genome-wide transcriptional and chromatin landscapes of
ß-catenin-TCF3/4-TLE circuitry, and genetically dissect their biological roles
within the native HFSC niche. We show that during HFSC quiescence, TCF3, TCF4 and
TLE (Groucho) bind coordinately and transcriptionally repress Wnt target genes.
We also show that ß-catenin is dispensable for HFSC viability, and if TCF3/4
levels are sufficiently reduced, it is dispensable for proliferation. However,
ß-catenin is essential to activate genes that launch hair follicle fate and
suppress sebocyte fate determination. TCF3/4 deficiency mimics
Wnt-ß-catenin-dependent activation of these hair follicle fate targets; TCF3
overexpression parallels their TLE4-dependent suppression. Our studies unveil
TCF3/4-TLE histone deacetylases as a repressive rheostat, whose action can be
relieved by Wnt-ß-catenin signalling. When TCF3/4 and TLE levels are high, HFSCs 
can maintain stemness, but remain quiescent. When these levels drop or when
Wnt-ß-catenin levels rise, this balance is shifted and hair regeneration
initiates.

PMCID: PMC3984009
PMID: 24463605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cancer Sci. 2014 Apr;105(4):418-24. doi: 10.1111/cas.12356. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Context-dependent activation of Wnt signaling by tumor suppressor RUNX3 in
gastric cancer cells.

Ju X(1), Ishikawa TO, Naka K, Ito K, Ito Y, Oshima M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.

RUNX3 is a tumor suppressor for a variety of cancers. RUNX3 suppresses the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway by binding to the TCF4/ß-catenin complex,
resulting in the inhibition of binding of the complex to the Wnt target gene
promoter. Here, we confirmed that RUNX3 suppressed Wnt signaling activity in
several gastric cancer cell lines; however, we found that RUNX3 increased the Wnt
signaling activity in KatoIII and SNU668 gastric cancer cells. Notably, RUNX3
expression increased the ratio of the Wnt signaling-high population in the
KatoIII cells. although the maximum Wnt activation level of individual cells was 
similar to that in the control. As found previously, RUNX3 also binds to TCF4 and
ß-catenin in KatoIII cells, suggesting that these molecules form a ternary
complex. Moreover, the ChIP analyses revealed that TCF4, ß-catenin and RUNX3 bind
the promoter region of the Wnt target genes, Axin2 and c-Myc, and the occupancy
of TCF4 and ß-catenin in these promoter regions is increased by the RUNX3
expression. These results suggest that RUNX3 stabilizes the TCF4/ß-catenin
complex on the Wnt target gene promoter in KatoIII cells, leading to activation
of Wnt signaling. Although RUNX3 increased the Wnt signaling activity, its
expression resulted in suppression of tumorigenesis of KatoIII cells, indicating 
that RUNX3 plays a tumor-suppressing role in KatoIII cells through a
Wnt-independent mechanism. These results indicate that RUNX3 can either suppress 
or activate the Wnt signaling pathway through its binding to the TCF4/ß-catenin
complex by cell context-dependent mechanisms.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317806
PMID: 24447505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Jun;28(4):552-61. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.01.002. Epub
2014 Jan 13.

Destruxin B inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth through modulation of
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Huynh TT(1), Rao YK(2), Lee WH(3), Chen HA(4), Le TD(5), Tzeng DT(6), Wang LS(7),
Wu AT(8), Lin YF(9), Tzeng YM(10), Yeh CT(11).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Neurosurgery, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi
Minh City, Viet Nam. (2)Institute of Biochemical Sciences and Technology,
Chaoyang University of Technology, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Pathology, 
Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Departments of
Surgery, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Hepatitis, Cho Ray Hospital, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(6)Institute of Genomics and Bioinformatics, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan. (7)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)The Ph.D.
Program for Translational Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (10)Institute of Biochemical
Sciences and Technology, Chaoyang University of Technology, Taichung, Taiwan.
Electronic address: ymtzeng@cyut.edu.tw. (11)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Departments of Surgery,
Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute 
of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: ctyeh@tmu.edu.tw.

The aberrant activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays an important role in the
carcinogenesis and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Therefore, the 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling molecules are attractive candidates for the development
of targeted therapies for this disease. The present study showed that destruxin B
(DB) inhibits the proliferation and induces the apoptosis of HCC cells by
decreasing the protein expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL and
increasing the expression of the proapoptotic protein Bax. More importantly, DB
also attenuates Wnt-signaling in HCC cells by downregulating ß-catenin, Tcf4, and
ß-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity, which results in the decreased
expression of ß-catenin target genes, such as cyclin D1, c-myc, and survivin.
Furthermore, DB affects the migratory and invasive abilities of Sk-Hep1 cells
through the suppression of markers of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). A synergistic anti-proliferative and migratory effect was achieved using
the combination of DB and sorafenib in Sk-Hep1 cells. In conclusion, DB acts as a
novel Wnt/ß-catenin inhibitor and reduces the aggressiveness and invasive
potential of HCC by altering the cells' EMT status and mobility. DB in
combination with sorafenib may be considered for future clinical use for the
management of metastatic HCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24434019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;38(19):3332-7.

[Effect of ginseng polysaccharide-induced wnt/beta-catenin signal transduction
pathway on apoptosis of human nasopharyngeal cancer cells CNE-2].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan JM(1), Liu ZH(2), Li J(2), Wang YP(2), Yang LY(3), Huang JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
fanwhich@163.com (2)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Teaching and 
Research Room of Histology and Embryology, S Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, China. (3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of ginseng polysaccharide (GPS) on the
proliferation and apoptosis of human nasopharyngeal cancer cells CNE-2, and
discuss the possible mechanism.
METHOD: The effect of GPS on the growth of CNE-2 cells was observed by CCK8
assay. CNE-2 cells in the logarithmic phase were collected and processed
respectively with different concentrations (0, 0. 1, 0. 2, 0. 3. 0. 4 g L-1) of
GPS for 48 h. The flow cytometry was used to detect its induction effect on CNE-2
cell apoptosis. Hoechst-33258 cell staining and electron microscope were used to 
observe the morphological changes of cells. The beta-catenin mRNA expression was 
detected by Real-time PCR. The protein localizations and expressions of
beta-catenin and TCF4 were tested by the immunofluorescence staining. The
expressions of beta-catenin, Bcl-2 and Bax proteins were detected by Western
blot.
RESULT: CCK8 assay results showed that GPS could remarkably inhibit the
proliferation of CNE-2 cells, with dose-time dependence. IC50 of cells induced
with GPS for 48 h was 0. 39 g L-1. After being processed with GPS with
concentrations of 0.1, 0. 2, 0. 3, 0. 4 g L-1 for 48 h, the cell apoptosis rates 
of human nasopharyngeal cancer cells CNE-2 were (5. 69 +/- 0. 29)% , (10. 3 +/-
0. 63)% , (15. 4 +/- 0. 74 ) % and (35. 7 +/- 1. 86)% , respectively. Significant
difference was observed compared with the control group (2. 08 +/- 0. 11) % (P
<0. 05). The results of Hoechst-33258 staining showed the characteristics of cell
apoptosis. Under the electron microscope, apoptosis bodies could be observed
among CNE-2 cells induced with GPS with the concentration of 0. 4 g L -1 for 48
h. The results of Real-time PCR showed a significant reduction in beta-catenin
mRNA expression. The results of laser confocal microscopy revealed notable
decrease of beta-catenin and TCF4 expression in nucleus and transfer from nucleus
to cell membranes in beta-catenin expression areas after being processed with GPS
for 48 h. Western blot showed significant decrease in the expressions of
beta-catenin and anti-apoptosis protein Bcl-2, with an increasing expression in
apoptosis-promoting protein Bax (P <0. 05).
CONCLUSION: GPS could significantly inhibit the proliferation of CNE-2 cells and 
promote thier apoptosis. The obstruction of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway
may be an important mechanism for GPS to induce the apoptosis of human
nasopharyngeal cancer cells CNE-2.

PMID: 24422403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Aug;71(15):2815-35. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1553-4. Epub 
2014 Jan 12.

Transcription factor 4 (TCF4) and schizophrenia: integrating the animal and the
human perspective.

Quednow BB(1), Brzózka MM, Rossner MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Experimental and
Clinical Pharmacopsychology, Psychiatric Hospital, University of Zurich,
Lenggstrasse 31, 8032, Zurich, Switzerland, quednow@bli.uzh.ch.

Schizophrenia is a genetically complex disease considered to have a
neurodevelopmental pathogenesis and defined by a broad spectrum of positive and
negative symptoms as well as cognitive deficits. Recently, large genome-wide
association studies have identified common alleles slightly increasing the risk
for schizophrenia. Among the few schizophrenia-risk genes that have been
consistently replicated is the basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factor
4 (TCF4). Haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 (formatting follows IUPAC nomenclature: 
TCF4 protein/protein function, Tcf4 rodent gene cDNA mRNA, TCF4 human gene cDNA
mRNA) gene causes the Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-a neurodevelopmental disease
characterized by severe mental retardation. Accordingly, Tcf4 null-mutant mice
display developmental brain defects. TCF4-associated risk alleles are located in 
putative coding and non-coding regions of the gene. Hence, subtle changes at the 
level of gene expression might be relevant for the etiopathology of
schizophrenia. Behavioural phenotypes obtained with a mouse model of slightly
increased gene dosage and electrophysiological investigations with human
risk-allele carriers revealed an overlapping spectrum of schizophrenia-relevant
endophenotypes. Most prominently, early information processing and higher
cognitive functions appear to be associated with TCF4 risk genotypes. Moreover, a
recent human study unravelled gene × environment interactions between TCF4 risk
alleles and smoking behaviour that were specifically associated with disrupted
early information processing. Taken together, TCF4 is considered as an integrator
('hub') of several bHLH networks controlling critical steps of various
developmental, and, possibly, plasticity-related transcriptional programs in the 
CNS and changes of TCF4 expression also appear to affect brain networks important
for information processing. Consequently, these findings support the
neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia and provide a basis for
identifying the underlying molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 24413739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. EMBO J. 2014 Jan 13;33(2):146-56. doi: 10.1002/embj.201385358. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Wnt-induced transcriptional activation is exclusively mediated by TCF/LEF.

Schuijers J(1), Mokry M, Hatzis P, Cuppen E, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Active canonical Wnt signaling results in recruitment of ß-catenin to DNA by
TCF/LEF family members, leading to transcriptional activation of TCF target
genes. However, additional transcription factors have been suggested to recruit
ß-catenin and tether it to DNA. Here, we describe the genome-wide pattern of
ß-catenin DNA binding in murine intestinal epithelium, Wnt-responsive colorectal 
cancer (CRC) cells and HEK293 embryonic kidney cells. We identify two classes of 
ß-catenin binding sites. The first class represents the majority of the DNA-bound
ß-catenin and co-localizes with TCF4, the prominent TCF/LEF family member in
these cells. The second class consists of ß-catenin binding sites that
co-localize with a minimal amount of TCF4. The latter consists of lower affinity 
ß-catenin binding events, does not drive transcription and often does not contain
a consensus TCF binding motif. Surprisingly, a dominant-negative form of TCF4
abrogates the ß-catenin/DNA interaction of both classes of binding sites,
implying that the second class comprises low affinity TCF-DNA complexes. Our
results indicate that ß-catenin is tethered to chromatin overwhelmingly through
the TCF/LEF transcription factors in these three systems.

PMCID: PMC3989608
PMID: 24413017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2080-2. doi: 10.1002/hep.27000. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Deciphering liver zonation: new insights into the ß-catenin, Tcf4, and HNF4a
triad.

Berasain C(1), Avila MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Centro de Investigación Médica
Aplocada (CIMA), Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Clínica
Universidad de Navarra, 31008, Pamplona, Spain.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2344-57.

PMID: 24407883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Mar;9(3):973-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1889. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

ß-catenin deacetylation is essential for WNT-induced proliferation of breast
cancer cells.

Wang SH(1), Li N(1), Wei Y(1), Li QR(1), Yu ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School of 
Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

Deregulation of the WNT signaling pathway is associated with the development and 
progression of breast cancer. ß-catenin mutations have been found to
constitutively activate ß-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF) signaling in other types of
cancer. ß-catenin acetylation regulates ß-catenin-TCF4 interaction in WNT
signaling, but it remains unknown whether the acetylation of ß-catenin is
involved in WNT-induced proliferation of breast cancer cells. In this study, a
lower level of acetylated ß-catenin (K345) was observed in breast cancer tissues.
WNT3A stimulated the downregulation of ß-catenin acetylation and promoted the
proliferation of MCF7 cells. The K345Q mutation in ß-catenin inhibited
WNT-induced cell growth and axin2/TCF7 upregulation in breast cancer cells. By
contrast, K345R mutants could mimic deacetylated ß-catenin to generate the
WNT-elicited phenotype. Additionally, the acetylation of ß-catenin may prime
ß-catenin for phosphorylation. Further investigation revealed that the
deacetylase HDAC6 was responsible for WNT-induced deacetylation of ß-catenin in
breast cancer cells. In conclusion, the epigenetic modification of ß-catenin may 
be essential for WNT signaling in breast cancer progression, and blocking the
occurrence of ß-catenin acetylation may provide a novel therapeutic approach for 
breast cancer.

PMID: 24401947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;34(6):1020-30. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01195-13. Epub 2014 Jan
6.

Zac1 regulates cell cycle arrest in neuronal progenitors via Tcf4.

Schmidt-Edelkraut U(1), Daniel G, Hoffmann A, Spengler D.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany.

Imprinted genes play a critical role in brain development and mental health,
although the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms remain incompletely
understood. The family of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins directs the
proliferation, differentiation, and specification of distinct neuronal progenitor
populations. Here, we identified the bHLH factor gene Tcf4 as a direct target
gene of Zac1/Plagl1, a maternally imprinted transcriptional regulator, during
early neurogenesis. Zac1 and Tcf4 expression levels concomitantly increased
during neuronal progenitor differentiation; moreover, Zac1 interacts with two
cis-regulatory elements in the Tcf4 gene locus, and these elements together
confer synergistic activation of the Tcf4 gene. Tcf4 upregulation enhances the
expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor gene p57(Kip2), a paternally 
imprinted Tcf4 target gene, and increases the number of cells in G1 phase.
Overall, we show that Zac1 controls cell cycle arrest function in neuronal
progenitors through induction of p57(Kip2) via Tcf4 and provide evidence for
cooperation between imprinted genes and a bHLH factor in early neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC3958027
PMID: 24396065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S515-21. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3468-6. Epub
2014 Jan 6.

Allelic imbalance at an 8q24 oncogenic SNP is involved in activating MYC in human
colorectal cancer.

Sugimachi K(1), Niida A, Yamamoto K, Shimamura T, Imoto S, Iinuma H, Shinden Y,
Eguchi H, Sudo T, Watanabe M, Tanaka J, Kudo S, Hase K, Kusunoki M, Yamada K,
Shimada Y, Sugihara K, Maehara Y, Miyano S, Mori M, Mimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The rs6983267 at 8q24.21 has been established as a significant
cancer-related single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). The risk allele showed
similarity to the binding site of transcription factor TCF4/LEF1 that activates
transcription of MYC. However, little is known about the role of this SNP in
increasing MYC activity in colorectal cancers (CRCs).
METHODS: The genotypes of rs6983267 in peripheral blood and primary cancers, MYC 
activity and copy number (CN) alteration were examined in 107 CRCs. Next, we
plotted the number of cancers cell lines exhibiting specific G/T genotypes in 746
cancer cell lines of the Sanger Institute database. Then we validated the
relationship between the 8q24 SNP status and clinicopathologic parameters in 68
CRCs with loss of heterozygosity (LOH).
RESULTS: The MYC module activity was activated by either transcription in the
risk allele (G) or by amplification in the non-risk allele (T). Then, we
confirmed that the CN amplification dominantly occurred in the non-risk allele,
whereas CN neutral LOH, which indicated uniparental disomy (UPD) was more
frequently observed for the risk allele. Finally, we confirmed that risk allele
dominant cases, either by amplification or by UPD, indicated a more malignant
clinical phenotype than non-risk allele dominant cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The development of CRC requires MYC activation through retention of 
the risk allele, or amplification of the non-risk allele at the oncogenic SNP in 
the site of primary tumor.

PMID: 24390711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. FASEB J. 2014 Apr;28(4):1654-65. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-239426. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Regulation of the muscle fiber microenvironment by activated satellite cells
during hypertrophy.

Fry CS(1), Lee JD, Jackson JR, Kirby TJ, Stasko SA, Liu H, Dupont-Versteegden EE,
McCarthy JJ, Peterson CA.

Author information: 
(1)1900 S. Limestone, CTW 105, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. 
cpete4@uky.edu.

Our aim in the current study was to determine the necessity of satellite cells
for long-term muscle growth and maintenance. We utilized a transgenic Pax7-DTA
mouse model, allowing for the conditional depletion of > 90% of satellite cells
with tamoxifen treatment. Synergist ablation surgery, where removal of synergist 
muscles places functional overload on the plantaris, was used to stimulate robust
hypertrophy. Following 8 wk of overload, satellite cell-depleted muscle
demonstrated an accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and fibroblast
expansion that resulted in reduced specific force of the plantaris. Although the 
early growth response was normal, an attenuation of hypertrophy measured by both 
muscle wet weight and fiber cross-sectional area occurred in satellite
cell-depleted muscle. Isolated primary myogenic progenitor cells (MPCs)
negatively regulated fibroblast ECM mRNA expression in vitro, suggesting a novel 
role for activated satellite cells/MPCs in muscle adaptation. These results
provide evidence that satellite cells regulate the muscle environment during
growth.

PMCID: PMC3963024
PMID: 24376025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Adv Gerontol. 2014;27(4):704-9.

[Frequency of some diseases and conditions in geriatric patients with coronary
heart disease and various genotypes of transcription factor 7-like 2 protein].

[Article in Russian]

Khoroshinina LP, Tur'eva LV, Glotov OS, Poliakova IV, Baranov VS.

In 2009-2010, 98 patients diagnosed with the coronary heart disease, but without 
the expressed metabolic violations, decompensated conditions and diseases were
surveyed. Patients of 60-90 years were divided by age into two groups: younger
than 75 years--47 people; 75 years and older--51; there were 41 women and 57 men;
the ratio between women and men was 1:1.4; average age was 76.0 ± 1.3 years. The 
average age of women was 76.0 ± 1.8 years, men--76.1 ± 2,0 years. 96.0 ± 2.0% of 
geriatric patients with CHD complained of steno-cardiac pains in pre-cardiac
area; the excess mass of a body was observed in 43.4 ± 5.0% of geriatric patients
with CHD, acute myocardial infarction in the anamnesis was noted in 52.5 ± 6.9%
(n = 52); hypertensive illness had 98.0 ± 1.4% (n = 97). Patients had the
favorable average levels of lipoproteins of high density (not lower than 1
mmol/l). A significant number (79.2 ± 5.6%) of patients had hemodynamically
significant narrowing of coronary vessels (75% and more), while the area of
myocardial hypokinesia was observed in 41.2 ± 6.9% of patients, sharp violation
of brain blood circulation was noted in 14.1 ± 9.8%. Wild type homozygous
genotype of TCF7L2 gene was detected significantly more often (77.6 ± 4.7%) in
patients of advanced and senile age with CHD, regardless of age group, exis-tence
of accompanying diseases and conditions, such as previous myocardial damage,
acute disorders of cerebral circulation and fatty degeneration of the liver.
However allele of risk T (totally C/Tand T/T) of TCF7L2 gene came to light in
22.4 ± 9.1% of geriatric patients with CHD, that contributes to development of a 
metabolic syndrome in such patients and reduces term of their life.

PMID: 25946847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:394523. doi: 10.1155/2013/394523. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

IRS1, TCF7L2, ADRB1, PPARG, and HHEX polymorphisms associated with atherogenic
risk in Mexican population.

Estrada-Velasco BI(1), Cruz M(2), Madrid-Marina V(1), Martínez-Nava GA(1),
Gomez-Zamudio J(2), Burguete-García AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública,
Avenida Universidad 655, Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, 62100 Cuernavaca, 
MOR, Mexico. (2)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de
Especialidades, IMSS, Avenida Cuauhtémoc 330, Doctores, Cuauhtémoc, CMN Siglo
XXI, 06720 México, DF, Mexico.

Objective. We aimed to explore the association between polymorphisms of IRS1
(rs1801278), TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), ADRB1 (rs1801253), PPARG
(rs1801282), and HHEX (rs5015480) genes with atherogenic risk (AI = Total
cholesterol/HDL) in MetS, T2D, and healthy populations from the Mexican Social
Security Institute. Methodology and Results. Four hundred thirty-five MetS, 517
T2D, and 547 healthy individuals were selected. The association between the SNPs 
and the atherogenic index was evaluated by multiple linear regression and
multinomial logistic regression models. The ADRB1 gene showed a statistically
significant association with high-risk atherogenic index, OR = 2.94 (IC 95%
1.64-5.24; P < 0.0001) for the Arg/Gly variant, under the dominant model an OR = 
2.96 (IC 95% 1.67-5.25; P < 0.0001), and under the Log additive model an OR =
2.52 (IC 95% 1.54-4.15; P < 0.0001). Conclusions. The Arg389Gly polymorphism of
the ADRB1 gene may be a worthy biological marker to predict the risk of
developing cardiovascular diseases given a high-risk atherogenic index.

PMCID: PMC3859263
PMID: 24371822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Dermatol. 2014 Jan;41(1):84-91. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12313. Epub 2013 Dec 20.

Identification of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in dermal papilla cells of
human scalp hair follicles: TCF4 regulates the proliferation and secretory
activity of dermal papilla cell.

Xiong Y(1), Liu Y, Song Z, Hao F, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Chongqing, China.

It is clear that the dermal papilla cell (DPC), which is located at the bottom of
the hair follicle, is a special mesenchymal component, and it plays a leading
role in regulating hair follicle development and periodic regeneration. Recent
studies showed that the Wnt signaling pathway through ß-catenin (canonical Wnt
signaling pathway) is an essential component in maintaining the hair-inducing
activity of the dermal papilla and growth of hair papilla cells. However, the
intrinsic pathways and regulating mechanism are largely unknown. In the previous 
work, we constructed a cDNA subtractive library of DPC and first found that the
TCF4 gene, as a key factor of Wnt signaling pathway, was expressed as the
upregulated gene of the hair follicle in low-passage DPC. This study was to
explore the role of TCF4 in regulating the proliferation and secretory activity
of DPC. We constructed a pcDNA3.0-TCF4 expression vector and transfected it into 
DPC to achieve stable expression by bangosome 2000. Furthermore, we used the
method of chemosynthesis to synthesize three pairs of TCF4 siRNA and transfected 
them into DPC. Meanwhile, we compared the transfection group and non-transfection
group. We first proposed that there was expression difference in TCF4 in DPC
under different biological condition. This study may have a high impact on the
molecular mechanism of follicular lesions and provide a new vision for the
treatment of clinic diseases.

© 2013 Japanese Dermatological Association.

PMID: 24354472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jan;165B(1):9-18. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32212. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Neurophysiologic effect of GWAS derived schizophrenia and bipolar risk variants.

Hall MH(1), Levy DL, Salisbury DF, Haddad S, Gallagher P, Lohan M, Cohen B, Ongür
D, Smoller JW.

Author information: 
(1)Psychotic Disorders Division, Department of Psychiatry, McLean Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Psychiatry,
Psychology Research Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human
Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) as disease associated variants for schizophrenia (SCZ),
bipolar disorder (BPD), or both. Although these results are statistically robust,
the functional effects of these variants and their role in the pathophysiology of
SCZ or BPD remain unclear. Dissecting the effects of risk genes on distinct
domains of brain function can provide important biological insights into the
mechanisms by which these genes may confer illness risk. This study used
quantitative event related potentials to characterize the neurophysiological
effects of well-documented GWAS-derived SCZ/BPD susceptibility variants in order 
to map gene effects onto important domains of brain function. We genotyped 199
patients with DSM-IV diagnoses of SCZ or BPD and 74 healthy control subjects for 
19 risk SNPs derived from previous GWAS findings and tested their association
with five neurophysiologic traits (P3 amplitude, P3 latency, N1 amplitude, P2
amplitude, and P50 sensory gating responses) known to be abnormal in psychosis.
The TCF4 SNP rs17512836 risk allele showed a significant association with reduced
auditory P3 amplitude (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00016) after correction for multiple testing. The
same allele was also associated with delayed P3 latency (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Our results 
suggest that a SCZ risk variant in TCF4 is associated with neurophysiologic
traits thought to index attention and working memory abnormalities in psychotic
disorders. These findings suggest a mechanism by which TCF4 may contribute to the
neurobiological basis of psychotic illness.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3984007
PMID: 24339136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Dec 4;12(4):6268-74. doi: 10.4238/2013.December.4.14.

Colorectal cancer susceptibility variants alter risk of breast cancer in a
Chinese Han population.

Wei W(1), Jiang M, Luo L, Li Z, Wang P, Dong WQ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, China.

Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) and candidate gene studies have
revealed many novel loci associated with colorectal cancer susceptibility. We
evaluated the effect of these colorectal cancer-associated variants on the risk
of breast cancer in a Chinese Han population. Seven single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3856806 in PPARG, rs7014346 in POU5F1P1, rs989902 in
PTPN13, rs1801278 in IRS1, rs7003146 in TCF7L2, rs1503185 in PTPRJ, and
rs63750447 in MLH1) were genotyped in Han Chinese subjects, including 216
patients with breast cancer and 216 matched controls, using the Sequenom
MassARRAY platform. The association of genotypes with susceptibility to breast
cancer was analyzed using the odds ratio (OR), with 95% confidence interval (CI) 
and logistic regression. Three SNPs (rs7014346, rs989902, and rs7003146) were
found to be significantly associated with the susceptibility of breast cancer.
The GA and AA genotypes of rs7003146 in TCF7L2, and the CA and CC genotype of
rs989902 in PTPN13 were associated with reduced breast cancer risk in the Chinese
Han population based on the best-fit dominant model. The GG genotype of rs7014346
in POU5F1P1 was also significantly associated with decreased breast cancer risk
under the best-fit additive model. Our results confirmed the association of
rs7014346 in POU5F1P1, rs989902 in PTPN13, and rs7003146 in TCF7L2 with
variations in the risk of breast cancer in a Chinese Han population.

PMID: 24338422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Int J Med Sci. 2013 Nov 25;10(13):1888-98. doi: 10.7150/ijms.6019. eCollection
2013.

Modulation of ß-catenin signaling by the inhibitors of MAP kinase, tyrosine
kinase, and PI3-kinase pathways.

Zhang W(1), Zhang H, Wang N, Zhao C, Zhang H, Deng F, Wu N, He Y, Chen X, Zhang
J, Wen S, Liao Z, Zhang Q, Zhang Z, Liu W, Yan Z, Luu HH, Haydon RC, Zhou L, He
TC.

Author information: 
(1)1. Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine and School of
Clinical Diagnostic Medicine, and the Affiliated Hospitals of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China; ; 2. Molecular Oncology Laboratory,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Chicago Medical Center, 5841
South Maryland Avenue, MC 3079, Chicago, IL 60637, USA; ; 3. Department of
Laboratory Medicine of the Affiliated Hospital, Bingzhou Medical University,
Yantai, Shandong, China;

Aberrant activation of ß-catenin signaling plays an important role in human
tumorigenesis. However, molecular mechanisms behind the ß-catenin signaling
deregulation are mostly unknown because genetic alterations in this pathway only 
account for a small fraction of tumors. Here, we investigator if other major
pathways can regulate ß-catenin signaling activity. By employing a panel of
chemical activators and/or inhibitors of several cellular signaling pathways, we 
assess these modulators' effects on luciferase reporter driven by
ß-catenin/TCF4-responsive elements. We find that lithium-stimulated ß-catenin
activity is synergistically enhanced by protein kinase C activator PMA. However, 
ß-catenin-regulated transcriptional (CRT) activity is significantly inhibited by 
casein kinase II inhibitor DRB, MEK inhibitor PD98059, G-proteins and their
receptor uncoupling agent suramin, protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein,
and PI-3 kinase inhibitor wortmannin, suggesting that these cellular pathways may
participate in regulating ß-catenin signaling. Interestingly, the Ca<U+207A><U+207A>/calmodulin
kinase II inhibitor HDBA is shown to activate ß-catenin activity at low doses.
Furthermore, Wnt3A-stimulated and constitutively activated CRT activities, as
well as the intracellular accumulation of ß-catenin protein in human colon cancer
cells, are effectively suppressed by PD98059, genistein, and wortmannin. We
further demonstrate that EGF can activate TCF4/ß-catenin activity and induce the 
tyrosine phosphorylation of ß-catenin protein. Thus, our results should provide
important insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying Wnt/ß-catenin
activation. This knowledge should facilitate our efforts to develop efficacious
and novel therapeutics by targeting these pathways.

PMCID: PMC3856380
PMID: 24324366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;19(9):1010-6. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.159. Epub 2013 Dec
10.

Genome-wide association study of bipolar disorder accounting for effect of body
mass index identifies a new risk allele in TCF7L2.

Winham SJ(1), Cuellar-Barboza AB(2), Oliveros A(3), McElroy SL(4), Crow S(5),
Colby C(1), Choi DS(6), Chauhan M(7), Frye M(8), Biernacka JM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester,
MN, USA. (2)1] Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Universidad
Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico [2] Department of Psychiatry and
Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester,
MN, USA. (4)1] Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, OH, USA [2] University of
Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (6)1] Department of
Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA [2]
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo
Clinic Health Systems Austin, Austin, MN, USA. (8)Department of Psychiatry and
Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (9)1] Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA [2] Department of
Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is associated with higher body mass index (BMI) and
increased metabolic comorbidity. Considering the associated phenotypic traits in 
genetic studies of complex diseases, either by adjusting for covariates or by
investigating interactions between genetic variants and covariates, may help to
uncover the missing heritability. However, obesity-related traits have not been
incorporated in prior genome-wide analyses of BD as covariates or potential
interacting factors. To investigate the genetic factors underlying BD while
considering BMI, we conducted genome-wide analyses using data from the Genetic
Association Information Network BD study. We analyzed 729,454 genotyped
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers on 388 European-American BD cases
and 1020 healthy controls with available data for maximum BMI. We performed
genome-wide association analyses of the genetic effects while accounting for the 
effect of maximum BMI, and also evaluated SNP-BMI interactions. A joint test of
main and interaction effects demonstrated significant evidence of association at 
the genome-wide level with rs12772424 in an intron of TCF7L2 (P=2.85E-8). This
SNP exhibited interaction effects, indicating that the bipolar susceptibility
risk of this SNP is dependent on BMI. TCF7L2 codes for the transcription factor
TCF/LF, part of the Wnt canonical pathway, and is one of the strongest genetic
risk variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D). This is consistent with BD
pathophysiology, as the Wnt pathway has crucial implications in neurodevelopment,
neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, and is involved in the mechanisms of action of 
BD and depression treatments. We hypothesize that genetic risk for BD is BMI
dependent, possibly related to common genetic risk with T2D.

PMID: 24322204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Diabetologia. 2014 Mar;57(3):542-53. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3131-6. Epub 2013
Dec 8.

TCF7L2 in mouse pancreatic beta cells plays a crucial role in glucose homeostasis
by regulating beta cell mass.

Takamoto I(1), Kubota N, Nakaya K, Kumagai K, Hashimoto S, Kubota T, Inoue M,
Kajiwara E, Katsuyama H, Obata A, Sakurai Y, Iwamoto M, Kitamura T, Ueki K,
Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common genetic variations of the transcription factor 7-like 2
gene (encoded by TCF7L2), one of the T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor transcription factors for the converging wingless-type MMTV integration
site family (Wnt)/ß-catenin signalling pathway, are known to be associated with
type 2 diabetes. Individuals with at-risk alleles of TCF7L2 exhibit impaired
insulin secretion. Although previous studies using animal models have revealed
the existence of a relationship between the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway and 
glucose homeostasis, it remains unclear whether TCF7L2 in the pancreatic beta
cells might be causally involved in insulin secretion in vivo. In this study, we 
investigated the role of TCF7L2 expressed in the pancreatic beta cells in glucose
homeostasis.
METHODS: Three independent groups of genetically engineered mice (DN mice) were
generated, in which expression of the dominant-negative form of Tcf7l2 was driven
under a rat insulin promoter. Phenotypes of both adult and newborn mice were
evaluated. The levels of genes and proteins expressed in isolated islets were
determined by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR and western blot analysis,
respectively.
RESULTS: Adult DN mice showed impaired glucose tolerance and decreased insulin
secretion in both oral and intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests. Marked
reduction of the beta cell area and whole-pancreas insulin content was observed
in both the adult and newborn DN mice. Islets from the DN mice showed decreased
gene expressions of Ccnd1, Ccnd2, Irs1, Irs2, Ins1, Ins2 and Mafa, consistent
with the deleterious effects of the dominant-negative form of Tcf7l2 on beta cell
proliferation and insulin production.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 expressed in the pancreatic beta cells plays a
crucial role in glucose metabolism through regulation of the beta cell mass.

PMID: 24317852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 18;105(24):1852-61. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt331. Epub
2013 Dec 7.

Aspirin use, 8q24 single nucleotide polymorphism rs6983267, and colorectal cancer
according to CTNNB1 alterations.

Nan H(1), Morikawa T, Suuriniemi M, Imamura Y, Werner L, Kuchiba A, Yamauchi M,
Hunter DJ, Kraft P, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S, Freedman ML, Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Division of Cancer Epidemiology, Department of
Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD (HN); Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine
(HN, DJH, ELG, CSF, ATC) and Department of Epidemiology (DJH, PK, ELG, SO),
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Center for
Molecular Oncologic Pathology (TM, YI, AK, MY, SO), Department of Medical
Oncology (TM, MS, YI, AK, MY, CSF, SO, MLF), and Department of Biostatistics and 
Computational Biology (LW), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Department 
of Epidemiology (DJH, ELG, SO) and Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA (DJH, ELG); Broad Institute, Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Cambridge, MA (MLF); Division of Gastroenterology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (ATC).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 18;105(24):1847-8.

BACKGROUND: Regular aspirin use reduces the risk for colorectal cancer (CRC),
possibly through inhibition of WNT/cadherin-associated protein ß1 (CTNNB1 or
ß-catenin) signaling. The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs6983267 on
chromosome 8q24 is a CRC susceptibility locus that affects binding activity of
transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2) to CTNNB1, thereby altering expression of 
target oncogenes, including MYC.
METHODS: We evaluated regular aspirin use and CRC risk according to genotypes of 
SNP rs6983267 and CTNNB1 expression status in two prospective case-control
studies (840 CRC case patients and 1686 age- and race-matched control subjects)
nested within the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study. We estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using
unconditional logistic regression models. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: A lower risk of CRC was associated with regular aspirin use and the T
allele of rs6983267. The effect of aspirin was confined to individuals with
protective T allele of rs6983267 (additive matching factors-adjusted OR for T
allele = 0.83; 95% CI = 0.74 to 0.94; P trend = .002; P interaction = .01).
Additionally, the T allele of rs6983267 was associated with a reduced expression 
of MYC oncogene (P trend = .03). Moreover, among individuals with protective T
allele, the effect of regular aspirin use was limited to those with positive
nuclear CTNNB1 expression. In a functional analysis, in vitro treatment of LS174T
cells (a cell line heterozygous for rs6983267) with aspirin was statistically
significantly associated with higher G/T allelic ratio of TCF7L2
immunoprecipitated DNA (P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support an influence of aspirin on WNT/CTNNB1 signaling 
and suggest that aspirin chemoprevention may be tailored according to rs6983267
genotype.

PMCID: PMC3866156
PMID: 24317174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Neuro Oncol. 2014 Jan;16(2):217-27. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not194. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

TCTP promotes glioma cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo via enhanced
ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcription.

Gu X(1), Yao L, Ma G, Cui L, Li Y, Liang W, Zhao B, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding authors: Keshen Li, MD, PhD, Institute of Neurology, Guangdong
Medical College, Zhanjiang 524001, China. zhaozhaozhao2012@gmail.com); Bin Zhao, 
MD, PhD, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and Cerebral Diseases,
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang 524001, China
(zhaobine@vip.tom.com.

Background The translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) is a
multifunctional protein that plays important roles in immune responses, cell
proliferation, tumorigenicity and cell apoptosis. Here, we examined the clinical 
value of TCTP in glioma patient survival and investigated the functional roles
and mechanism of TCTP in glioma development. Methods TCTP expression was
determined through immunohistochemical staining, immunoblotting, and quantitative
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). TCTP or TCF-4 expression was silenced using short
hairpin (sh) RNA. In vitro cell proliferation was detected using MTT, BrdU and
colony formation assays, and in vivo tumor growth was performed using the
xenograft model. TCTP/TCF-4/ß-catenin association was detected using a
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay. TCF-4 transcription activity was detected
using a TOPflash/FOPflash report gene assay. Wnt/ß-catenin-targeted gene
expression was detected through Western blotting. Results TCTP protein levels
were significantly elevated in high-grade gliomas compared with low-grade gliomas
and normal brain tissues. Importantly, the expression of TCTP was significantly
associated with poorer overall survival and disease-free survival, and TCTP also 
reduced the survival rate after treatment with radiotherapy and temozolomide
(RT-TMZ) for glioma patients. The ectopic expression of TCTP enhanced glioma cell
proliferation both in vitro and in vivo, whereas the knockdown of TCTP inhibited 
this effect. Similarly, the overexpression of TCTP increased ß-catenin binding to
TCF-4, TOPflash report gene transcription activity, and the expression of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling target genes including c-Myc and cyclin D1; notably, the 
knockdown of TCTP reduced these effects. The knockdown of TCF-4 using shRNA
rescued the enhanced cell proliferation induced by the overexpression of TCTP.
Conclusion TCTP is associated with reduced survival of glioma patients and
induces glioma tumor growth through enhanced Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3895383
PMID: 24311645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Jan 8;62(1):167-72. doi: 10.1021/jf404411r. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Inhibition of the ß-catenin/Tcf signaling by caffeoylquinic acids in sweet potato
leaf through down regulation of the Tcf-4 transcription.

Taira J(1), Uehara M, Tsuchida E, Ohmine W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Technology, Okinawa National College of Technology ,
905 Henoko, Nago City, Okinawa, 905-2192 Japan.

Sweet potato leaves contain the highest levels of functional polyphenols. In this
study the effects of the sweet potato leaf extract and its contents, such as mono
(3, 4, and 5)-caffeoylquinic acid (CQA), di-CQA (4,5-diCQA, 3,5-diCQA, and
3,4-diCQA) and caffeic acid (CA), were evaluated on the ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling
in human colorectal cancer HCT116 cells. The extract and the CQA derivatives
inhibited the ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling, and the inhibition of the di-CQA (with
two caffeoyl groups) was higher than that of the mono-CQA (one-caffeoyl group)
and CA, suggesting that the caffeoyl structure in the presence of a catechol
group plays a significant role in interfering with the ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling.
In addition, the CQA derivatives had no effect on the ß-catenin protein
expression, but all test compounds inhibited the expression of the Tcf-4
transcription, and the inhibition of the di-CQA derivatives was stronger than
those of the mono-CQA derivatives as well as the ß-catenin/Tcf-4 transcriptional 
activity. These compounds can modulate the downstream Wnt signaling pathway,
suggesting that sweet potato leaves can be a protective food for colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 24308429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Schizophr Res. 2014 Jan;152(1):124-9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2013.10.038. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

TCF4 gene polymorphism and cognitive performance in patients with first episode
psychosis.

Albanna A(1), Choudhry Z(2), Harvey PO(3), Fathalli F(4), Cassidy C(3), Sengupta 
SM(3), Iyer SN(1), Rho A(3), Lepage M(4), Malla A(4), Joober R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Canada. (2)Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University,
Canada. (3)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Canada. (4)Douglas Mental 
Health University Institute, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, McGill University,
Canada. (5)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Canada; Department of
Human Genetics, McGill University, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, McGill
University, Canada; Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University,
Canada. Electronic address: ridha.joober@douglas.mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF4 gene have been consistently
associated with schizophrenia in genome wide association studies, including the C
allele of rs9960767. However, its exact role in modulating the schizophrenia
phenotype is not known.
AIMS: To comprehensively investigate the relationship between rs9960767 risk
allele (C) of TCF4 and cognitive performance in patients with first episode
psychosis (FEP).
METHODS: 173 patients with FEP received a comprehensive neurocognitive evaluation
and were genotyped for rs9960767. Carriers of the risk allele (CA/CC) were
compared to non-carriers (AA) using Multivariate Analysis of Covariance MANCOVA. 
Ethnicity, negative symptoms and substance abuse were included as covariates.
RESULTS: Carriers of the risk allele had a statistically significant lower
performance in the cognitive domain of Reasoning/Problem-Solving compared to
non-carriers (F1,172=4.4, p=.038). There were no significant genotype effects on 
the other cognitive domains or general cognition. This effect on the
Reasoning/Problem-Solving domain remained significant even when controlling for
IQ (F1,172=4.3, p=.039).
CONCLUSIONS: rs9960767 (C) of TCF4 appears to be associated with neurocognitive
deficits in the Reasoning/Problem-Solving cognitive domain, in patients with FEP.
A confirmation of this finding in a larger sample and including other TCF4
polymorphisms will be needed to gain further validity of this result.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24275585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2013;23(4):309-16.

TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G>T) polymorphism contributes to breast carcinogenesis:
evidence from a meta-analysis.

Wang Z(1), Zhang Q, Chen F, Wang Y, Nie W, Yang B, Guan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
Univercity.

Studies on the association between the TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism and breast 
cancer risk have reported conflicting results. To characterize the relationship
between this polymorphism and breast cancer risk, we conducted a comprehensive
literature search for relevant studies and performed a meta-analysis. A total of 
four studies including 5280 cases and 6026 controls were eligible for our
analysis. Overall, we did find that this polymorphism correlates with breast
cancer risk [TT versus GG: odds ratio (OR)=1.19, 95% confidence interval
(CI)=1.02-1.40; GT versus GG: OR=1.10, 95% CI=1.01-1.19; T versus G: OR=1.12, 95%
CI=1.05-1.19]. Furthermore, in the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, we did also
find that this polymorphism associated with an increased breast cancer risk in
white individuals (T versus G: OR=1.11, 95% CI=1.04-1.18). In summary, this
meta-analysis suggests that the rs12255372 T allele is a low-penetrant risk
factor for breast carcinogenesis. In the future, larger-scale and more
well-designed studies based on homogeneous breast cancer patients are needed to
validate our findings, especially in Asians.

PMID: 24266846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jan 2;55(1):33-42. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-12611.

Association and familial segregation of CTG18.1 trinucleotide repeat expansion of
TCF4 gene in Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Mootha VV(1), Gong X, Ku HC, Xing C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Dallas, Texas.

PURPOSE: We tested the association between two intronic polymorphisms (CTG18.1
and rs613872) in TCF4 and Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD), and
analyzed their segregation patterns in families.
METHODS: We recruited 120 unrelated Caucasian subjects with FECD and 100
controls. Available family members of probands were recruited. Genotyping of the 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs613872 was performed using Sanger
sequencing or real-time allelic discrimination assay. The trinucleotide repeat
polymorphism, CTG18.1, was genotyped using a combination of short tandem repeat
assay and triplet repeat primed PCR assay. The cytosine-thymine-guanine (CTG)
repeat length of =40 was classified as an expanded CTG18.1 allele. Association of
the two loci with FECD was evaluated. Segregation in 29 families was examined.
RESULTS: The two polymorphisms are in linkage disequilibrium (r(2) = 0.65 in
cases and 0.31 in controls). Significant associations were found between FECD and
rs613872 (P = 3.1 × 10(-17)), expanded CTG18.1 allele (P = 6.5 × 10(-25)), and
their haplotypes (P = 5.9 × 10(-19)). The odds ratio (OR) of each copy of the
rs613872 G allele for FECD was estimated to be 9.5 (95% confidence interval [CI],
5.1-17.5). The OR of each copy of the CTG18.1 expanded allele was estimated to be
32.3 (95% CI, 13.4-77.6). The expanded CTG 18.1 allele cosegregated with the
trait in 52% (15/29) of families with complete penetrance and 10% (3/29) with
incomplete penetrance.
CONCLUSIONS: We report, to our knowledge, the first independent replication of
the expanded CTG 18.1 allele conferring significant risk for FECD (>30-fold
increase). The expanded allele cosegregates with the trait with complete
penetrance in a majority of families, but we also document cases of incomplete
penetrance.

PMCID: PMC3880006
PMID: 24255041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. BMB Rep. 2013 Dec;46(12):567-74.

CREB and FoxO1: two transcription factors for the regulation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis.

Oh KJ, Han HS, Kim MJ, Koo SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
koohoi@korea.ac.kr.

Liver plays a major role in maintaining glucose homeostasis in mammals. Under
fasting conditions, hepatic glucose production is critical as a source of fuel to
maintain the basic functions in other tissues, including skeletal muscle, red
blood cells, and the brain. Fasting hormones glucagon and cortisol play major
roles during the process, in part by activating the transcription of key enzyme
genes in the gluconeogenesis such as phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)
and glucose 6 phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase). Conversely, gluconeogenic
transcription is repressed by pancreatic insulin under feeding conditions, which 
effectively inhibits transcriptional activator complexes by either promoting
post-translational modifications or activating transcriptional inhibitors in the 
liver, resulting in the reduction of hepatic glucose output. The transcriptional 
regulatory machineries have been highlighted as targets for type 2 diabetes drugs
to control glycemia, so understanding of the complex regulatory mechanisms for
transcription circuits for hepatic gluconeogenesis is critical in the potential
development of therapeutic tools for the treatment of this disease. In this
review, the current understanding regarding the roles of two key transcriptional 
activators, CREB and FoxO1, in the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenic program is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4133859
PMID: 24238363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Pathologe. 2013 Nov;34 Suppl 2:269-73. doi: 10.1007/s00292-013-1821-y.

[In situ analyses of molecular mechanisms of colorectal carcinogenesis].

[Article in German]

Kriegl L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Thalkirchner 
Str. 36, 80337, München, Deutschland, Lydia.Kriegl@med.lmu.de.

The main signaling pathways of colorectal carcinogenesis encompass the classical 
adenoma-carcinoma sequence and the serrated route. In the classical
adenoma-carcinoma sequence there are initially frequent mutations of the APC gene
which lead to an activation of the WNT signaling pathway. When the WNT signaling 
pathway is activated ß-catenin mediates the transcription of diverse factors
which cause migration, invasion and proliferation of cells. Although APC
mutations occur in all tumor cells, a heterogeneous distribution pattern of
ß-catenin is found in tumors and ß-catenin also represents an important
prognostic marker. A similar picture is found for <U+03B3>-catenin which is expressed
independently from ß-catenin. Clearly more homogeneous is the expression of TCF4 
and LEF1 which are the main binding partners of ß-catenin and <U+03B3>-catenin and are
likewise important prognostic markers. The TRAIL signaling pathway is
therapeutically interesting and within this pathway loss of the main receptors
TRAIL-R1 and TRAIL-R2 is frequently found. Furthermore, the membranous
localization of both factors correlates with a better overall survival. These
results might be therapeutically relevant with respect to therapy with
recombinant TRAIL molecules binding to TRAIL-R1 and TRAIL-R2. In the serrated
route oncogen-induced senescence caused by mutations of the KRAS and BRAF
oncogenes initially plays an important role. This senescence blockade is overcome
by hypermethylation of the p16(INK4a) promoter and leads to the development of
invasive tumors. The SIRT1 and c-Myc genes also contribute to progression of
lesions in the serrated route and are activated through the RAS/RAF/MAPK-kinase
signaling pathway as well as the WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 24196627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2013 Dec;12(4):310-5. doi: 10.1177/1534734613504435.
Epub 2013 Nov 9.

Association of variant rs7903146 (C/T) single nucleotide polymorphism of TCF7L2
gene with impairment in wound healing among north Indian type 2 diabetes
population: a case-control study.

Singh K(1), Agrawal NK, Gupta SK, Singh K.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
India.

The variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been shown to be
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its several secondary
complications. Here, we aimed to examine the possible role of one of the common
variant of this gene, rs7903146 (C/T), with impairment of wound healing in cases 
with T2DM. A total of 750 individuals, including 322 patients with T2DM and 120
patients with diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) and 308 controls, were analyzed for
rs7903146 variant of the TCF7L2 gene. Genotyping was done by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. For rs7903146 variant, TT
genotype frequency in patients with DFU was 10.8% and in controls was 5.2%. Risk 
genotype (TT) frequencies showed statistically significant difference between the
DFU patients versus non-DM control group (odds ratio = 2.44, P = .037, 95%
confidence interval = 1.05-5.64) compared with nonrisk genotype (CC + CT). In the
present study, a positive significant association between DFU and the TT genotype
of rs7903146 (C/T) variant of TCF7L2 gene was found.

PMID: 24214952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2344-57. doi: 10.1002/hep.26924. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

T-cell factor 4 and ß-catenin chromatin occupancies pattern zonal liver
metabolism in mice.

Gougelet A(1), Torre C, Veber P, Sartor C, Bachelot L, Denechaud PD, Godard C,
Moldes M, Burnol AF, Dubuquoy C, Terris B, Guillonneau F, Ye T, Schwarz M,
Braeuning A, Perret C, Colnot S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR8104, Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1016, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2080-2.

ß-catenin signaling can be both a physiological and oncogenic pathway in the
liver. It controls compartmentalized gene expression, allowing the liver to
ensure its essential metabolic function. It is activated by mutations in 20%-40% 
of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) with specific metabolic features. We decipher
the molecular determinants of ß-catenin-dependent zonal transcription using mice 
with ß-catenin-activated or -inactivated hepatocytes, characterizing in vivo
their chromatin occupancy by T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 and ß-catenin, transcriptome, 
and metabolome. We find that Tcf-4 DNA bindings depend on ß-catenin.
Tcf-4/ß-catenin binds Wnt-responsive elements preferentially around
ß-catenin-induced genes. In contrast, genes repressed by ß-catenin bind Tcf-4 on 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (Hnf-4)-responsive elements. ß-Catenin, Tcf-4, and
Hnf-4a interact, dictating ß-catenin transcription, which is antagonistic to that
elicited by Hnf-4a. Finally, we find the drug/bile metabolism pathway to be the
one most heavily targeted by ß-catenin, partly through xenobiotic nuclear
receptors.CONCLUSIONS: ß-catenin patterns the zonal liver together with Tcf-4,
Hnf-4a, and xenobiotic nuclear receptors. This network represses lipid metabolism
and exacerbates glutamine, drug, and bile metabolism, mirroring HCCs with
ß-catenin mutational activation.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24214913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Psychiatry Res. 2014 Jan 30;215(1):255-7. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.10.008.
Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Absence of low frequency variants associated with schizophrenia at the
ultraconserved non-coding region of TCF4.

González-Penas J(1), Arrojo M(2), Páramo M(2), Paz E(2), Agra S(2), Ramos-Ríos
R(2), Brenlla J(2), Costas J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo
Galego de Saúde (SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Grupo de Medicina
Xenómica, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo
Galego de Saúde (SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Servizo de Psiquiatría, 
Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de 
Saúde (SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (3)Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de Saúde (SERGAS),
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Fundación Pública Galega
de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic address:
javier.costas.costas@sergas.es.

PMID: 24210665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 24;8(10):e78430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078430.
eCollection 2013.

Plasma metabolomics reveal alterations of sphingo- and glycerophospholipid levels
in non-diabetic carriers of the transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism
rs7903146.

Then C(1), Wahl S, Kirchhofer A, Grallert H, Krug S, Kastenmüller G,
Römisch-Margl W, Claussnitzer M, Illig T, Heier M, Meisinger C, Adamski J,
Thorand B, Huth C, Peters A, Prehn C, Heukamp I, Laumen H, Lechner A, Hauner H,
Seissler J.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Diabetes Zentrum - Campus Innenstadt,
Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany ; Clinical Cooperation Group
Diabetes, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München and Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Munich, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
have been shown to display a powerful association with type 2 diabetes. The aim
of the present study was to evaluate metabolic alterations in carriers of a
common TCF7L2 risk variant.
METHODS: Seventeen non-diabetic subjects carrying the T risk allele at the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 locus and 24 subjects carrying no risk allele were submitted to 
intravenous glucose tolerance test and euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp. Plasma 
samples were analysed for concentrations of 163 metabolites through targeted mass
spectrometry.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 risk allele carriers had a reduced first-phase insulin response
and normal insulin sensitivity. Under fasting conditions, carriers of TCF7L2
rs7903146 exhibited a non-significant increase of plasma sphingomyelins (SMs),
phosphatidylcholines (PCs) and lysophosphatidylcholines (lysoPCs) species. A
significant genotype effect was detected in response to challenge tests in 6 SMs 
(C16:0, C16:1, C18:0, C18:1, C24:0, C24:1), 5 hydroxy-SMs (C14:1, C16:1, C22:1,
C22:2, C24:1), 4 lysoPCs (C14:0, C16:0, C16:1, C17:0), 3 diacyl-PCs (C28:1,
C36:6, C40:4) and 4 long-chain acyl-alkyl-PCs (C40:2, C40:5, C44:5, C44:6).
DISCUSSION: Plasma metabolomic profiling identified alterations of phospholipid
metabolism in response to challenge tests in subjects with TCF7L2 rs7903146
genotype. This may reflect a genotype-mediated link to early metabolic
abnormalities prior to the development of disturbed glucose tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3813438
PMID: 24205231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Jan 17;9(1):193-201. doi: 10.1021/cb400795x. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Targeting the Tcf4 G13ANDE17 binding site to selectively disrupt ß-catenin/T-cell
factor protein-protein interactions.

Huang Z(1), Zhang M, Burton SD, Katsakhyan LN, Ji H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Center for Cell and Genome Science, University of
Utah , Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-0850, United States.

Selective disruption of protein-protein interactions by small molecules is
important for probing the structure and dynamic aspects of cellular network. It
can also provide new therapeutic targets. ß-Catenin of the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway uses the same positively charged groove to bind with T-cell
factor (Tcf), cadherin, and adenomatous polysis coli (APC). The extravagant
formation of ß-catenin/Tcf interactions drives the initiation and progression of 
many cancers and fibroses, while ß-catenin/cadherin and ß-catenin/APC
interactions are essential for cell-cell adhesion and ß-catenin degradation. In
this study, a selective binding site that can differentiate ß-catenin/Tcf,
ß-catenin/cadherin, and ß-catenin/APC interactions was identified by alanine
scanning and biochemical assays. A new peptidomimetic strategy that incorporates 
SiteMap and multiple-copy simultaneous search was used to design selective
small-molecule inhibitors for ß-catenin/Tcf interactions. A potent inhibitor was 
discovered to bind with ß-catenin and completely disrupt ß-catenin/Tcf
interactions. It also exhibits dual selectivity for ß-catenin/Tcf over
ß-catenin/cadherin and ß-catenin/APC interactions in both biochemical and
cell-based assays. This study provides a proof of concept for designing selective
inhibitors for ß-catenin/Tcf interactions.

PMID: 24191653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):397-404. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2831. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

miR-139 regulates the proliferation and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma
through the WNT/TCF-4 pathway.

Gu W(1), Li X, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, P.R.
China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are key post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but their speci<U+FB01>c roles and functions have yet to
be fully elucidated. In the present study, a significant downregulation of
miR-139 expression was demonstrated in HCC samples and HCC cells using
quantitative PCR (qPCR). Upregulation of miR-139 in vitro, attenuated HCC cell
growth, migration/invasion and induced apoptosis. Based on computational and
expression analysis, we noted that miR-139 can control the expression of T-cell
factor-4 (TCF-4) as a target gene. A reporter assay with the 3'UTR of TCF-4
cloned downstream of a luciferase gene showed decreased luciferase activity in
the presence of miR-139, providing strong evidence that miR-139 is a direct
regulator of TCF-4. Furthermore, we observed that restoration of TCF-4 activity
resulted in effects that were similar to those following transfection of the
miR-139 inhibitor into HCC cells. Finally, mechanistic investigation revealed
that the overexpression of miR-139 suppressed the ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional
activity by targeting TCF-4. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that miR-139
downregulation is common in HCC and that overexpression of miR-139 expression
inhibits cell proliferation and invasion, suggesting that miR-139 may provide a
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of HCC patients.

PMID: 24190507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 1;23(5):1237-49. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt514. Epub 2013 Oct
24.

Restoration of muscle strength in dystrophic muscle by angiotensin-1-7 through
inhibition of TGF-ß signalling.

Acuña MJ(1), Pessina P, Olguin H, Cabrera D, Vio CP, Bader M, Muñoz-Canoves P,
Santos RA, Cabello-Verrugio C, Brandan E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Aging and Regeneration, CARE Chile UC and Department Cell and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Catholic University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the most common inherited neuromuscular
disease, and is characterized by the lack of dystrophin, muscle wasting,
increased transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß Smad-dependent signalling and
fibrosis. Acting via the Mas receptor, angiotensin-1-7 [Ang-(1-7)], is part of
the renin-angiotensin system, with the opposite effect to that of angiotensin II.
We hypothesized that the Ang-(1-7)/Mas receptor axis might protect chronically
damaged tissues as in skeletal muscle of the DMD mouse model mdx. Infusion or
oral administration of Ang-(1-7) in mdx mice normalized skeletal muscle
architecture, decreased local fibrosis and improved muscle function in vitro and 
in vivo. These positive effects were mediated by the inhibition of TGF-ß Smad
signalling, which in turn led to reduction of the pro-fibrotic microRNA miR-21
concomitant with a reduction in the number of TCF4 expressing fibroblasts. Mdx
mice infused with Mas antagonist (A-779) and mdx deficient for the Mas receptor
showed highly deteriorated muscular architecture, increased fibrosis and TGF-ß
signalling with diminished muscle strength. These results suggest that this novel
compound Ang-(1-7) might be used to improve quality of life and delay death in
individuals with DMD and this drug should be investigated in further pre-clinical
trials.

PMID: 24163134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Gene. 2014 Jan 10;533(2):554-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.104. Epub 2013 Oct
22.

Polymorphisms of transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene in Tunisian women
with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Ben-Salem A(1), Ajina M, Suissi M, Daher HS, Almawi WY, Mahjoub T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genome and Multifactorial Diseases, LR12ES07, Faculty of
Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine
disorder that affects women in their child-bearing age, and is often associated
with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2DM). Given the overlap between
PCOS and T2DM, we investigated the association of transcription factor-7-like 2
(TCF7L2) variants rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and rs12255372 with the
susceptibility to PCOS.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Study subjects comprised 119 Tunisian women with PCOS (mean
age 29.8±4.7years), and 150 control women (mean age 30.6±5.9years). TCF7L2
genotyping was done by the allelic discrimination/real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: Minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of rs4506565 (P=0.61), rs7903146
(P=0.68), rs12243326 (P=0.56), and rs12255372 (P=0.60) were comparable between
PCOS cases and control subjects. As the four tested TCF7L2 variants were in
linkage disequilibrium, 4-locus (rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, rs12255372)
haplotype analysis demonstrated that haplotype 2111 was initially negatively
associated with PCOS [P=0.035; OR (95% CI)=0.13 (0.02-0.85)], which was later
lost upon correcting for multiple comparisons [Pc=0.248].
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that there is weak or no contribution of TCF7L2 gene
polymorphism to PCOS in Tunisian women. Further studies with larger samples are
necessary to confirm this observation.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53 Suppl 1:E169-80. doi: 10.1002/mc.22088. Epub 2013 Oct
22.

Reg4-induced mitogenesis involves Akt-GSK3ß-ß-Catenin-TCF-4 signaling in human
colorectal cancer.

Bishnupuri KS(1), Sainathan SK, Bishnupuri K, Leahy DR, Luo Q, Anant S, Houchen
CW, Dieckgraefe BK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri.

Upregulation of regenerating gene 4 (Reg4) is observed in many human
gastrointestinal malignancies including colorectal cancer (CRC). We previously
reported a Reg4-mediated induction of epidermal growth factor receptor-Akt-AP1
signaling regulating CRC cell apoptosis. However, the role of Reg4 in the
regulation of CRC cell division is poorly understood. This study tests the
hypothesis that Reg4 induces Akt-GSK3ß-ß-Catenin-TCF-4 signaling to regulate CRC 
cell division. In vitro models of human CRC were used to determine the role of
Reg4 in regulation of CRC cell division. Cell cycle studies demonstrated that
Reg4 treatment significantly decreased CRC cell number in G1 phase and increased 
in G2 phase. Subsequently Reg4 significantly increased the mitotic index of CRC
cells. As assessed by real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analyses, Reg4
significantly increased the expression of cell cycle regulatory genes Cyclin D1
and D3, and associated Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK4 and CDK6). Reg4-mediated
increase in these genes involved a pathway that included an induced Akt activity 
by increasing phosphorylation of Thr308 and Ser473, a reduced glycogen synthase
kinase 3ß (GSK-3ß) activity by increasing phosphorylation of Ser9, an induced
nuclear translocation of ß-Catenin by decreasing phosphorylation of
Ser33/37/Thr41, and an increased TCF-4 transcriptional activity. Furthermore,
antagonism of Reg4-signaling using Reg4-specific mAbs (2H6 and 3E5) and Akt
inhibitor significantly decreased, whereas agonism using GSK-3ß antagonist
(SB216763) significantly increased mitotic index and proliferation of CRC cells. 
These results identify Reg4 as a key regulator of the CRC cell division and
proliferation, hence a potential target of human CRC treatment.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4565142
PMID: 24151146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2013 Dec;23(12):697-705. doi:
10.1097/FPC.0000000000000012.

Impact of TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms on hydrochlorothiazide-induced
diabetes.

Karnes JH(1), Gong Y, Pacanowski MA, McDonough CW, Arwood MJ, Langaee TY, Pepine 
CJ, Johnson JA, Cooper-Dehoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee bDepartment of Pharmacotherapy and Translational
Research cDepartment of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, Center for
Pharmacogenomics dDepartment of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida eOffice of Clinical Pharmacology,
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Thiazide diuretics have been associated with increased risk for new
onset diabetes (NOD), but pharmacogenetic markers of thiazide-induced NOD are not
well studied. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the transcription factor 
7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) represent the strongest and most reproducible genetic
associations with diabetes. We investigated the association of tag SNPs in TCF7L2
with thiazide-induced NOD.
METHODS: We identified cases that developed NOD and age, sex, and
race/ethnicity-matched controls from the INternational VErapamil SR-Trandolapril 
STudy (INVEST). INVEST compared cardiovascular outcomes between two
antihypertensive treatment strategies in ethnically diverse patients with
hypertension and coronary artery disease. We genotyped 101 TCF7L2 tag SNPs and
used logistic regression to test for pharmacogenetic (SNP×hydrochlorothiazide
treatment) interactions. Permuted interaction P values were corrected with the
PACT test and adjusted for diabetes-related variables.
RESULTS: In INVEST whites, we observed three TCF7L2 SNPs with significant
SNP×treatment interactions for NOD. The strongest pharmacogenetic interaction was
observed for rs7917983 [synergy index 3.37 (95% CI 1.72-6.59), P=5.0×10,
PACT=0.03], which was associated with increased NOD risk in
hydrochlorothiazide-treated patients [odds ratio 1.53 (1.04-2.25), P=0.03] and
decreased NOD risk in non hydrochlorothiazide-treated patients [odds ratio 0.48
(0.27-0.86), P=0.02]. The TCF7L2 SNP rs4506565, previously associated with
diabetes, showed a similar, significant pharmacogenetic association.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that hydrochlorothiazide treatment is an
environmental risk factor that increases diabetes risk beyond that attributed to 
TCF7L2 variation in white, hypertensive patients. Further study and replication
of our results is needed to confirm pharmacogenetic influences of TCF7L2 SNPs on 
thiazide-induced NOD.

PMCID: PMC3893755
PMID: 24128935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2309-20. doi: 10.1002/hep.26775. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Tri-iodothyronine induces hepatocyte proliferation by protein kinase A-dependent 
ß-catenin activation in rodents.

Fanti M(1), Singh S, Ledda-Columbano GM, Columbano A, Monga SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari,
Italy.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2074-6.

Thyroid hormone (T3), like many other ligands of the steroid/thyroid hormone
nuclear receptor superfamily, is a strong inducer of liver cell proliferation in 
rats and mice. However, the molecular basis of its mitogenic activity, which is
currently unknown, must be elucidated if its use in hepatic regenerative medicine
is to be considered. F-344 rats or C57BL/6 mice were fed a diet containing T3 for
2-7 days. In rats, administration of T3 led to an increased cytoplasmic
stabilization and nuclear translocation of ß-catenin in pericentral hepatocytes
with a concomitant increase in cyclin-D1 expression. T3 administration to
wild-type (WT) mice resulted in increased hepatocyte proliferation; however, no
mitogenic response in hepatocytes to T3 was evident in the hepatocyte-specific
ß-catenin knockout mice (KO). In fact, T3 induced ß-catenin-TCF4 reporter
activity both in vitro and in vivo. Livers from T3-treated mice demonstrated no
changes in Ctnnb1 expression, activity of glycogen synthase kinase-3ß, known to
phosphorylate and eventually promote ß-catenin degradation, or
E-cadherin-ß-catenin association. However, T3 treatment increased ß-catenin
phosphorylation at Ser675, an event downstream of protein kinase A (PKA).
Administration of PKA inhibitor during T3 treatment of mice and rats as well as
in cell culture abrogated Ser675-ß-catenin and simultaneously decreased cyclin-D1
expression to block hepatocyte proliferation.CONCLUSION: We have identified
T3-induced hepatocyte mitogenic response to be mediated by PKA-dependent
ß-catenin activation. Thus, T3 may be of therapeutic relevance to stimulate
ß-catenin signaling to in turn induce regeneration in selected cases of hepatic
insufficiency.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3979513
PMID: 24122933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Cell Mol Med. 2013 Dec;17(12):1619-31. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12150. Epub 2013 Oct
9.

Repeated H2 O2 exposure drives cell cycle progression in an in vitro model of
ulcerative colitis.

Poehlmann A(1), Reissig K, Schönfeld P, Walluscheck D, Schinlauer A, Hartig R,
Lessel W, Guenther T, Silver A, Roessner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

The production of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) drives tumourigenesis in ulcerative 
colitis (UC). Recently, we showed that H2 O2 activates DNA damage checkpoints in 
human colonic epithelial cells (HCEC) through c-Jun N-terminal Kinases (JNK) that
induces p21(WAF1) . Moreover, caspases circumvented the G1/S and intra-S
checkpoints, and cells accumulated in G2/M. The latter observation raised the
question of whether repeated H2 O2 exposures alter JNK activation, thereby
promoting a direct passage of cells from G2/M arrest to driven cell cycle
progression. Here, we report that increased proliferation of repeatedly H2 O2
-exposed HCEC cells (C-cell cultures) was associated with (i) increased
phospho-p46 JNK, (ii) decreased total JNK and phospho-p54 JNK and (iii) p21(WAF1)
down-regulation. Altered JNK activation and p21(WAF1) down-regulation were
accompanied by defects in maintaining G2/M and mitotic spindle checkpoints
through adaptation, as well as by apoptosis resistance following H2 O2 exposure. 
This may cause increased proliferation of C-cell cultures, a defining initiating 
feature in the inflammation-carcinoma pathway in UC. We further suggest that
dysregulated JNK activation is attributed to a non-apoptotic function of
caspases, causing checkpoint adaptation in C-cell cultures. Additionally, loss of
cell-contact inhibition and the overcoming of senescence, hallmarks of cancer,
contributed to increased proliferation. Furthermore, there was evidence that p54 
JNK inactivation is responsible for loss of cell-contact inhibition. We present a
cellular model of UC and suggest a sinusoidal pattern of proliferation, which is 
triggered by H2 O2 -induced reactive oxygen species generation, involving an
interplay between JNK activation/inactivation, p21(WAF1) , c-Fos,
c-Jun/phospho-c-Jun, ATF2/phospho-ATF2, ß-catenin/TCF4-signalling, c-Myc, CDK6
and Cyclin D2, leading to driven cell cycle progression.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3914643
PMID: 24118792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5692-703. doi: 10.1242/jcs.135053. Epub 2013
Oct 7.

A double-negative feedback loop between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang M(1), Li SN, Anjum KM, Gui LX, Zhu SS, Liu J, Chen JK, Liu QF, Ye GD, Wang
WJ, Wu JF, Cai WY, Sun GB, Liu YJ, Liu RF, Zhang ZM, Li BA.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361102,
China.

Wnt-ß-catenin signaling participates in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in a variety of cancers; however, its involvement in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and downstream molecular events is largely undefined. HNF4a is
the most prominent and specific factor maintaining the differentiation of hepatic
lineage cells and a potential EMT regulator in HCC cells. However, the molecular 
mechanisms by which HNF4a maintains the differentiated liver epithelium and
inhibits EMT have not been completely defined. In this study, we systematically
explored the relationship between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a in the EMT
process of HCC cells. Our results indicated that HNF4a expression was negatively 
regulated during Wnt-ß-catenin signaling-induced EMT through Snail and Slug in
HCC cells. In contrast, HNF4a was found to directly associate with TCF4 to
compete with ß-catenin but facilitate transcription co-repressor activities, thus
inhibiting expression of EMT-related Wnt-ß-catenin targets. Moreover, HNF4a may
control the switch between the transcriptional and adhesion functions of
ß-catenin. Overexpression of HNF4a was found to completely compromise the
Wnt-ß-catenin-signaling-induced EMT phenotype. Finally, we determined the
regulation pattern between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a in rat tumor models.
Our studies have identified a double-negative feedback mechanism controlling
Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a expression in vitro and in vivo, which sheds
new light on the regulation of EMT in HCC. The modulation of these molecular
processes may be a method of inhibiting HCC invasion by blocking Wnt-ß-catenin
signaling or restoring HNF4a expression to prevent EMT.

PMID: 24101726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5598-609. doi: 10.1242/jcs.132233. Epub 2013
Oct 7.

Postnatal ablation of osteoblast Smad4 enhances proliferative responses to
canonical Wnt signaling through interactions with ß-catenin.

Salazar VS(1), Zarkadis N, Huang L, Watkins M, Kading J, Bonar S, Norris J,
Mbalaviele G, Civitelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Bone and Mineral Disease,
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid, Campus Box 8301,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Canonical Wnt (cWnt) signaling through ß-catenin regulates osteoblast
proliferation and differentiation to enhance bone formation. We previously
reported that osteogenic action of ß-catenin is dependent on BMP signaling. Here,
we further examined interactions between cWnt and BMP in bone. In
osteoprogenitors stimulated with BMP2, ß-catenin localizes to the nucleus,
physically interacts with Smad4, and is recruited to DNA-binding transcription
complexes containing Smad4, R-Smad1/5 and TCF4. Furthermore, Tcf/Lef-dependent
transcription, Ccnd1 expression and proliferation all increase when Smad4, 1 or 5
levels are low, whereas TCF/Lef activities decrease when Smad4 expression is
high. The ability of Smad4 to antagonize transcription of Ccnd1 is dependent on
DNA-binding activity but Smad4-dependent transcription is not required. In mice, 
conditional deletion of Smad4 in osterix(+) cells increases mitosis of cells on
trabecular bone surfaces as well as in primary osteoblast cultures from adult
bone marrow and neonatal calvaria. By contrast, ablation of Smad4 delays
differentiation and matrix mineralization by primary osteoblasts in response to
Wnt3a, indicating that loss of Smad4 perturbs the balance between proliferation
and differentiation in osteoprogenitors. We propose that Smad4 and Tcf/Lef
transcription complexes compete for ß-catenin, thus restraining cWnt-dependent
proliferative signals while favoring the matrix synthesizing activity of
osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3860308
PMID: 24101723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Exp Med. 2013 Oct 21;210(11):2151-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130443. Epub 2013 Oct
7.

Transcription factor Runx2 controls the development and migration of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells.

Sawai CM(1), Sisirak V, Ghosh HS, Hou EZ, Ceribelli M, Staudt LM, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) rapidly produce type I interferon (IFN-I) in 
response to viruses and are essential for antiviral immune responses. Although
related to classical DCs (cDCs) in their development and expression profile, pDCs
possess many distinct features. Unlike cDCs, pDCs develop in the bone marrow (BM)
and emerge into peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues as fully differentiated
cells. We now report that pDCs specifically express Runx2, a Runt family
transcription factor that is essential for bone development. pDCs in
Runx2-deficient mice developed normally in the BM but were greatly reduced in the
periphery. The defect was cell-intrinsic and was associated with the retention of
mature Ly49Q(+) pDCs in the BM. Runx2 was required for the expression of several 
pDC-enriched genes, including the chemokine receptors Ccr2 and Ccr5. Mature pDCs 
expressed high levels of Ccr5 at the cell surface, and Ccr5-deficient pDCs in a
competitive setting were reduced in the periphery relative to the BM. Thus, Runx2
is required for the emergence of mature BM pDCs into the periphery, in a process 
that is partially dependent on Ccr5. These results establish Runx2 as a
lineage-specific regulator of immune system development.

PMCID: PMC3804932
PMID: 24101375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct 3;93(4):758-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.08.010.

Mutations in AGBL1 cause dominant late-onset Fuchs corneal dystrophy and alter
protein-protein interaction with TCF4.

Riazuddin SA(1), Vasanth S, Katsanis N, Gottsch JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Fuchs corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a hereditary dystrophy of the corneal
endothelium and is responsible for majority of the corneal transplantation
performed in the United States. Here, we describe three generations of a family
with 12 individuals affected by late-onset FCD and in which three individuals are
unaffected. Genome-wide mapping provided suggestive linkage at two loci on
chromosomal arms 3p and 15q. Alleles at either locus alone were not sufficient to
explain FCD; however, considered together, both loci could explain the disorder
in this pedigree. Subsequent next-generation sequencing identified a nonsense
mutation in AGBL1 in the 15q locus; this mutation would result in a premature
termination of AGBL1. Consistent with a causal role for this transcript, further 
sequencing of our cohort of late-onset-FCD-affected individuals identified two
cases harboring the same nonsense mutation and a further three unrelated
individuals bearing a second missense allele. AGBL1 encodes a glutamate
decarboxylase previously identified in serial analysis of gene expression of
corneal endothelium, a finding confirmed by immunohistochemical staining.
Wild-type AGBL1 localizes predominantly to the cytoplasm; in sharp contrast, the 
truncated protein showed distinct nuclear localization. Finally, we show that
AGBL1 interacts biochemically with the FCD-associated protein TCF4 and that the
mutations found in our cohort of FCD individuals diminish this interaction. Taken
together, our data identify a locus for FCD, extend the complex genetic
architecture of the disorder, provide direct evidence for the involvement of TCF4
in FCD pathogenesis, and begin to explain how causal FCD mutations affect
discrete biochemical complexes.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791265
PMID: 24094747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 15;110(42):17053-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313650110. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Paracrine activation of WNT/ß-catenin pathway in uterine leiomyoma stem cells
promotes tumor growth.

Ono M(1), Yin P, Navarro A, Moravek MB, Coon JS 5th, Druschitz SA, Serna VA,
Qiang W, Brooks DC, Malpani SS, Ma J, Ercan CM, Mittal N, Monsivais D, Dyson MT, 
Yemelyanov A, Maruyama T, Chakravarti D, Kim JJ, Kurita T, Gottardi CJ, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611.

Uterine leiomyomas are extremely common estrogen and progesterone-dependent
tumors of the myometrium and cause irregular uterine bleeding, severe anemia, and
recurrent pregnancy loss in 15-30% of reproductive-age women. Each leiomyoma is
thought to arise from a single mutated myometrial smooth muscle stem cell.
Leiomyoma side-population (LMSP) cells comprising 1% of all tumor cells and
displaying tumor-initiating stem cell characteristics are essential for estrogen-
and progesterone-dependent in vivo growth of tumors, although they have
remarkably lower estrogen/progesterone receptor levels than mature myometrial or 
leiomyoma cells. However, how estrogen/progesterone regulates the growth of LMSP 
cells via mature neighboring cells is unknown. Here, we demonstrate a critical
paracrine role of the wingless-type (WNT)/ß-catenin pathway in
estrogen/progesterone-dependent tumorigenesis, involving LMSP and differentiated 
myometrial or leiomyoma cells. Estrogen/progesterone treatment of mature
myometrial cells induced expression of WNT11 and WNT16, which remained
constitutively elevated in leiomyoma tissues. In LMSP cells cocultured with
mature myometrial cells, estrogen-progesterone selectively induced nuclear
translocation of ß-catenin and induced transcriptional activity of its
heterodimeric partner T-cell factor and their target gene AXIN2, leading to the
proliferation of LMSP cells. This effect could be blocked by a WNT antagonist.
Ectopic expression of inhibitor of ß-catenin and T-cell factor 4 in LMSP cells,
but not in mature leiomyoma cells, blocked the estrogen/progesterone-dependent
growth of human tumors in vivo. We uncovered a paracrine role of the
WNT/ß-catenin pathway that enables mature myometrial or leiomyoma cells to send
mitogenic signals to neighboring tissue stem cells in response to estrogen and
progesterone, leading to the growth of uterine leiomyomas.

PMCID: PMC3801037
PMID: 24082114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Feb;92(2):185-96. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1089-y. Epub
2013 Sep 27.

Tissue-specific differences in the regulation of KIBRA gene expression involve
transcription factor TCF7L2 and a complex alternative promoter system.

Guske K(1), Schmitz B, Schelleckes M, Duning K, Kremerskothen J, Pavenstädt HJ,
Brand SM, Brand E.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine D, Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology, University
Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Münster, Germany.

KIBRA has been described as a key regulator of the Hippo signaling pathway,
regulating organ size control, cell contact inhibition, cell growth, as well as
tumorigenesis and cystogenesis. Since there is scarce information on KIBRA gene
expression regulation, we analyzed the molecular basis of tissue-specific KIBRA
expression in human kidney epithelial (IHKE, HPCT) and neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y,
SK-SN-SH) cells. We detected four novel and differentially used transcription
start sites, two of which positioned in the first intron, generating two novel
alternative exons. We identified one constitutively active core promoter (P1a)
and three alternative promoters (P1b, P2, and P3), which were exclusively active 
in kidney cells. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) selectively activated
KIBRA at P1a, P2, and P3 in kidney cells. The two genetic variants -580C>T
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and -1691C>T (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) significantly affected the transcriptional
activity of the KIBRA core promoter. We propose a novel functional structure of
the KIBRA gene and provide detailed insight into molecular cell type-specific
KIBRA transcriptional regulation by TCF7L2, the Yes-associated protein 1 and TEA 
domain family member. Our findings provide a potential basis for future studies
on malfunctioning KIBRA regulation in pathophysiological conditions such as
cancer development.KEY MESSAGE: KIBRA expression is regulated by three
independent, cell type-specific promoters Two novel TSS were located within
intron one resulting in two alternative exons TSS utilization is cell
type-specific TCF7L2, YAP1, and TEAD are involved in the differential KIBRA
expression regulation.

PMID: 24072042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Neural Dev. 2013 Sep 25;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-19.

The ventral habenulae of zebrafish develop in prosomere 2 dependent on Tcf7l2
function.

Beretta CA(1), Dross N, Bankhead P, Carl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, Mannheim 68167, Germany.
matthias.carl@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: The conserved habenular neural circuit relays cognitive information
from the forebrain into the ventral mid- and hindbrain. In zebrafish, the
bilaterally formed habenulae in the dorsal diencephalon are made up of the
asymmetric dorsal and symmetric ventral habenular nuclei, which are homologous to
the medial and lateral nuclei respectively, in mammals. These structures have
been implicated in various behaviors related to the serotonergic/dopaminergic
neurotransmitter system. The dorsal habenulae develop adjacent to the medially
positioned pineal complex. Their precursors differentiate into two main neuronal 
subpopulations which differ in size across brain hemispheres as signals from
left-sided parapineal cells influence their differentiation program. Unlike the
dorsal habenulae and despite their importance, the ventral habenulae have been
poorly studied. It is not known which genetic programs underlie their development
and why they are formed symmetrically, unlike the dorsal habenulae. A main reason
for this lack of knowledge is that the vHb origin has remained elusive to date.
RESULTS: To address these questions, we applied long-term 2-photon microscopy
time-lapse analysis of habenular neural circuit development combined with depth
color coding in a transgenic line, labeling all main components of the network.
Additional laser ablations and cell tracking experiments using the
photoconvertible PSmOrange system in GFP transgenic fish show that the ventral
habenulae develop in prosomere 2, posterior and lateral to the dorsal habenulae
in the dorsal thalamus. Mutant analysis demonstrates that the ventral habenular
nuclei only develop in the presence of functional Tcf7l2, a downstream modulator 
of the Wnt signaling cascade. Consistently, photoconverted thalamic tcf7l2exl/exl
mutant cells do not contribute to habenula formation.
CONCLUSIONS: We show in vivo that dorsal and ventral habenulae develop in
different regions of prosomere 2. In the process of ventral habenula formation,
functional tcf7l2 gene activity is required and in its absence, ventral habenular
neurons do not develop. Influenced by signals from parapineal cells, dorsal
habenular neurons differentiate at a time at which ventral habenular cells are
still on their way towards their final destination. Thus, our finding may provide
a simple explanation as to why only neuronal populations of the dorsal habenulae 
differ in size across brain hemispheres.

PMCID: PMC3827927
PMID: 24067090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e74191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074191. eCollection
2013.

Characterization of the molecular mechanism of the bone-anabolic activity of
carfilzomib in multiple myeloma.

Hu B(1), Chen Y, Usmani SZ, Ye S, Qiang W, Papanikolaou X, Heuck CJ, Yaccoby S,
Williams BO, Van Rhee F, Barlogie B, Epstein J, Qiang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Myeloma Institute for Research and Therapy, Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer
Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas,
United States of America.

Carfilzomib, the next generation of proteasome inhibitor, may increase
osteoblast-related markers in patients with multiple myeloma, but the molecular
mechanism of its effect on mesenchymal stem cell differentiation to osteoblasts
remains unknown. Herein, we demonstrated that carfilzomib significantly promoted 
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation into osteoblasts. In osteoprogenitor cells 
and primary mesenchymal stem cells from patients with myeloma, carfilzomib
induced increases in alkaline phosphatase activity, matrix mineralization, and
calcium deposition via Wnt-independent activation of ß-catenin/TCF signaling.
Using affinity pull-down assays with immunoblotting analysis and
immunofluorescence, we found that carfilzomib induced stabilization of both free 
and active forms of ß-catenin in a time- and dose-dependent manner that was not
associated with ß-catenin transcriptional regulation. Nuclear translocation of
ß-catenin protein was associated with TCF transcriptional activity that was
independent of the effects of GSK3ß-activation and of signaling induced by 19 Wnt
ligands, 10 Frizzled receptors, and LRP5/6 co-receptors. Blocking activation of
ß-catenin/TCF signaling by dominant negative TCF1 or TCF4 attenuated
carfilzomib-induced matrix mineralization. Thus, carfilzomib induced osteoblast
differentiation via Wnt-independent activation of the ß-catenin/TCF pathway.
These results provide a novel molecular mechanism critical to understanding the
anabolic role of carfilzomib on myeloma-induced bone disease.

PMCID: PMC3774816
PMID: 24066119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Sep 25;14:98. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-98.

Genetic variants associated with fasting glucose and insulin concentrations in an
ethnically diverse population: results from the Population Architecture using
Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study.

Fesinmeyer MD(1), Meigs JB, North KE, Schumacher FR, Buková P, Franceschini N,
Haessler J, Goodloe R, Spencer KL, Voruganti VS, Howard BV, Jackson R, Kolonel
LN, Liu S, Manson JE, Monroe KR, Mukamal K, Dilks HH, Pendergrass SA, Nato A, Wan
P, Wilkens LR, Le Marchand L, Ambite JL, Buyske S, Florez JC, Crawford DC,
Hindorff LA, Haiman CA, Peters U, Pankow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota School 
of Public Health, Minneapolis MN, USA. pankow@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Multiple genome-wide association studies (GWAS) within European
populations have implicated common genetic variants associated with insulin and
glucose concentrations. In contrast, few studies have been conducted within
minority groups, which carry the highest burden of impaired glucose homeostasis
and type 2 diabetes in the U.S.
METHODS: As part of the 'Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology 
(PAGE) Consortium, we investigated the association of up to 10 GWAS-identified
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 8 genetic regions with glucose or
insulin concentrations in up to 36,579 non-diabetic subjects including 23,323
European Americans (EA) and 7,526 African Americans (AA), 3,140 Hispanics, 1,779 
American Indians (AI), and 811 Asians. We estimated the association between each 
SNP and fasting glucose or log-transformed fasting insulin, followed by
meta-analysis to combine results across PAGE sites.
RESULTS: Overall, our results show that 9/9 GWAS SNPs are associated with glucose
in EA (p = 0.04 to 9 × 10-15), versus 3/9 in AA (p= 0.03 to 6 × 10-5), 3/4 SNPs
in Hispanics, 2/4 SNPs in AI, and 1/2 SNPs in Asians. For insulin we observed a
significant association with rs780094/GCKR in EA, Hispanics and AI only.
CONCLUSIONS: Generalization of results across multiple racial/ethnic groups helps
confirm the relevance of some of these loci for glucose and insulin metabolism.
Lack of association in non-EA groups may be due to insufficient power, or to
unique patterns of linkage disequilibrium.

PMCID: PMC3849560
PMID: 24063630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Sep 23;14:96. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-96.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T) allele is associated with type 2 diabetes in urban
Ghana: a hospital-based case-control study.

Danquah I(1), Othmer T, Frank LK, Bedu-Addo G, Schulze MB, Mockenhaupt FP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine and International Health, Charité,
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Spandauer Damm 130, 14050 Berlin, Germany.
ina.danquah@dife.de.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus is increasing dramatically in sub-Saharan
Africa, and genetic predisposition is likely involved in that. Yet, genetic
variants known to confer increased susceptibility among Caucasians are far from
being established in African populations. In Ghanaian adults, we examined
associations of several of these polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A hospital-based case-control study on type 2 diabetes (and
hypertension) was conducted in Kumasi, Ghana. TCF7L2 rs7903146, KCNJ11 rs5219,
PPAR<U+03B3> rs1801282 and CAPN10 rs3842570, rs3792267, and rs5030952 were typed and
associations with type 2 diabetes and phenotypic traits examined.
RESULTS: 675 patients with type 2 diabetes and 377 controls were compared. The
minor allele frequency of the TCF7L2 (T) allele was 0.33. In the multivariate
model, this allele increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 39% (95% confidence
interval (CI), 1.07-1.81; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014). The minor alleles KCNJ11 (G) and PPAR<U+03B3> (G) 
were practically absent (each, 0.001). Minor allele frequencies of CAPN10 were
for -43 (A) 0.11 and for -63 (C) 0.46. These variants showed no significant
associations with type 2 diabetes. Two CAPN10 haplotypes tended to protect
against type 2 diabetes: 211 (aOR, 0.32; 95% CI, 0.03-1.92; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.31) and 221
(aOR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.48-1.10; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.13).
CONCLUSIONS: In urban Ghana, the frequency of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T) allele is 
comparable to the one in Caucasians; the association with type 2 diabetes is
slightly weaker. The risk allele KCNJ11 (G) and the protective allele PPAR<U+03B3> (G)
are virtually absent. The potential influence of comparatively rare CAPN10
haplotypes on type 2 diabetes risk in this population requires further
evaluation. Large-scale genetic studies among native Africans aiming at
fine-mapping the candidate genes are needed to identify the actual factors
involved in their increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3848778
PMID: 24059590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e73169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073169. eCollection
2013.

Knockdown of human TCF4 affects multiple signaling pathways involved in cell
survival, epithelial to mesenchymal transition and neuronal differentiation.

Forrest MP(1), Waite AJ, Martin-Rendon E, Blake DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS): a severe form of 
mental retardation with phenotypic similarities to Angelman, Mowat-Wilson and
Rett syndromes. Genome-wide association studies have also found that common
variants in TCF4 are associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. Although
TCF4 is transcription factor, little is known about TCF4-regulated processes in
the brain. In this study we used genome-wide expression profiling to determine
the effects of acute TCF4 knockdown on gene expression in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells. We identified 1204 gene expression changes (494 upregulated, 710
downregulated) in TCF4 knockdown cells. Pathway and enrichment analysis on the
differentially expressed genes in TCF4-knockdown cells identified an
over-representation of genes involved in TGF-ß signaling, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and apoptosis. Among the most significantly
differentially expressed genes were the EMT regulators, SNAI2 and DEC1 and the
proneural genes, NEUROG2 and ASCL1. Altered expression of several mental
retardation genes such as UBE3A (Angelman Syndrome), ZEB2 (Mowat-Wilson Syndrome)
and MEF2C was also found in TCF4-depleted cells. These data suggest that TCF4
regulates a number of convergent signaling pathways involved in cell
differentiation and survival in addition to a subset of clinically important
mental retardation genes.

PMCID: PMC3751932
PMID: 24058414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.003.
Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Malondialdehyde regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in murine islets
via TCF7L2-dependent Wnt signaling pathway.

Wang X(1), Lei XG, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China; Animal Science Department, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Evidence showed strong relations between malondialdehyde (MDA) levels and
different pathological stages of diabetes. Here, an explicit system with freshly 
isolated islets and precisely controlled MDA gradient was employed to investigate
the physiological effect of MDA on GSIS. Promoter analysis, pathway mapping,
Q-PCR profiling, and siRNA verification were performed to clarify the
intracellular signaling pathways. MDA at a moderately high level (5 and 10µM)
promoted GSIS and accompanied with ATP/ADP ratio, cytosolic Ca(2+) level, and key
regulators (GK, GLUT2, PDX1, and UCP2) changes in islets. Both upstream (PI3K and
p-AKT) and downstream (TCF7L2 and TCF7) factors of Wnt pathway showed greatest
changes. Knockdown of TCF7L2 blocked the MDA-induced GSIS elevation. These
results indicated that MDA acted as a signaling messenger and regulated islet
GSIS mainly through Wnt pathway. Therefore, the elevated MDA level and
up-regulated Wnt signaling pathway could be an etiological factor in the
development of hyperinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(22):12291-301. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02464-13. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Epstein-Barr virus induces global changes in cellular mRNA isoform usage that are
important for the maintenance of latency.

Homa NJ(1), Salinas R, Forte E, Robinson TJ, Garcia-Blanco MA, Luftig MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for Virology, Duke
University Medical Center.

Oncogenic viruses promote cell proliferation through the dramatic reorganization 
of host transcriptomes. In addition to regulating mRNA abundance, changes in mRNA
isoform usage can have a profound impact on the protein output of the
transcriptome. Using Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformation of primary B cells, 
we have studied the ability of an oncogenic virus to alter the mRNA isoform
profile of its host. Using the algorithm called SplicerEX with two complementary 
Affymetrix microarray platforms, we uncovered 433 mRNA isoform changes regulated 
by EBV during B-cell transformation. These changes were largely orthogonal with
the 2,163 mRNA abundance changes observed during transformation, such that less
than one-third of mRNAs changing at the level of isoform also changed in overall 
abundance. While we observed no preference for a mechanistic class of mRNA
isoform change, we detected a significant shortening of 3' untranslated regions
and exclusion of cassette exons in EBV-transformed cells relative to uninfected B
cells. Gene ontology analysis of the mRNA isoform changes revealed significant
enrichment in nucleic acid binding proteins. We validated several of these
isoform changes and were intrigued by those in two mRNAs encoding the proteins
XBP1 and TCF4, which have both been shown to bind and activate the promoter of
the major EBV lytic trans-activator BZLF1. Our studies indicate that EBV latent
infection promotes the usage of mRNA isoforms of XBP1 and TCF4 that restrict
BZLF1 activation. Therefore, characterization of global changes in mRNA isoform
usage during EBV infection identifies a new mechanism for the maintenance of
latent infection.

PMCID: PMC3807935
PMID: 24027308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. JAMA. 2013 Sep 11;310(10):1013. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.277647.

Mediterranean diet may reduce stroke risk in individuals with genetic
predisposition to diabetes.

Mitka M.

PMID: 24026584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Oct;121(9):526-30. doi:
10.1055/s-0033-1347199. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Rs290487 of TCF7L2 gene is not associated with type 2 diabetes in Chinese Han
population: a case control study and meta-analysis.

Ren Q(1), Xiao J, Han X, Luo Y, Yang W, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Peking University Diabetes Center, Beijing, China.

AIMS: rs290487 in TCF7L2 was originally identified to be associated with type 2
diabetes in Taiwan Chinese population. However, discrepancies were noted in
subsequent replicated studies. So the aim of this study is to investigate the
effect of rs290487 in TCF7L2 on genetic susceptibility of type 2 diabetes in a
large sample of Chinese -population.
RESULTS: In meta analysis of 9 studies with 9 422 cases and 8 585 control
subjects, no association was found between rs290487 and type 2 diabetes in China 
(OR=1.06, 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.96-1.17, p=0.19). In case control
study, rs290487 was genotyped in 5 151 diabetic patients and 4 650 non-diabetic
controls. After adjusting for sex, age and BMI, and using an additive genetic
model, logistic regression analysis revealed no association between rs290487 and 
type 2 diabetes (OR=1.015, 95%CI 0.949-1.087, p=0.662). No association was found 
between rs290487 and type 2 diabetes in northern and southern Chinese population 
separately.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we have found no association between rs290487 and type 2
diabetes in Chinese population. This SNP is unlikely an influential genetic
variant with type 2 diabetes in Chinese population.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24002895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Front Horm Res. 2013;40:28-39. doi: 10.1159/000341682. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Genetics of polycystic ovary syndrome.

Barber TM(1), Franks S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic and Vascular Health, Warwick Medical School, University 
of Warwick, Coventry, UK. T.Barber@warwick.ac.uk

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an oligogenic condition, with a heritability 
of ~70%. PCOS is also associated with obesity, which itself is heavily influenced
by genetic variants. PCOS is inherently difficult to study genetically, and most 
of the current literature (>70 studies based on the candidate gene approach) is
inconclusive, with many studies being underpowered resulting in inconsistencies, 
controversies and lack of clear consensus. A further problem is that the
candidate gene approach relies upon some prior understanding of pathogenesis to
determine the candidacy of the gene chosen (with >20,000 genes to choose from
within the human genome). PCOS has a complex and incompletely understood
pathogenesis, thereby limiting the candidate gene approach for this condition.
Thankfully, this limitation is overcome through use of the genome-wide
association study (GWAS), the first of which in PCOS has already been published. 
The GWAS does not rely upon any a priori understanding of pathogenesis, and as
such holds the potential to reveal hitherto unexpected or even unknown pathogenic
pathways that may be implicated in the development of PCOS. Data from future GWAS
in PCOS should transform our understanding of PCOS pathogenesis, and also provide
a basis on which to develop future novel therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24002403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2013 Sep;53(3):101-8. doi: 10.1111/cga.12011.

Wnt11 expression in rat dental pulp and promotional effects of Wnt signaling on
odontoblast differentiation.

Koizumi Y(1), Kawashima N, Yamamoto M, Takimoto K, Zhou M, Suzuki N, Saito M,
Harada H, Suda H.

Author information: 
(1)Pulp Biology and Endodontics, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical & Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Congenital anomalies of wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
integration site family (Wnt) are frequently accompanied with tooth and dentin
abnormality. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of Wnt
signaling on odontoblast differentiation of mouse dental papilla cells (MDPs).
Mouse dental papilla cells were cultured in a-modified minimum essential medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics. Odontoblast differentiation
was induced by bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2), and the expression of
odontoblast-specific markers and Wnt-related signaling molecules was analyzed by 
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry. Odontoblast differentiation was evaluated by dentin
sialophosphoprotein (Dspp) and dentin matrix protein (DMP) 1 expression.
Localization of ß-catenin in MDPs was detected by immunocytochemistry using an
anti-ß-catenin antibody. Dspp expression in MDPs was upregulated in the presence 
of BMP2. Wnt5a, Wnt11, Lef1 and Tcf4 expression was upregulated in BMP2-treated
MDPs. Wnt11 expression was detected in rat dental pulp in vivo, and particularly 
strong expression of Wnt11 was detected in odontoblasts. Enhanced Dspp and DMP1
expression and alkaline phosphatase activity induced by BMP2 were completely
negated by the Wnt antagonist: IWR-1-endo treatment. Nuclear translocation of
ß-catenin observed in BMP2-treated MDPs was also negated by IWR-1-endo treatment.
These results indicate that Wnt signaling upregulates odontoblast marker
expression in MDPs, suggesting a promoting effect of Wnt signaling on odontoblast
differentiation.

© 2013 The Authors. Congenital Anomalies © 2013 Japanese Teratology Society.

PMID: 23998262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Gene. 2014 Jan 1;533(1):346-55. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.027. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Insights into significant pathways and gene interaction networks underlying
breast cancer cell line MCF-7 treated with 17ß-estradiol (E2).

Huan J(1), Wang L, Xing L, Qin X, Feng L, Pan X, Zhu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Eighth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Shanghai 200235, China. Electronic address: huanjl2013@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogens are known to regulate the proliferation of breast cancer
cells and to alter their cytoarchitectural and phenotypic properties, but the
gene networks and pathways by which estrogenic hormones regulate these events are
only partially understood.
METHODS: We used global gene expression profiling by Affymetrix GeneChip
microarray analysis, with KEGG pathway enrichment, PPI network construction,
module analysis and text mining methods to identify patterns and time courses of 
genes that are either stimulated or inhibited by estradiol (E2) in estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7 human breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: Of the genes queried on the Affymetrix Human Genome U133 plus 2.0
microarray, we identified 628 (12h), 852 (24h) and 880 (48 h) differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) that showed a robust pattern of regulation by E2. From
pathway enrichment analysis, we found out the changes of metabolic pathways of E2
treated samples at each time point. At 12h time point, the changes of metabolic
pathways were mainly focused on pathways in cancer, focal adhesion, and chemokine
signaling pathway. At 24h time point, the changes were mainly enriched in
neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction
and calcium signaling pathway. At 48 h time point, the significant pathways were 
pathways in cancer, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, cell adhesion molecules
(CAMs), axon guidance and ErbB signaling pathway. Of interest, our PPI network
analysis and module analysis found that E2 treatment induced enhancement of
PRSS23 at the three time points and PRSS23 was in the central position of each
module. Text mining results showed that the important genes of DEGs have
relationship with signal pathways, such as ERbB pathway (AREG), Wnt pathway
(NDP), MAPK pathway (NTRK3, TH), IP3 pathway (TRA@) and some transcript factors
(TCF4, MAF).
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies highlight the diverse gene networks and metabolic and
cell regulatory pathways through which E2 operates to achieve its widespread
effects on breast cancer cells.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23978611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 20;8(8):e72822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072822. eCollection
2013.

Limited TCF7L2 expression in MS lesions.

Lürbke A(1), Hagemeier K, Cui QL, Metz I, Brück W, Antel J, Kuhlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

Multiple sclerosis is the most frequent demyelinating disease in the human CNS
characterized by inflammation, demyelination, relative axonal loss and gliosis.
Remyelination occurs, but is frequently absent or restricted to a small
remyelinated rim at the lesion border. Impaired differentiation of
oligodendroglial precursor cells is one factor contributing to limited
remyelination, especially in chronic MS. TCF7L2 is an oligodendroglial
transcription factor regulating myelin gene expression during developmental
myelination as well as remyelination. TCF7L2 binds to co-effectors such as
ß-catenin or histone deacetylases and thereby activates or inhibits the
transcription of downstream genes involved in oligodendroglial differentiation.
To determine whether TCF7L2 can be used as a marker for differentiating or
myelinating oligodendrocytes, we analyzed the expression patterns of TCF7L2
during myelination and remyelination in human and murine CNS tissue samples.
Here, we demonstrate that marked expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is
restricted to a well defined time period during developmental myelination in
human and mouse CNS tissue samples. In demyelinating diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, TCF7L2 is reexpressed in oligodendrocytes in a subset of MS patients, 
but is also present in tissue samples from patients with non-demyelinating,
inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, TCF7L2 expression was also detected in
astrocytes. HDAC2, a potential binding partner of TCF7L2 that promotes
oligodendroglial differentiation and myelination, is expressed in the majority of
oligodendrocytes in controls and MS tissue samples. In summary, our data
demonstrate that the expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is limited to a
certain differentiation stage; however the expression of TCF7L2 is neither
restricted to the oligodendroglial lineage nor to (re-)myelinating conditions.

PMCID: PMC3748032
PMID: 23977356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003603. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

ß-Catenin-independent activation of TCF1/LEF1 in human hematopoietic tumor cells 
through interaction with ATF2 transcription factors.

Grumolato L(1), Liu G, Haremaki T, Mungamuri SK, Mong P, Akiri G, Lopez-Bergami
P, Arita A, Anouar Y, Mlodzik M, Ronai ZA, Brody J, Weinstein DC, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003745.

The role of Wnt signaling in embryonic development and stem cell maintenance is
well established and aberrations leading to the constitutive up-regulation of
this pathway are frequent in several types of human cancers. Upon ligand-mediated
activation, Wnt receptors promote the stabilization of ß-catenin, which
translocates to the nucleus and binds to the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer
factor (TCF/LEF) family of transcription factors to regulate the expression of
Wnt target genes. When not bound to ß-catenin, the TCF/LEF proteins are believed 
to act as transcriptional repressors. Using a specific lentiviral reporter, we
identified hematopoietic tumor cells displaying constitutive TCF/LEF
transcriptional activation in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization. Suppression
of TCF/LEF activity in these cells mediated by an inducible dominant-negative
TCF4 (DN-TCF4) inhibited both cell growth and the expression of Wnt target genes.
Further, expression of TCF1 and LEF1, but not TCF4, stimulated TCF/LEF reporter
activity in certain human cell lines independently of ß-catenin. By a
complementary approach in vivo, TCF1 mutants, which lacked the ability to bind to
ß-catenin, induced Xenopus embryo axis duplication, a hallmark of Wnt activation,
and the expression of the Wnt target gene Xnr3. Through generation of different
TCF1-TCF4 fusion proteins, we identified three distinct TCF1 domains that
participate in the ß-catenin-independent activity of this transcription factor.
TCF1 and LEF1 physically interacted and functionally synergized with members of
the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) family of transcription factors.
Moreover, knockdown of ATF2 expression in lymphoma cells phenocopied the
inhibitory effects of DN-TCF4 on the expression of target genes associated with
the Wnt pathway and on cell growth. Together, our findings indicate that, through
interaction with ATF2 factors, TCF1/LEF1 promote the growth of hematopoietic
malignancies in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization, thus establishing a new
mechanism for TCF1/LEF1 transcriptional activity distinct from that associated
with canonical Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3744423
PMID: 23966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 9;8(8):e71730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071730. eCollection 
2013.

Association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and cancer risk: a meta-analysis.

Chen J(1), Yuan T, Liu M, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of the
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been suggested to 
play an important role in the pathogenesis of cancer. However, the results have
been inconsistent. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis to clarify the
associations between TCF7L2 polymorphism and cancer risk.
METHODS: Published literature from PubMed and EMBASE were retrieved. Pooled odds 
ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence interval (CIs) were calculated using fixed- or
random-effects model.
RESULTS: A total of 19 studies (14,814 cases and 33,856 controls) were identified
for the analysis of the association between TCF7L2 polymorphism and cancer risk. 
The results showed that TCF7L2 polymorphism was associated with breast cancer
(Homogeneous model: OR=1.17, 95%CI=1.02-1.35, I (2)<U+200A>=21.8%, p for
heterogeneity=0.276; Heterogeneous model: OR=1.11, 95%CI=1.03-1.20, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, 
p for heterogeneity=0.543), prostate cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=0.89,
95%CI=0.84-0.96, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.640; Heterogeneous model:
OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.95, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.871), and colon
cancer (Heterogeneous model: OR=1.15, 95%CI=1.01-1.31, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for
heterogeneity=0.658), but not with colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis indicated that there were significantly
associations between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and risk of breast,
prostate and colon cancers, rather than colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and
ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3739728
PMID: 23951231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Diabetologia. 2013 Nov;56(11):2414-23. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3021-y. Epub 2013 
Aug 14.

Parental history of type 2 diabetes, TCF7L2 variant and lower insulin secretion
are associated with incident hypertension. Data from the DESIR and RISC cohorts.

Bonnet F(1), Roussel R, Natali A, Cauchi S, Petrie J, Laville M, Yengo L, Froguel
P, Lange C, Lantieri O, Marre M, Balkau B, Ferrannini E; DESIR and RISC Study
Groups.

Author information: 
(1)Service Endocrinologie-Diabétologie, CHU Rennes, Université Rennes 1, Inserm
UMR 991, Rennes, France, fabrice.bonnet@chu-rennes.fr.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The relationship between insulin secretion and the incidence of 
hypertension has not been well characterised. We hypothesised that both a
parental history of diabetes and TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, which increases
susceptibility to diabetes because of impaired beta cell function, are associated
with incident hypertension. In a separate cohort, we assessed whether low insulin
secretion is related to incident hypertension.
METHODS: Nine year incident hypertension was studied in 2,391 normotensive
participants from the Data from an Epidemiological Study on the Insulin
Resistance Syndrome (DESIR) cohort. The relationship between insulin secretion
and 3 year incident hypertension was investigated in 1,047 non-diabetic,
normotensive individuals from the Relationship between Insulin Sensitivity and
Cardiovascular Disease (RISC) cohort. Insulin secretion during OGTT was expressed
in relation to the degree of insulin resistance, as assessed by a
hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp.
RESULTS: In the DESIR cohort, a parental history of diabetes and the TCF7L2
at-risk variant were both associated with hypertension incidence at year 9,
independently of waist circumference, BP, fasting glucose, insulin levels and
HOMA-IR at inclusion (p = 0.02 for parental history, p = 0.006 for TCF7L2). In
the RISC cohort, a lower insulin secretion rate during the OGTT at baseline was
associated with both higher BP and a greater risk of hypertension at year 3. This
inverse correlation between the insulin secretion rate and incident hypertension 
persisted after controlling for baseline insulin resistance, glycaemia and BP (p 
= 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Parental history of diabetes, TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and a reduced insulin secretion rate were consistently associated
with incident hypertension. A low insulin secretion rate might be a new risk
factor for incident hypertension, beyond insulin resistance.

PMID: 23942764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Diabetes Care. 2013 Nov;36(11):3803-11. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0955. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Mediterranean diet reduces the adverse effect of the TCF7L2-rs7903146
polymorphism on cardiovascular risk factors and stroke incidence: a randomized
controlled trial in a high-cardiovascular-risk population.

Corella D(1), Carrasco P, Sorlí JV, Estruch R, Rico-Sanz J, Martínez-González MÁ,
Salas-Salvadó J, Covas MI, Coltell O, Arós F, Lapetra J, Serra-Majem L,
Ruiz-Gutiérrez V, Warnberg J, Fiol M, Pintó X, Ortega-Azorín C, Muñoz MÁ,
Martínez JA, Gómez-Gracia E, González JI, Ros E, Ordovás JM.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Dolores Corella, dolores.corella@uv.es.

OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms are strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes, but controversially with plasma lipids and
cardiovascular disease. Interactions of the Mediterranean diet (MedDiet) on these
associations are unknown. We investigated whether the TCF7L2-rs7903146 (C>T)
polymorphism associations with type 2 diabetes, glucose, lipids, and
cardiovascular disease incidence were modulated by MedDiet.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A randomized trial (two MedDiet intervention groups 
and a control group) with 7,018 participants in the PREvención con
DIetaMEDiterránea study was undertaken and major cardiovascular events assessed. 
Data were analyzed at baseline and after a median follow-up of 4.8 years.
Multivariable-adjusted Cox regression was used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs)
for cardiovascular events.
RESULTS: The TCF7L2-rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with type 2 diabetes
(odds ratio 1.87 [95% CI 1.62-2.17] for TT compared with CC). MedDiet interacted 
significantly with rs7903146 on fasting glucose at baseline (P interaction =
0.004). When adherence to the MedDiet was low, TT had higher fasting glucose
concentrations (132.3 ± 3.5 mg/dL) than CC+CT (127.3 ± 3.2 mg/dL) individuals (P 
= 0.001). Nevertheless, when adherence was high, this increase was not observed
(P = 0.605). This modulation was also detected for total cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, and triglycerides (P interaction < 0.05 for all). Likewise, in the
randomized trial, TT subjects had a higher stroke incidence in the control group 
(adjusted HR 2.91 [95% CI 1.36-6.19]; P = 0.006 compared with CC), whereas
dietary intervention with MedDiet reduced stroke incidence in TT homozygotes
(adjusted HR 0.96 [95% CI 0.49-1.87]; P = 0.892 for TT compared with CC).
CONCLUSIONS: Our novel results suggest that MedDiet may not only reduce increased
fasting glucose and lipids in TT individuals, but also stroke incidence.

PMCID: PMC3816851
PMID: 23942586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Oct 1;169(5):569-76. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0105. Print 2013 
Nov.

Polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene in South Brazilian women with polycystic ovary
syndrome: a cross-sectional study.

Ramos RB(1), Wiltgen D, Spritzer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecological Endocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Hospital de
Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2350, 90035-003 Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 C/T
and rs11196236 C/T are associated with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in South 
Brazilian women.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Two hundred PCOS patients and 102 non-hirsute, ovulatory controls were
genotyped by real-time PCR. Haplotypes were constructed from the combination of
both polymorphisms. Frequencies were inferred using the PHASE 2.1.1 software.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The distribution of rs7903146 (PCOS, 54.4% CC; 28.5% CT;
17.1% TT; controls, 51.0% CC; 37.0% CT; 12.0% TT) and rs11196236 (PCOS, 4.3% CC; 
33.5% CT; 62.2% TT; controls, 3.2% CC; 35.5% CT; 61.3% TT) was similar between
the groups. rs7903146 and rs11196236 were not in linkage disequilibrium
(|D'|=0.34; r(2)=0.07). PCOS participants were younger, with higher age-adjusted 
BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure, triglycerides, insulin, homeostasis
model assessment index to estimate insulin resistance and total testosterone, and
lower HDL-C and sex hormone binding globulin vs controls. In PCOS, no differences
between genotypes and haplotypes were found for clinical and metabolic variables.
However, for each T (rs7903146) and T (rs11196236) allele added to the
haplotypes, a variation of 5.87 cm in waist (P trend=0.01), 10.7 mg/dl in total
cholesterol (P trend=0.03), and 10.3 mg/dl in LDL-C (P trend=0.01) was recorded. 
TCF7L2 variants are probably not implicated in PCOS development in South
Brazilian women.

PMID: 23935130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;30(4):467-72. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2013.04.019.

[Study of the association between SNP rs7903146(C/T) in TCF7L2 and metabolic
syndrome in Chinese Korean and Han populations from Yanbian].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YP(1), Wang WJ, Sheng TX, Cui ZW, Jin YH, Jin Y, Zhang Z, Jin XJ, Zhou WJ,
Yang KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Yanbian University College of
Basic Medicine, Yanji, Jilin 133000, P. R. China. yangkj@ybu.cdu.com.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between a rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism of
TCF7L2 gene and metabolic syndrome (MS), plasma lipoprotein, and plasma
adiponectin (PA) in Chinese Korean and Han populations from Yanbian region.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing were used to determine the 
genotype of rs7903146 in 310 Chinese Korean (190 in case group and 120 in control
group) and 344 Chinese Han (255 in case group and 89 in control group). ELIAS was
used to test serum insulin (INS) and PA.
RESULTS: The frequency of T allele was higher in ethnic Han compared with ethnic 
Koreans (0.022 vs. 0.008), lower than that of Europeans (0.279) and Africans
(0.257), but similar to those of Beijing Chinese and Japanese. For ethnic Korean 
Chinese, the frequencies of TT and CT genotypes as well as the T allele in
patients with EH were significantly higher than those of the control group (P<
0.01), which also showed an increasing trend for both MS and T2DM groups (P=0.09 
and P=0.07, respectively). By contrast, for Chinese Han, the frequencies of
genotypes and particular allele in patients with MS, T2DM and EH showed no
significant difference from those of the control group. For T2DM, EH, and control
groups, PA level of individuals with CT or TT genotypes was significantly higher 
compared with that of the CC genotype (P< 0.05). The TC and LDL-C levels were
significantly higher in T2DM, MS and EH groups compared with those of the control
group. The PA level was lower in MS group compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: The T allele of SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene may be a risk factor for
EH in Chinese Korean population from Yanbian region. The T allele also affects
the PA level; lower PA is a risk factor for MS. The rs7903146 polymorphism showed
a racial and ethnic difference.

PMID: 23926018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Aug 3;13:203. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-203.

Targeting beta-catenin signaling to induce apoptosis in human breast cancer cells
by z-guggulsterone and Gugulipid extract of Ayurvedic medicine plant Commiphora
mukul.

Jiang G(1), Xiao X, Zeng Y, Nagabhushanam K, Majeed M, Xiao D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215004, Jiangsu, China. xs52308@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: z-Guggulsterone (z-Gug) and Gugulipid (GL) have been used to treat a 
variety of ailments. We now report their anti-cancer effect and mechanism against
human breast cancer.
METHODS: Using the human estrogen receptor-positive (MCF-7) and triple-negative
(MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cells as well as the normal human mammary epithelial
cell line (HMEC), we evaluated the anti-breast-cancer efficacy and apoptosis
inducing activity of GL. We determined the cellular and molecular mechanism of
GL-inhibited breast cancer cell growth.
RESULTS: GL significantly inhibited growth of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells with an 
IC50~2 µM at pharmacologically relevant concentrations standardized to its major 
active constituent z-Gug. The GL-induced growth inhibition correlated with
apoptosis induction as evidenced by an increase in cytoplasmic histone-associated
DNA fragmentation and caspase 3 activity. The GL-induced apoptosis was associated
with down-regulation of the ß-Catenin signaling pathway. The decreased expression
of Wnt/ß-Catenin targeting genes, such as cyclin D1, C-myc and survivin, and the 
inhibition of the activity of the transcription factor (T-cell factor 4, TCF-4)
were observed in GL-treated breast cancer cells. The GL treatment resulted in a
significant reduction of ß-Catenin /TCF-4 complex in both of the cancer cells.
The GL-induced apoptotic cell death was significantly enhanced by RNA
Interference of ß-Catenin and TCF-4. On the other hand, the normal human mammary 
epithelial cell HMEC, compared with the human breast cancer cells, is
significantly more resistant to growth inhibition and apoptosis induction by GL.
CONCLUSION: The present study indicates that the ß-Catenin signaling pathway is
the target for GL-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3735424
PMID: 23914993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cancer. 2013 Jul 2;4(6):447-57. doi: 10.7150/jca.6896. Print 2013.

Wnt and the cancer niche: paracrine interactions with gastrointestinal cancer
cells undergoing asymmetric cell division.

Xin HW(1), Ambe CM, Ray S, Kim BK, Koizumi T, Wiegand GW, Hari D, Mullinax JE,
Jaiswal KR, Garfield SH, Stojadinovic A, Rudloff U, Thorgeirsson SS, Avital I.

Author information: 
(1)1. Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;

OBJECTIVE: Stem-like cancer cells contribute to cancer initiation and
maintenance. Stem cells can self-renew by asymmetric cell division (ACD). ACD
with non-random chromosomal cosegregation (ACD-NRCC) is one possible self-renewal
mechanism. There is a paucity of evidence supporting ACD-NRCC in human cancer.
Our aim was to investigate ACD-NRCC and its potential interactions with the
cancer niche (microenvironment) in gastrointestinal cancers.
DESIGN: We used DNA double and single labeling approaches with FACS to isolate
live cells undergoing ACD-NRCC.
RESULTS: Gastrointestinal cancers contain rare subpopulations of cells capable of
ACD-NRCC. ACD-NRCC was detected preferentially in subpopulations of cells
previously suggested to be stem-like/tumor-initiating cancer cells. ACD-NRCC was 
independent of cell-to-cell contact, and was regulated by the cancer niche in a
heat-sensitive paracrine fashion. Wnt pathway genes and proteins are
differentially expressed in cells undergoing ACD-NRCC vs. symmetric cell
division. Blocking the Wnt pathway with IWP2 (WNT antagonist) or siRNA-TCF4
resulted in suppression of ACD-NRCC. However, using a Wnt-agonist did not
increase the relative proportion of cells undergoing ACD-NRCC.
CONCLUSION: Gastrointestinal cancers contain subpopulations of cells capable of
ACD-NRCC. Here we show for the first time that ACD-NRCC can be regulated by the
Wnt pathway, and by the cancer niche in a paracrine fashion. However, whether
ACD-NRCC is exclusively associated with stem-like cancer cells remains to be
determined. Further study of these findings might generate novel insights into
stem cell and cancer biology. Targeting the mechanism of ACD-NRCC might engender 
novel approaches for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3726705
PMID: 23901343  [PubMed]


360. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;70(6):573-81.

A comprehensive family-based replication study of schizophrenia genes.

Aberg KA(1), Liu Y, Bukszár J, McClay JL, Khachane AN, Andreassen OA, Blackwood
D, Corvin A, Djurovic S, Gurling H, Ophoff R, Pato CN, Pato MT, Riley B, Webb T, 
Kendler K, O'Donovan M, Craddock N, Kirov G, Owen M, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Werge
T, Hultman CM, Delisi LE, Sullivan P, van den Oord EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond 23298, USA.

Comment in
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;70(6):569-70.
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;71(1):94-5.

IMPORTANCE: Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a devastating psychiatric condition.
Identifying the specific genetic variants and pathways that increase
susceptibility to SCZ is critical to improve disease understanding and address
the urgent need for new drug targets.
OBJECTIVE: To identify SCZ susceptibility genes.
DESIGN: We integrated results from a meta-analysis of 18 genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) involving 1,085,772 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 6
databases that showed significant informativeness for SCZ. The 9380 most
promising SNPs were then specifically genotyped in an independent family-based
replication study that, after quality control, consisted of 8107 SNPs.
SETTING: Linkage meta-analysis, brain transcriptome meta-analysis, candidate gene
database, OMIM, relevant mouse studies, and expression quantitative trait locus
databases.
PATIENTS: We included 11,185 cases and 10,768 control subjects from 6 databases
and, after quality control 6298 individuals (including 3286 cases) from 1811
nuclear families.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Case-control status for SCZ.
RESULTS: Replication results showed a highly significant enrichment of SNPs with 
small P values. Of the SNPs with replication values of P.01, the proportion of
SNPs that had the same direction of effects as in the GWAS meta-analysis was 89% 
in the combined ancestry group (sign test, P < 2.20 x 10(-16) and 93% in subjects
of European ancestry only (P < 2.20 < 10(-16)). Our results supported the major
histocompatibility complex region showing a3.7-fold overall enrichment of
replication values of P < .01 in subjects from European ancestry. We replicated
SNPs in TCF4 (P = 2.53 x 10(-10)) and NOTCH4 (P = 3.16 x 10(-7)) that are among
the most robust SCZ findings. More novel findings included POM121L2 (P = 3.51 x
10(-7)), AS3MT (P = 9.01 x 10(-7)), CNNM2 (P = 6.07 = 10(-7)), and NT5C2(P = 4.09
x 10(-7)). To explore the many small effects, we performed pathway analyses. The 
most significant pathways involved neuronal function (axonal guidance, neuronal
systems, and L1 cell adhesion molecule interaction)and the immune system (antigen
processing, cell adhesion molecules relevant to T cells, and translocation to
immunological synapse).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: We replicated novel SCZ disease genes and pathogenic
pathways. Better understanding the molecular and biological mechanisms involved
with schizophrenia may improve disease management and may identify new drug
targets.

PMID: 23894747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Oct;33(7):983-90. doi: 10.1007/s10571-013-9966-z. Epub
2013 Jul 28.

Conditioned medium of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-activated olfactory ensheathing
cells promotes synaptogenesis and neurite growth in vitro.

Yang Z(1), Wu Y, Zheng L, Zhang C, Yang J, Shi M, Feng D, Wu Z, Wang YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 
127 Chang Le Xi Road, Xi'an, 710032, Shaanxi, China.

Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs), the major glia cells in the olfactory system,
have been extensively studied because of their ability to promote axonal growth
and regeneration. Whether it could facilitate synaptogenesis is an important, but
remains as yet an unanswered question. We have identified a subgroup of Wnt
signaling-activated OECs, spatiotemporal distribution of which in the olfactory
bulb suggests a role for these cells in both axonal growth and synaptogenesis. In
the present study, we explored this possibility in vitro. OECs were primarily
cultured, in which Wnt signaling was activated by overexpressing ß-catenin, and
inhibited by dominant negative TCF4. Neurite growth and synaptogenesis were
assessed by co-culturing neurons with conditioned medium from control OECs (cOECs
CM), Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-activated OECs (wOECs CM), or Wnt
signaling-inhibited OECs (wiOECs). The results showed that although cOECs CM
enhances axonal growth, wOECs CM exhibited a stronger axonal growth-promoting
effect, than cOECs CM. More importantly, wOECs CM stimulates synatpogenesis,
demonstrated by the expression of Synaptophysin and whole-cell patch clamp
recording. In contrast, both cOECs CM and wiOECs CM do not affect synaptogenesis.
Our data, for the first time, demonstrated that, in comparison with regularly
cultured OECs, wOECs CM are more effective in enhancing axonal growth, and can
promote synaptogenesis, probably by secreting factors. These results suggest a
potential application of wOECs for treating spinal cord injury.

PMID: 23893371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 24;33(30):12528-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0536-13.2013.

Transgenic overexpression of Sox17 promotes oligodendrocyte development and
attenuates demyelination.

Ming X(1), Chew LJ, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that Sox17 regulates cell cycle exit and
differentiation in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Here we investigated its
function in white matter (WM) development and adult injury with a newly generated
transgenic mouse overexpressing Sox17 in the oligodendrocyte lineage under the
CNPase promoter. Sox17 overexpression in CNP-Sox17 mice sequentially promoted
postnatal oligodendrogenesis, increasing NG2 progenitor cells from postnatal day 
(P) 15, then O4+ and CC1+ cells at P30 and P120, respectively. Total Olig2+
oligodendrocyte lineage cells first decreased between P8 and P22 through
Sox17-mediated increase in apoptotic cell death, and thereafter significantly
exceeded WT levels from P30 when cell death had ceased. CNP-Sox17 mice showed
increased Gli2 protein levels and Gli2+ cells in WM, indicating that Sox17
promotes the generation of oligodendrocyte lineage cells through Hedgehog
signaling. Sox17 overexpression prevented cell loss after lysolecithin-induced
demyelination by increasing Olig2+ and CC1+ cells in response to injury.
Furthermore, Sox17 overexpression abolished the injury-induced increase in
TCF7L2/TCF4+ cells, and protected oligodendrocytes from apoptosis by preventing
decreases in Gli2 and Bcl-2 expression that were observed in WT lesions. Our
study thus reveals a biphasic effect of Sox17 overexpression on cell survival and
oligodendrocyte formation in the developing WM, and that its potentiation of
oligodendrocyte survival in the adult confers resistance to injury and myelin
loss. This study demonstrates that overexpression of this transcription factor
might be a viable protective strategy to mitigate the consequences of
demyelination in the adult WM.

PMCID: PMC3721852
PMID: 23884956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;19(17):4621-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0585.
Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Novel role of MDA-9/syntenin in regulating urothelial cell proliferation by
modulating EGFR signaling.

Dasgupta S(1), Menezes ME, Das SK, Emdad L, Janjic A, Bhatia S, Mukhopadhyay ND, 
Shao C, Sarkar D, Fisher PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. sdasgupta@vcu.edu

PURPOSE: Urothelial cell carcinoma (UCC) rapidly progresses from superficial to
muscle-invasive tumors. The key molecules involved in metastatic progression and 
its early detection require clarification. The present study defines a seminal
role of the metastasis-associated gene MDA-9/Syntenin in UCC progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression pattern of MDA-9/Syntenin was examined in 44
primary UCC and the impact of its overexpression and knockdown was examined in
multiple cells lines and key findings were validated in primary tumors.
RESULTS: Significantly higher (P=0.002-0.003) expression of MDA-9/Syntenin was
observed in 64% (28 of 44) of primary tumors and an association was evident with 
stage (P=0.01), grade (P=0.03), and invasion status (P=0.02). MDA-9/Syntenin
overexpression in nontumorigenic HUC-1 cells increased proliferation (P=0.0012), 
invasion (P=0.0001), and EGF receptor (EGFR), AKT, phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K), and c-Src expression. Alteration of ß-catenin, E-cadherin, vimentin,
claudin-1, ZO-1, and T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) expression was also observed.
MDA-9/Syntenin knockdown in three UCC cell lines reversed phenotypic and
molecular changes observed in the HUC-1 cells and reduced in vivo metastasis. Key
molecular changes observed in the cell lines were confirmed in primary tumors. A 
physical interaction and colocalization of MDA-9/Syntenin and EGFR was evident in
UCC cell lines and primary tumors. A logistic regression model analysis revealed 
a significant correlation between MDA-9/Syntenin:EGFR and MDA-9/Syntenin:AKT
expressions with stage (P=0.04, EGFR; P=0.01, AKT). A correlation between
MDA-9/Syntenin:ß-catenin coexpression with stage (P=0.03) and invasion (P=0.04)
was also evident.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that MDA-9/Syntenin might provide an
attractive target for developing detection, monitoring, and therapeutic
strategies for managing UCC.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3872137
PMID: 23873690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Psychopharmacol. 2013 Nov;27(11):1058-69. doi: 10.1177/0269881113497612. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Electroconvulsive seizure-induced changes in gene expression in the mouse
hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus.

Sakaida M(1), Sukeno M, Imoto Y, Tsuchiya S, Sugimoto Y, Okuno Y, Segi-Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Electroconvulsive therapy is an effective and rapid treatment for depression. In 
patients with depression, the function of the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus (PVN) is frequently altered. Electroconvulsive seizure (ECS), which 
is a model of electroconvulsive therapy, upregulates the expression of c-fos in
the PVN of animal models. Therefore, we hypothesized that ECS alters gene
expression and function in the PVN. The PVN was microdissected from mouse brain
sections following ECS treatment, and total RNA was analyzed by microarray. Two
hours after ECS, the levels of expression of 2.6% (589 genes) of the genes showed
a greater than 2-fold decrease and 0.9% (205 genes) showed a greater than 2-fold 
increase. Among these genes, 72 of the downregulated genes and 12 of the
upregulated genes have been proposed to be associated with psychiatric disorders,
such as depression, by knowledge database analyses. The groups of downregulated
genes included neuropeptides (Cck), kinases (Prkcb, Camk2a), transcription
factors (Tcf4), and transporters (Aqp4), and these have been suggested to be
associated with psychiatric disorders and/or PVN function. The results of the
present study indicated that ECS treatment could modulate PVN functions through
altered gene expression, which may contribute to its antidepressant effects.

PMID: 23863925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;29(10):873-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2013.813469.
Epub 2013 Jul 15.

Association of the rs7903146 polymorphism in transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene with gestational diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis.

Kang S(1), Xie Z, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Medical College of Qingdao University , Qingdao, 
Shandong , P.R. China.

A meta-analysis was performed to assess the association between the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism rs7903146 (IVS3C<U+2009>><U+2009>T) and gestational 
diabetes mellitus (GDM). A comprehensive search was conducted to identify all
case-control or cohort design studies of the above-mentioned associations. The
fixed or random effect pooled measure was selected on the basis of homogeneity
test among studies. Heterogeneity among studies was evaluated using the I(2).
Meta-regression was used to explore the potential sources of between-study
heterogeneity. Publication bias was estimated using Egger's linear regression
test. A total of 10 studies including 3404 cases and 6473 controls were involved 
in this meta-analysis. Overall, after excluding articles that deviated from HWE
in controls, and further the key contributors to between-study heterogeneity,
significant associations between TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic polymorphism and risk
of gestational diabetes mellitus were observed in the dominant (OR 1.653, 95% CI 
1.416-1.930) and codominant (OR 1.525, 95% CI 1.350-1.723) models. The
meta-analysis suggests that TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic polymorphism was associated 
with increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 23855352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 2;8(7):e68525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068525. Print 2013.

Henryin, an ent-kaurane diterpenoid, inhibits Wnt signaling through interference 
with ß-catenin/TCF4 interaction in colorectal cancer cells.

Li X(1), Pu J, Jiang S, Su J, Kong L, Mao B, Sun H, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China,
Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Aberrant Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has been strongly associated with the
tumorigenesis of human colorectal cancer. Inhibitors of this pathway may then
offer therapeutic strategies as well as chemoprevention for this malignant
disease. Henryin is an ent-kaurane diterpenoid isolated from Isodonrubescens var.
lushanensis, a plant long been used in folk medicine to prevent inflammation and 
gastrointestinal disease. In the present study, we report that henryin
selectively inhibits the proliferation of human colorectal cancer cells with a
GI50 value in the nano-molar range. Microarray analysis and reporter assays
showed that henryin worked as a novel antagonist of Wnt signaling pathway.
Henryin reduced the expression of Cyclin D1 and C-myc, and induced G1/S phase
arrest in HCT116 cells. Concurrently, henryin did not affect the cytosol-nuclear 
distribution of soluble ß-catenin, but impaired the association of ß-catenin/TCF4
transcriptional complex likely through directly blocking the binding of ß-catenin
to TCF4. We also then analyzed the structure-activity relationship among the
ent-kaurane type diterpenoids. Our data suggests that henryin, as a novel
inhibitor of Wnt signaling, could be a potential candidate for further
preclinical evaluation for colon cancer treatment, and as such warrants further
exploration.

PMCID: PMC3699517
PMID: 23844215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 1;8(7):e67694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067694. Print 2013.

GRG5/AES interacts with T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) and downregulates Wnt signaling in
human cells and zebrafish embryos.

Costa AM(1), Pereira-Castro I, Ricardo E, Spencer F, Fisher S, da Costa LT.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP-Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of 
Porto, Porto, Portugal. ltcosta@uevora.pt

Transcriptional control by TCF/LEF proteins is crucial in key developmental
processes such as embryo polarity, tissue architecture and cell fate
determination. TCFs associate with ß-catenin to activate transcription in the
presence of Wnt signaling, but in its absence act as repressors together with
Groucho-family proteins (GRGs). TCF4 is critical in vertebrate intestinal
epithelium, where TCF4-ß-catenin complexes are necessary for the maintenance of a
proliferative compartment, and their abnormal formation initiates tumorigenesis. 
However, the extent of TCF4-GRG complexes' roles in development and the
mechanisms by which they repress transcription are not completely understood.
Here we characterize the interaction between TCF4 and GRG5/AES, a Groucho family 
member whose functional relationship with TCFs has been controversial. We map the
core GRG interaction region in TCF4 to a 111-amino acid fragment and show that,
in contrast to other GRGs, GRG5/AES-binding specifically depends on a 4-amino
acid motif (LVPQ) present only in TCF3 and some TCF4 isoforms. We further
demonstrate that GRG5/AES represses Wnt-mediated transcription both in human
cells and zebrafish embryos. Importantly, we provide the first evidence of an
inherent repressive function of GRG5/AES in dorsal-ventral patterning during
early zebrafish embryogenesis. These results improve our understanding of TCF-GRG
interactions, have significant implications for models of transcriptional
repression by TCF-GRG complexes, and lay the groundwork for in depth direct
assessment of the potential role of Groucho-family proteins in both normal and
abnormal development.

PMCID: PMC3698143
PMID: 23840876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Sep;56(9):502-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.06.007. Epub 2013
Jul 4.

Monozygotic twins discordant for 18q21.2qter deletion detected by array CGH in
amniotic fluid.

Essaoui M(1), Nizon M, Beaujard MP, Carrier A, Tantau J, de Blois MC, Fontaine S,
Michot C, Amiel J, Bernard JP, Attié-Bitach T, Vekemans M, Turleau C, Ville Y,
Malan V.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP,
Paris, France.

Discordant chromosomal anomalies in monozygotic twins may be caused by various
timing issues of erroneous mitosis and twinning events. Here, we report a
prenatal diagnosis of heterokaryotypic monozygotic twins discordant for
phenotype. In a 28-year-old woman, ultrasound examination performed at 26 weeks
of gestation, detected intrauterine growth restriction and unilateral cleft lip
and palate in twin B, whereas twin A had normal fluid, growth and anatomy.
Molecular karyotyping in twin B identified a 18q21.2qter deletion, further
confirmed by FISH analysis on amniocytes. Interestingly, in twin A, cytogenetic
studies (FISH analysis and karyotype) on amniocytes were normal. Genotyping with 
microsatellite markers confirmed the monozygosity of the twins. At 32 weeks of
gestation, selective termination of twin B was performed by umbilical cord
coagulation and fetal blood samples were taken from the umbilical cord in both
twins. FISH analyses detected mosaicism in both twins with 75% of cells being
normal and 25% harboring the 18qter deletion. After genetic counseling, the
parents elected to terminate the second twin at 36 weeks of gestation. In
postmortem studies, FISH analyses revealed mosaicism on several tissues in both
twins. Taking into account this observation, we discuss the difficulties of
genetic counseling and management concerning heterokaryotypic monozygotic twins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23832107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3128-38. doi: 10.1242/dev.088765. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Wnt/ß-catenin signalling regulates Sox17 expression and is essential for
organizer and endoderm formation in the mouse.

Engert S(1), Burtscher I, Liao WP, Dulev S, Schotta G, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany.

Several signalling cascades are implicated in the formation and patterning of the
three principal germ layers, but their precise temporal-spatial mode of action in
progenitor populations remains undefined. We have used conditional gene deletion 
of mouse ß-catenin in Sox17-positive embryonic and extra-embryonic endoderm as
well as vascular endothelial progenitors to address the function of canonical Wnt
signalling in cell lineage formation and patterning. Conditional mutants fail to 
form anterior brain structures and exhibit posterior body axis truncations,
whereas initial blood vessel formation appears normal. Tetraploid rescue
experiments reveal that lack of ß-catenin in the anterior visceral endoderm
results in defects in head organizer formation. Sox17 lineage tracing in the
definitive endoderm (DE) shows a cell-autonomous requirement for ß-catenin in
midgut and hindgut formation. Surprisingly, wild-type posterior visceral endoderm
(PVE) in midgut- and hindgut-deficient tetraploid chimera rescues the posterior
body axis truncation, indicating that the PVE is important for tail organizer
formation. Upon loss of ß-catenin in the visceral endoderm and DE lineages, but
not in the vascular endothelial lineage, Sox17 expression is not maintained,
suggesting downstream regulation by canonical Wnt signalling. Strikingly,
Tcf4/ß-catenin transactivation complexes accumulated on Sox17 cis-regulatory
elements specifically upon endoderm induction in an embryonic stem cell
differentiation system. Together, these results indicate that the Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling pathway regulates Sox17 expression for visceral endoderm pattering and
DE formation and provide the first functional evidence that the PVE is necessary 
for gastrula organizer gene induction and posterior axis development.

PMID: 23824574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Protein Sci. 2013 Sep;22(9):1196-205. doi: 10.1002/pro.2304.

Protonation-dependent conformational variability of intrinsically disordered
proteins.

Geist L(1), Henen MA, Haiderer S, Schwarz TC, Kurzbach D, Zawadzka-Kazimierczuk
A, Saxena S, Zerko S, Kozminski W, Hinderberger D, Konrat R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational and Structural Biology, Max F. Perutz
Laboratories, University of Vienna, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, A-1030, Vienna,
Austria.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are characterized by substantial
conformational plasticity and undergo rearrangements of the time-averaged
conformational ensemble on changes of environmental conditions (e.g., in ionic
strength, pH, molecular crowding). In contrast to stably folded proteins, IDPs
often form compact conformations at acidic pH. The biological relevance of this
process was, for example, demonstrated by nuclear magnetic resonance studies of
the aggregation prone (low pH) state of a-synuclein. In this study, we report a
large-scale analysis of the pH dependence of disordered proteins using the
recently developed meta-structure approach. The meta-structure analysis of a
large set of IDPs revealed a significant tendency of IDPs to form a-helical
secondary structure elements and to preferentially fold into more compact
structures under acidic conditions. The predictive validity of this novel
approach was demonstrated with applications to the tumor-suppressor BASP1 and the
transcription factor Tcf4.

Copyright © 2013 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3776332
PMID: 23821606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Dec;34(12):2861-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt229. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

GPR48, a poor prognostic factor, promotes tumor metastasis and activates
ß-catenin/TCF signaling in colorectal cancer.

Wu J(1), Xie N, Xie K, Zeng J, Cheng L, Lei Y, Liu Y, Song L, Dong D, Chen Y,
Zeng R, Nice EC, Huang C, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, P. R. China.

G-protein-coupled receptor 48 (GPR48) is an orphan receptor belonging to the
G-protein-coupled receptors family, which plays an important role in the
development of various organs and cancer development and progression such as
gastric cancer and colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the prognostic value of
GPR48 expression in patients with CRC has not been reported. In this study, we
observed that GPR48 was overexpressed in primary CRC and metastatic lymph nodes
and closely correlated with tumor invasion and metastasis. Multivariate analysis 
indicated that high GPR48 expression was a poor prognostic factor for overall
survival in CRC patients. In vitro and in vivo assays demonstrated that enforced 
expression of GPR48 contributed to enhance migration and invasion of cancer cells
and tumor metastasis. In addition, we found that GPR48 increased nuclear
ß-catenin accumulation, T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) transcription activity, and
expression of its target genes including Cyclin D1 and c-Myc in CRC cells.
Correlation analysis showed that GPR48 expression in CRC tissues was positively
associated with ß-catenin expression. Upregulation of GPR48 resulted in increased
phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß, Akt and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) in CRC cells, while inhibition of PI3K/Akt
and mitogen-activated protein kinase /ERK1/2 pathways was sufficient to abolish
the effect of GPR48 on ß-catenin/TCF signaling. Taken together, GPR48 could serve
as both a prognostic biomarker and a therapeutic target for resectable CRC
patients.

PMID: 23803691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cell Rep. 2013 Jun 27;3(6):2113-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.015. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

Stage-specific regulation of reprogramming to induced pluripotent stem cells by
Wnt signaling and T cell factor proteins.

Ho R(1), Papp B, Hoffman JA, Merrill BJ, Plath K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Molecular Biology Institute, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California
Los Angeles, 615 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

Wnt signaling is intrinsic to mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Therefore, 
it is surprising that reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs) is not strongly enhanced by Wnt signaling. Here, we demonstrate
that active Wnt signaling inhibits the early stage of reprogramming to iPSCs,
whereas it is required and even stimulating during the late stage.
Mechanistically, this biphasic effect of Wnt signaling is accompanied by a change
in the requirement of all four of its transcriptional effectors: T cell factor 1 
(Tcf1), Lef1, Tcf3, and Tcf4. For example, Tcf3 and Tcf4 are stimulatory early
but inhibitory late in the reprogramming process. Accordingly, ectopic expression
of Tcf3 early in reprogramming combined with its loss of function late enables
efficient reprogramming in the absence of ectopic Sox2. Together, our data
indicate that the stepwise process of reprogramming to iPSCs is critically
dependent on the stage-specific control and action of all four Tcfs and Wnt
signaling.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700671
PMID: 23791530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Sep;47(9):1215-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.05.021.
Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Analysis of miR-137 expression and rs1625579 in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.

Guella I(1), Sequeira A, Rollins B, Morgan L, Torri F, van Erp TG, Myers RM,
Barchas JD, Schatzberg AF, Watson SJ, Akil H, Bunney WE, Potkin SG, Macciardi F, 
Vawter MP.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior,
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that act as potent regulators of
gene expression. A recent GWAS reported the rs1625579 SNP, located downstream of 
miR-137, as the strongest new association with schizophrenia [Ripke S, Sanders
AR, Kendler KS, Levinson DF, Sklar P, Holmans PA, et al. Genome-wide association 
study identifies five new schizophrenia loci. Nat Genet 2011;43:969-76.]. Prior
to this GWAS finding, a schizophrenia imaging-genetic study found miR-137 target 
genes significantly enriched for association with activation in the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) [Potkin SG, Macciardi F, Guffanti G, Fallon JH, Wang Q,
Turner JA, et al. Identifying gene regulatory networks in schizophrenia.
Neuroimage 2010;53:839-47.]. We investigated the expression levels of miR-137 and
three candidate target genes (ZNF804A, CACNA1C, TCF4) in the DLPFC of postmortem 
brain tissue from 2 independent cohorts: (1) 26 subjects (10 control (CTR), 7
schizophrenia (SZ), 9 bipolar disorder (BD)) collected at the UCI brain bank; and
(2) 99 subjects (33 CTR, 35 SZ, 31 BD) obtained from the Stanley Medical Research
Institute (SMRI). MiR-137 expression in the DLPFC did not differ between
diagnoses. We also explored the relationship between rs1625579 genotypes and
miR-137 expression. Significantly lower miR-137 expression levels were observed
in the homozygous TT subjects compared to TG and GG subjects in the control group
(30% decrease, p-value = 0.03). Moreover, reduced miR-137 levels in TT subjects
corresponded to increased levels of the miR-137 target gene TCF4. The miR-137
expression pattern in 9 brain regions was significant for regional effect (ANOVA 
p-value = 1.83E-12), with amygdala and hippocampus having the highest miR-137
expression level. In conclusion, decreased miR-137 expression is associated with 
the SZ risk allele of rs1625579, and potential regulation of TCF4, another SZ
candidate gene. This study offers additional support for involvement of miR-137
and downstream targets as mechanisms of risk for psychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3753093
PMID: 23786914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Ophthalmic Genet. 2014 Sep;35(3):138-41. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.804098. Epub 
2013 Jun 12.

Association of transcription factor 4 (TCF4) and protein tyrosine phosphatase,
receptor type G (PTPRG) with corneal dystrophies in southern Chinese.

Wang KJ(1), Jhanji V, Chen J, Law RW, Leung AT, Zhang M, Wang N, Pang CP, Yam GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong .

Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy is a common type of posterior CD characterized by
the development of gutta in the Descemet membrane. Recently, TCF4 was considered 
as a major risk gene for European FED cases. However, another recent report has
shown that rs613872 was not associated with Singaporean Chinese FEDs. Recent
reports indicate the genotypic heterogeneity of FEDs in different ethnic
populations. It is thus essential to understand whether these genes affect the
occurrence of FEDs and non-Fuchs' CD in the local population. In the present
study, we screened several reported SNPs (rs2286812, rs17595731 and rs613827 in
TCF4; rs7640737 and rs2292245 in PTPRG) in FED and non-Fuchs' patients with
corneal dystrophies of southern Chinese.

PMID: 23758498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogene. 2014 May 22;33(21):2737-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.238. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

EphA2 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition through the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway in gastric cancer cells.

Huang J(1), Xiao D(2), Li G(3), Ma J(3), Chen P(3), Yuan W(4), Hou F(4), Ge J(4),
Zhong M(1), Tang Y(1), Xia X(5), Chen Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (3)Cancer Research Institute, Hunan Key
Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China. (4)Department of General Surgery, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (5)Center for Genomic Medicine,
The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Weill Cornell School of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

This study aims to investigate the significance of erythropoietin-producing
hepatocellular (Eph)A2 expression and the mechanism by which EphA2 is involved in
the epithelial-mensenchymal transition (EMT) of gastric cancer cells. EphA2
expression levels were upregulated and positively correlated with metastasis and 
EMT markers in human gastric cancer specimens. Modulation of EphA2 expression
levels had distinct effects on cell proliferation, cell cycle, migration,
invasion and morphology in the gastric cancer cell lines SGC7901 and AGS in vitro
and in vivo. Overexpression of EphA2 resulted in the upregulation of the EMT
molecular markers N-cadherin and Snail, as well as the Wnt/ß-catenin targets
TCF4, Cyclin-D1 and c-Myc, while silencing EphA2 using short hairpin RNA had the 
opposite effect. Furthermore, inhibition of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by XAV939
negated the effect of EphA2 overexpression, whereas activation of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by LiCl impaired the effect of the EphA2 knockdown on EMT. 
These observations demonstrate that EphA2 upregulation is a common event in
gastric cancer specimens that is closely correlated with cancer metastasis and
that EphA2 promotes EMT of gastric cancer cells through activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

PMID: 23752181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Exp Ther Med. 2013 May;5(5):1511-1515. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Ileal interposition surgery-induced improvement of hyperglycemia and insulin
resistance in Goto-Kakizaki rats by upregulation of TCF7L2 expression.

Sun X(1), Song M, Bai R, Cheng S, Xing Y, Yuan H, Wang P, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100050, P.R. China ;

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of ileal interposition (IT) 
on glucose and insulin resistance (IR) in type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM), and
the role of T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), formerly known as TCF4, in the
downregulation of hyperglycemia following IT. Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats subjected
to IT surgery (GK-IT group), GK rats subjected to sham surgery (GK-Sham group)
and Wistar (WS) rats subjected to sham surgery (WS-Sham group) were investigated 
in this study. Fasting plasma glucose, body weight, food intake per 1 kg body
weight, insulin and a homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR) were measured pre- and post-surgery. The rats were euthanized 28 days
post-surgery and the pancreas of each rat was dissected. The expression levels of
TCF7L2 mRNA and protein were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and western
blotting, respectively. Our results revealed that IT improved both fasting plasma
glucose levels and IR in GK rats by upregulating the expression of the TCF7L2
protein. IT provides a valuable therapeutic option for patients with T2DM.
Upregulation of TCF7L2 protein expression may be a possible mechanism underlying 
the improvement of T2DM following IT.

PMCID: PMC3671895
PMID: 23737909  [PubMed]


377. EMBO J. 2013 Jul 3;32(13):1903-16. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.123. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Autolysosomal ß-catenin degradation regulates Wnt-autophagy-p62 crosstalk.

Petherick KJ(1), Williams AC, Lane JD, Ordóñez-Morán P, Huelsken J, Collard TJ,
Smartt HJ, Batson J, Malik K, Paraskeva C, Greenhough A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Colorectal Tumour Biology Group, School of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling and autophagy pathways each play important roles
during development, adult tissue homeostasis and tumorigenesis. Here we identify 
the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway as a negative regulator of both basal and
stress-induced autophagy. Manipulation of ß-catenin expression levels in vitro
and in vivo revealed that ß-catenin suppresses autophagosome formation and
directly represses p62/SQSTM1 (encoding the autophagy adaptor p62) via TCF4.
Furthermore, we show that during nutrient deprivation ß-catenin is selectively
degraded via the formation of a ß-catenin-LC3 complex, attenuating
ß-catenin/TCF-driven transcription and proliferation to favour adaptation during 
metabolic stress. Formation of the ß-catenin-LC3 complex is mediated by a
W/YXXI/L motif and LC3-interacting region (LIR) in ß-catenin, which is required
for interaction with LC3 and non-proteasomal degradation of ß-catenin. Thus,
Wnt/ß-catenin represses autophagy and p62 expression, while ß-catenin is itself
targeted for autophagic clearance in autolysosomes upon autophagy induction.
These findings reveal a regulatory feedback mechanism that place ß-catenin at a
key cellular integration point coordinating proliferation with autophagy, with
implications for targeting these pathways for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3981178
PMID: 23736261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Sep;58(9):2507-17. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2704-z. Epub 2013
May 31.

Inhibitory effect of a standardized pomegranate fruit extract on Wnt signalling
in 1, 2-dimethylhydrazine induced rat colon carcinogenesis.

Sadik NA(1), Shaker OG.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Kasr El-Eini
Street, Cairo, 11562, Egypt. nerminsadik@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: De-regulation of Wnt signalling is increasingly being implicated in
both experimental and human carcinogenesis including colon cancer.
AIMS: Our goal was to identify possible dietary agents that block Wnt signalling 
as a step toward investigating new strategies for suppression of colon cancer.
Pomegranate extract has emerged as an intriguing candidate due to its
polyphenolic content.
METHODS: We used a 1,2-dimethylhydrazine dihydrochloride (DMH)-induced rat colon 
carcinogenesis model to investigate the expression pattern of the main key
players in Wnt signalling by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis.
RESULTS: Our results showed that many Wnt-target genes, e.g., Wnt5a, frizzled
receptor (FRZ)-8, ß-catenin, T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer binding protein
(Tcf4/Lef1), c-myc and cyclin D1, were up-regulated whereas adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) and axin1 exhibited down-regulation in colonic tissues of our
DMH-colon cancer group compared with the normal group. Standardized pomegranate
extract minimised all the aberrant alterations observed in the studied Wnt genes 
in colonic tissues of the DMH+pomegranate group as compared with the DMH-induced 
colon cancer group. This effect was also confirmed by the normalization of
survival rate, inhibition of tumour incidence and a reduction of serum tumour
marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level. Histopathological observations
provided supportive evidence for the biochemical and molecular analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Standardized pomegranate extract holds great promise in the field of
colon cancer prevention by dietary agents.

PMID: 23722564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. BMC Cancer. 2013 May 30;13:268. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-268.

Claudin 1 expression in basal-like breast cancer is related to patient age.

Blanchard AA(1), Ma X, Dueck KJ, Penner C, Cooper SC, Mulhall D, Murphy LC,
Leygue E, Myal Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Defects in tight junctions, gate-keepers of the integrity of the
epidermal barrier function, are known to contribute to cancer development. As
such, enhancing our understanding of how the expression of proteins involved in
these junctions is regulated in cancer, remains a priority. Although the
expression of one of these proteins, claudin 1, is down regulated in most
invasive human breast cancers (HBC), we have recently shown that high levels of
claudin 1, characterized tumors belonging to the very aggressive basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC) subtype. In these tumors, the claudin 1 protein, usually
localized in the cell membrane, is often mislocalized to the cytoplasm.
METHODS: To examine the clinical relevance of this observation, we have generated
and analyzed an invasive HBC tissue microarray consisting of 151 breast tumor
samples; 79 of which presented a basal-like phenotype (i.e. ER-ve, PR-ve HER2-ve,
CK5/6 or EGFR+ve). We also interrogated the outcome of claudin 1 knockdown in a
human BLBC cell line, BT-20.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis of this patient cohort revealed a
significant association between high claudin 1 expression and BLBCs in women 55
years of age and older. Interestingly, no significant association was found
between claudin 1 and nodal involvement, tumor grade or tumor size. Regression
analysis however, showed a significant positive association between claudin 1 and
claudin 4, even though claudin 4 did not significantly correlate with patient
age. Claudin 1 knockdown in BT-20 cells resulted in decreased cell migration. It 
also significantly altered the expression of several genes involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT); in particular, SERPINE 1 (PAI1) and SSP1
(osteopontin), known to inhibit EMT and cancer cell migration. Conversely, genes 
known to maintain EMT through their interaction, SNAIL2, TCF4 and FOXC2 were
significantly down regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of high claudin 1 protein levels observed in tumors 
derived from older women with BLBC, suggests that claudin 1 has the potential to 
serve as a marker which can identify a specific subgroup of patients within the
BLBC subtype and thus, further contribute to the characterization of these
ill-defined breast cancers. More importantly, our studies strongly suggest that
claudin 1 directly participates in promoting breast cancer progression, possibly 
through the alteration of expression of EMT genes.

PMCID: PMC3674926
PMID: 23721519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. PLoS One. 2013 May 22;8(5):e63490. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063490. Print 2013.

Kindlin 2 regulates myogenic related factor myogenin via a canonical Wnt
signaling in myogenic differentiation.

Yu Y(1), Qi L, Wu J, Wang Y, Fang W, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education of China, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Kindlin 2, as an integrin-associated protein, is required for myocyte elongation 
and fusion. However, the association of Kindlin 2 with muscle
differentiation-related signaling pathways is unknown. Here, we identified a
mechanism that Kindlin 2 regulates myogenic regulatory factors myogenin via a
canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We found that knockdown of Kindlin 2 leads to 
the abolishment of ß-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription in C2C12 cells, followed
by the impairment of myogenic differentiation. Mechanistically, nuclear
translocation of both Kindlin 2 and ß-catenin is induced during myogenic
differentiation. In particular, Kindlin 2 forms a tripartite complex with active 
ß-catenin and TCF4, and hence co-occupied on the promoter of myogenin to enhance 
its expression. Functionally, depletion of Kindlin 2 impairs myogenic
differentiation via downregulation of myogenin. Taken together, our data reveal
that Kindlin 2 is required for Wnt signaling-regulated myogenic differentiation, 
providing a mechanistic insight into the role of Kindlin-2 in muscle development.

PMCID: PMC3661532
PMID: 23717433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Genome Biol. 2013 May 28;14(5):R50. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-5-r50.

DNA methylation dynamics during intestinal stem cell differentiation reveals
enhancers driving gene expression in the villus.

Kaaij LT, van de Wetering M, Fang F, Decato B, Molaro A, van de Werken HJ, van Es
JH, Schuijers J, de Wit E, de Laat W, Hannon GJ, Clevers HC, Smith AD, Ketting
RF.

Comment in
    Genome Biol. 2013;14(5):116.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is of pivotal importance during development. Previous
genome-wide studies identified numerous differentially methylated regions upon
differentiation of stem cells, many of them associated with transcriptional start
sites.
RESULTS: We present the first genome-wide, single-base-resolution view into DNA
methylation dynamics during differentiation of a mammalian epithelial stem cell: 
the mouse small intestinal Lgr5+ stem cell. Very little change was observed at
transcriptional start sites and our data suggest that differentiation-related
genes are already primed for expression in the stem cell. Genome-wide, only 50
differentially methylated regions were identified. Almost all of these loci
represent enhancers driving gene expression in the differentiated part of the
small intestine. Finally, we show that binding of the transcription factor Tcf4
correlates with hypo-methylation and demonstrate that Tcf4 is one of the factors 
contributing to formation of differentially methylated regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal limited DNA methylation dynamics during small
intestine stem cell differentiation and an impact of transcription factor binding
on shaping the DNA methylation landscape during differentiation of stem cells in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC4053812
PMID: 23714178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genome Biol. 2013 May 28;14(5):116. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-5-116.

Rising from the crypt: decreasing DNA methylation during differentiation of the
small intestine.

Cullen SM, Goodell MA.

Comment on
    Genome Biol. 2013;14(5):R50.

The differentiation of intestinal stem cells involves few DNA methylation
changes, assayed by bisulfite sequencing, in contrast to other adult somatic stem
cell hierarchies.

PMCID: PMC4053750
PMID: 23714004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Neuroimage. 2013 Nov 15;82:273-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.066. Epub
2013 May 24.

Transcriptomics of cortical gray matter thickness decline during normal aging.

Kochunov P(1), Charlesworth J, Winkler A, Hong LE, Nichols TE, Curran JE,
Sprooten E, Jahanshad N, Thompson PM, Johnson MP, Kent JW Jr, Landman BA,
Mitchell B, Cole SA, Dyer TD, Moses EK, Goring HH, Almasy L, Duggirala R, Olvera 
RL, Glahn DC, Blangero J.

Author information: 
(1)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA. pkochunov@mprc.umaryland.edu

INTRODUCTION: We performed a whole-transcriptome correlation analysis, followed
by the pathway enrichment and testing of innate immune response pathway analyses 
to evaluate the hypothesis that transcriptional activity can predict cortical
gray matter thickness (GMT) variability during normal cerebral aging.
METHODS: Transcriptome and GMT data were available for 379 individuals (age
range=28-85) community-dwelling members of large extended Mexican American
families. Collection of transcriptome data preceded that of neuroimaging data by 
17 years. Genome-wide gene transcriptome data consisted of 20,413 heritable
lymphocytes-based transcripts. GMT measurements were performed from
high-resolution (isotropic 800 µm) T1-weighted MRI. Transcriptome-wide and
pathway enrichment analysis was used to classify genes correlated with GMT.
Transcripts for sixty genes from seven innate immune pathways were tested as
specific predictors of GMT variability.
RESULTS: Transcripts for eight genes (IGFBP3, LRRN3, CRIP2, SCD, IDS, TCF4,
GATA3, and HN1) passed the transcriptome-wide significance threshold. Four
orthogonal factors extracted from this set predicted 31.9% of the variability in 
the whole-brain and between 23.4 and 35% of regional GMT measurements. Pathway
enrichment analysis identified six functional categories including cellular
proliferation, aggregation, differentiation, viral infection, and metabolism. The
integrin signaling pathway was significantly (p<10(-6)) enriched with GMT.
Finally, three innate immune pathways (complement signaling, toll-receptors and
scavenger and immunoglobulins) were significantly associated with GMT.
CONCLUSION: Expression activity for the genes that regulate cellular
proliferation, adhesion, differentiation and inflammation can explain a
significant proportion of individual variability in cortical GMT. Our findings
suggest that normal cerebral aging is the product of a progressive decline in
regenerative capacity and increased neuroinflammation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3759649
PMID: 23707588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. BMC Genet. 2013 May 24;14:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-44.

Genome-wide linkage analysis of congenital heart defects using MOD score analysis
identifies two novel loci.

Flaquer A(1), Baumbach C, Piñero E, García Algas F, de la Fuente Sanchez MA,
Rosell J, Toquero J, Alonso-Pulpon L, Garcia-Pavia P, Strauch K, Heine-Suñer D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany. antonia.flaquer@lmu.de

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart defects (CHD) is the most common cause of death from
a congenital structure abnormality in newborns and is often associated with fetal
loss. There are many types of CHD. Human genetic studies have identified genes
that are responsible for the inheritance of a particular type of CHD and for some
types of CHD previously thought to be sporadic. However, occasionally different
members of the same family might have anatomically distinct defects - for
instance, one member with atrial septal defect, one with tetralogy of Fallot, and
one with ventricular septal defect. Our objective is to identify susceptibility
loci for CHD in families affected by distinct defects. The occurrence of these
apparently discordant clinical phenotypes within one family might hint at a
genetic framework common to most types of CHD.
RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis using MOD score analysis in 
families with diverse CHD. Significant linkage was obtained in two regions, at
chromosome 15 (15q26.3, P(empirical)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004) and at chromosome 18 (18q21.2,
P(empirical)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005).
CONCLUSIONS: In these two novel regions four candidate genes are located: SELS,
SNRPA1, and PCSK6 on 15q26.3, and TCF4 on 18q21.2. The new loci reported here
have not previously been described in connection with CHD. Although further
studies in other cohorts are needed to confirm these findings, the results
presented here together with recent insight into how the heart normally develops 
will improve the understanding of CHD.

PMCID: PMC3664624
PMID: 23705960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3429-38. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3794.
Epub 2013 May 21.

Downregulation of miR-452 promotes stem-like traits and tumorigenicity of
gliomas.

Liu L(1), Chen K, Wu J, Shi L, Hu B, Cheng S, Li M, Song L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Department of Experimental
Research, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: miR-452 is reported to be required for neural crest stem cell
differentiation during neural crest development. However, the biologic role of
miR-452 in gliomas remains unclear. The aim of the present study was to evaluate 
the effect of miR-452 on the stem-like properties and tumorigenesis of glioma
cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of miR-452 was examined in glioma cells and
glioma tissues using real-time PCR. The effects of miR-452 on stem-like traits
and tumorigenesis were investigated in vitro and in vivo using patient-derived
glioma cells and glioma cell lines. Western blotting and luciferase reporter
assays were conducted to examine the negative regulation of Bmi-1, LEF1, and TCF4
by miR-452. The methylation of the miR-452 promoter region was examined by
bisulfite genomic sequencing PCR.
RESULTS: miR-452 was markedly downregulated in glioma cells and clinical glioma
tissues. miR-452 levels were inversely correlated with World Health Organization 
(WHO) grades and patient survival. miR-452 directly targeted and suppressed
multiple stemness regulators, including Bmi-1, LEF1, and TCF4, resulting in
reduced stem-like traits and tumorigenesis of glioma cells in vitro and in vivo. 
Furthermore, we showed that downregulation of miR-452 in gliomas was caused by
hypermethylation of its promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of miR-452 plays an important role in promoting the
stem-like traits and tumorigenesis of gliomas and may represent a novel
prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for the disease.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3725315
PMID: 23695168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hum Reprod Update. 2013 Jul-Aug;19(4):376-90. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmt013. Epub
2013 May 19.

Genetic variants and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review.

Zhang C(1), Bao W, Rong Y, Yang H, Bowers K, Yeung E, Kiely M.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Branch, Division of Epidemiology, Statistics and Prevention
Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, 6100 Executive Blvd, Rockville, MD
20852, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have examined associations between genetic variants
and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). However, inferences from
these studies were often hindered by limited statistical power and conflicting
results. We aimed to systematically review and quantitatively summarize the
association of commonly studied single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with GDM
risk and to identify important gaps that remain for consideration in future
studies.
METHODS: Genetic association studies of GDM published through 1 October 2012 were
searched using the HuGE Navigator and PubMed databases. A SNP was included if the
SNP-GDM associations were assessed in three or more independent studies. Two
reviewers independently evaluated the eligibility for inclusion and extracted the
data. The allele-specific odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were pooled using random effects models accounting for heterogeneity.
RESULTS: Overall, 29 eligible articles capturing associations of 12 SNPs from 10 
genes were included for the systematic review. The minor alleles of rs7903146
(TCF7L2), rs12255372 (TCF7L2), rs1799884 (-30G/A, GCK), rs5219 (E23K, KCNJ11),
rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs10830963 (MTNR1B), rs1387153 (MTNR1B) 
and rs1801278 (Gly972Arg, IRS1) were significantly associated with a higher risk 
of GDM. Among them, genetic variants in TCF7L2 showed the strongest association
with GDM risk, with ORs (95% CIs) of 1.44 (1.29-1.60, P < 0.001) per T allele of 
rs7903146 and 1.46 (1.15-1.84, P = 0.002) per T allele of rs12255372.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we found significant associations of GDM 
risk with nine SNPs in seven genes, most of which have been related to the
regulation of insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3682671
PMID: 23690305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Gastroenterology. 2013 Sep;145(3):625-35. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.05.013. Epub
2013 May 16.

AP-1B-mediated protein sorting regulates polarity and proliferation of intestinal
epithelial cells in mice.

Hase K(1), Nakatsu F, Ohmae M, Sugihara K, Shioda N, Takahashi D, Obata Y,
Furusawa Y, Fujimura Y, Yamashita T, Fukuda S, Okamoto H, Asano M, Yonemura S,
Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In epithelial cells, protein sorting mechanisms regulate
localization of plasma membrane proteins that generate and maintain cell
polarity. The clathrin-adaptor protein (AP) complex AP-1B is expressed
specifically in polarized epithelial cells, where it regulates basolateral
sorting of membrane proteins. However, little is known about its physiological
significance.
METHODS: We analyzed the intestinal epithelia of mice deficient in Ap1m2
(Ap1m2(-/-) mice), which encodes the AP-1B µ1B subunit, and compared it with
129/B6/CD1 littermates (controls). Notch signaling was inhibited by
intraperitoneal injection of dibenzazepine, and ß-catenin signaling was inhibited
by injection of IWR1. Intestinal tissue samples were collected and analyzed by
immunofluorescence analysis.
RESULTS: Ap1m2(-/-) mice developed intestinal epithelial cell hyperplasia. The
polarity of intestinal epithelial cells was disrupted, as indicated by the
appearance of ectopic microvilli-like structures on the lateral plasma membrane
and mislocalization of basolateral membrane proteins, including the low-density
lipoprotein receptor and E-cadherin. The E-cadherin-ß-catenin complex therefore
was disrupted at the adherens junction, resulting in nuclear translocation of
ß-catenin. This resulted in up-regulation of genes regulated by
ß-catenin/transcription factor 4 (Tcf4) complex, and increased the proliferation 
of intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-1B is required for protein sorting and polarization of intestinal
cells in mice. Loss of AP-1B in the intestinal epithelia results in
mislocalization of E-cadherin, activation of ß-catenin/Tcf4 complex,
proliferation, and hyperplasia.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3369-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0684.
Epub 2013 May 14.

Identification and selective degradation of neopeptide-containing truncated
mutant proteins in the tumors with high microsatellite instability.

Kim WK(1), Park M, Park M, Kim YJ, Shin N, Kim HK, You KT, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Brain Korea 21 Projects for Medical Science,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Frameshift mutations in coding mononucleotide repeats (cMNR) are common 
in tumors with high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). These mutations generate 
mRNAs containing abnormal coding sequences and premature termination codons
(PTC). Normally, mRNAs containing PTCs are degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay (NMD). However, mRNAs containing PTCs located in the last exon are not
subject to degradation by NMD (NMD-irrelevant). This study aimed to discover
whether genes with frameshift mutations in the last exon generate truncated
mutant proteins.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We identified 66 genes containing cMNRs in the last exon by 
bioinformatic analysis. We found frequent insertion/deletion mutations in the
cMNRs of 29 genes in 10 MSI-H cancer cell lines and in the cMNRs of 3 genes in 19
MSI-H cancer tissues. We selected 7 genes (TTK, TCF7L2, MARCKS, ASTE1, INO80E,
CYHR1, and EBPL) for mutant mRNA expression analysis and 3 genes (TTK, TCF7L2,
and MARCKS) for mutant protein expression analysis.
RESULTS: The PTC-containing NMD-irrelevant mRNAs from mutated genes were not
degraded. However, only faint amounts of endogenous mutant TTK and TCF7L2 were
detected, and we failed to detect endogenous mutant MARCKS. By polysome analysis,
we showed that mRNAs from genomic mutant MARCKS constructs are normally
translated. After inhibiting 3 protein degradation pathways, we found that only
inhibition of the proteasomal pathway facilitated the rescue of endogenous mutant
TTK, TCF7L2, and MARCKS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that cancer cells scavenge potentially harmful
neopeptide-containing mutant proteins derived from NMD-irrelevant abnormal mRNAs 
via the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and these mutant proteins may be important
substrates for tumor-specific antigens.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23674496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. PLoS One. 2013 May 6;8(5):e60664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060664. Print 2013.

BMI1 polycomb group protein acts as a master switch for growth and death of tumor
cells: regulates TCF4-transcriptional factor-induced BCL2 signaling.

Siddique HR(1), Parray A, Tarapore RS, Wang L, Mukhtar H, Karnes RJ, Deng Y,
Konety BR, Saleem M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Chemoprevention and Therapeutics, The Hormel
Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota, United States of America.

For advanced prostate cancer (CaP), the progression of tumors to the state of
chemoresistance and paucity of knowledge about the mechanism of chemoresistance
are major stumbling blocks in the management of this disease. Here, we provide
compelling evidence that BMI1 polycomb group protein and a stem cell factor plays
a crucial role in determining the fate of tumors vis-à-vis chemotherapy. We show 
that progressive increase in the levels of BMI1 occurs during the progression of 
CaP disease in humans. We show that BMI1-rich tumor cells are non-responsive to
chemotherapy whereas BMI1-silenced tumor cells are responsive to therapy. By
employing microarray, ChIP, immunoblot and Luciferase reporter assays, we
identified a unique mechanism through which BMI1 rescues tumor cells from
chemotherapy. We found that BMI1 regulates (i) activity of TCF4 transcriptional
factor and (ii) binding of TCF4 to the promoter region of anti-apoptotic BCL2
gene. Notably, an increased TCF4 occupancy on BCL2 gene was observed in prostatic
tissues exhibiting high BMI1 levels. Using tumor cells other than CaP, we also
showed that regulation of TCF4-mediated BCL2 by BMI1 is universal. It is
noteworthy that forced expression of BMI1 was observed to drive normal cells to
hyperproliferative mode. We show that targeting BMI1 improves the outcome of
docetaxel therapy in animal models bearing chemoresistant prostatic tumors. We
suggest that BMI1 could be exploited as a potential molecular target for
therapeutics to treat chemoresistant tumors.

PMCID: PMC3645992
PMID: 23671559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2718-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01254-12. Epub 2013 May 
13.

Tumor necrosis factor a-induced hypoxia-inducible factor 1a-ß-catenin axis
regulates major histocompatibility complex class I gene activation through
chromatin remodeling.

Ghosh S(1), Paul A, Sen E.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) plays a crucial role in the progression of
glioblastoma multiforme tumors, which are characterized by their effective immune
escape mechanisms. As major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) is
involved in glioma immune evasion and since HIF-1a is a pivotal link between
inflammation and glioma progression, the role of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-a)-induced inflammation in MHC-I gene regulation was investigated. A
TNF-a-induced increase in MHC-I expression and transcriptional activation was
concurrent with increased HIF-1a, <U+039D>F-<U+03BA><U+0392>, and ß-catenin activities. While
knockdown of HIF-1a and ß-catenin abrogated TNF-a-induced MHC-I activation, NF-<U+03BA>B
had no effect. ß-Catenin inhibition abrogated HIF-1a activation and vice versa,
and this HIF-1a-ß-catenin axis positively regulated CREB phosphorylation.
Increased CREB activation was accompanied by its increased association with
ß-catenin and CBP. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed increased CREB
enrichment at CRE/site a on the MHC-I promoter in a ß-catenin-dependent manner.
ß-Catenin replaced human Brahma (hBrm) with Brg1 as the binding partner for CREB 
at the CRE site. The hBrm-to-Brg1 switch is crucial for MHC-I regulation, as
ATPase-deficient Brg1 abolished TNF-a-induced MHC-I expression. ß-Catenin also
increased the association of MHC-I enhanceosome components RFX5 and NF-YB at the 
SXY module. CREB acts as a platform for assembling coactivators and chromatin
remodelers required for MHC-I activation in a HIF-1a/ß-catenin-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3700138
PMID: 23671189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Sep 23;424:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 
May 10.

Gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Qu Y(1), Dang S, Hou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths
occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology
revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including
gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of
epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular
transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer
epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the
epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications,
nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation
in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor 
and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined
epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a
target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive
body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of
application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and
important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and
illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23669186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Liver Int. 2013 Aug;33(7):1100-12. doi: 10.1111/liv.12188. Epub 2013 May 8.

Upregulation of T-cell factor-4 isoform-responsive target genes in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Tomimaru Y(1), Koga H, Yano H, de la Monte S, Wands JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway regulates genes involved in cell
proliferation, survival, migration and invasion through regulation by T-cell
factor (TCF)-4 transcription factor proteins. However, the role of TCF-4 isoforms
generated by alternative splicing events in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
unknown.
AIM: Here, we investigated TCF-4 isoforms (TCF-4J and K)-responsive target genes 
that are important in hepatic oncogenesis and tumour development.
METHODS: Gene expression microarray was performed on HCC cells overexpressing
TCF-4J and K isoforms. Expression level of selected target genes was evaluated
and correlations were made between their expression level and that of TCF-4
isoform in 47 pairs of human HCC tumours.
RESULTS: Comparison by gene expression microarray revealed that 447 genes were
upregulated and 343 downregulated more than 2.0-fold in TCF-4J compared with
TCF-4K expressing cells. We validated expression of 18 selected target genes
involved in Wnt/ß-catenin, insulin/IGF-1/IRS1 and Notch signalling pathways in 47
pairs of human HCCs and adjacent uninvolved liver tissues. It was observed that
13 genes (CLDN2, STK17B, SPP1, AXIN2, WISP2, MMP7, IRS1, ANXA1, CAMK2N1, ASPH,
GPR56, CD24 and JAG1) activated by TCF-4J isoform in HCC cells, were also
upregulated in HCC tumours compared with adjacent peritumour tissue; more
importantly, 10 genes exhibited a significant correlation with the TCF-4J
expression level in tumour.
CONCLUSION: TCF-4 isoforms (TCF-4J and K) activated different downstream target
genes in HCC. The biological consequence of TCF-4J isoform expression was
upregulation of genes associated with tripartite Wnt/ß-catenin,
insulin/IGF-1/IRS1 and Notch signal transduction pathway activation, which
contribute to the pathogenesis of HCC.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3706555
PMID: 23651211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Liver Int. 2013 Nov;33(10):1536-48. doi: 10.1111/liv.12189. Epub 2013 May 6.

Loss of exon 4 in a human T-cell factor-4 isoform promotes hepatic
tumourigenicity.

Tomimaru Y(1), Xu CQ, Nambotin SB, Yan T, Wands JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: T-cell factor (TCF) proteins represent key transcription factors that
activate Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. We have reported that a pair of TCF-4 isoforms
(TCF-4C and TCF-4D) exhibit differential TCF transcriptional activity in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, although their structure differs by only
the presence (TCF-4D) or absence (TCF-4C) of exon 4.
AIM: To demonstrate a regulatory role of exon 4 in HCC development.
METHODS: TCF-4C and TCF-4D expression profiles were examined in 27 pairs of human
HCC and adjacent liver tissues. The functional role of the TCF-4 isoforms was
evaluated in OUMS-29 (an immortalized hepatocyte-derived) and HAK-1A (a
well-differentiated HCC) cell lines using stable clones overexpressing the TCF-4 
isoforms.
RESULTS: TCF-4C was significantly upregulated in HCC tissues compared with
corresponding peritumour and normal liver tissues; in contrast, there was no
difference in TCF-4D expression. TCF-4C clones derived from both cell lines
exhibited increased TCF activity, Wnt-responsive target genes, cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs
compared with TCF-4D clones. Capability of cell migration and colony formation
was significantly higher in TCF-4C than TCF-4D clones. In a nude mice xenograft
model, the HAK-1A-derived TCF-4C clone rapidly developed tumours compared with
the TCF-4D clone. TCF-4C clone-derived tumours exhibited upregulation of
Wnt-responsive target genes compared with the slow developing and small
TCF-4D-derived tumours.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that the TCF-4C isoform lacking exon 4 is
associated with a malignant phenotype compared with the exon 4-harbouring TCF-4D 
isoform, indicating that exon 4 of TCF-4 plays a prominent role in HCC
development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3775864
PMID: 23648141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Exp Mol Med. 2013 May 3;45:e21. doi: 10.1038/emm.2013.32.

Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome: intellectual disability due to loss of TCF4-regulated gene
transcription.

Sweatt JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Civitan
International Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-2182, USA. dsweatt@uab.edu

TCF4 (transcription factor 4; E2-2, ITF2) is a transcription factor that when
haplo-insufficient causes Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome (PTHS), an autism-spectrum
disorder that is associated with pervasive developmental delay and severe
intellectual disability. The TCF4 gene is also a risk factor with highly
significant linkage to schizophrenia, presumably via overexpression of the TCF4
gene product in the central nervous system. This review will present an overview 
of the clinical manifestations of PTHS and relate those clinical attributes to
the underlying molecular genetics of TCF4. In order to provide a molecular
biological context for the loss of function of TCF4 in PTHS, the review will also
present a brief overview of the basic biochemistry of TCF4-mediated regulation of
cellular and neuronal gene expression. In the final section of this review, I
will discuss and speculate upon possible roles for the TCF4 transcription factor 
in neuronal function and comment upon how understanding these roles may give new 
insights into the molecular neurobiology of human cognition.

PMCID: PMC3674405
PMID: 23640545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Front Genet. 2013 Apr 26;4:58. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00058. eCollection 2013.

Potential Impact of miR-137 and Its Targets in Schizophrenia.

Wright C(1), Turner JA, Calhoun VD, Perrone-Bizzozero N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Health Sciences Center, University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.

The significant impact of microRNAs (miRNAs) on disease pathology is becoming
increasingly evident. These small non-coding RNAs have the ability to
post-transcriptionally silence the expression of thousands of genes. Therefore,
dysregulation of even a single miRNA could confer a large polygenic effect.
Schizophrenia is a genetically complex illness thought to involve multiple genes 
each contributing a small risk. Large genome-wide association studies identified 
miR-137, a miRNA shown to be involved in neuronal maturation, as one of the top
risk genes. To assess the potential mechanism of impact of miR-137 in this
disorder and identify its targets, we used a combination of literature searches, 
ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA), and freely accessible bioinformatics resources.
Using TargetScan and the schizophrenia gene resource (SZGR) database, we found
that in addition to CSMD1, C10orf26, CACNA1C, TCF4, and ZNF804A, five
schizophrenia risk genes whose transcripts are also validated miR-137 targets,
there are other schizophrenia-associated genes that may be targets of miR-137,
including ERBB4, GABRA1, GRIN2A, GRM5, GSK3B, NRG2, and HTR2C. IPA analyses of
all the potential targets identified several nervous system (NS) functions as the
top canonical pathways including synaptic long-term potentiation, a process
implicated in learning and memory mechanisms and recently shown to be altered in 
patients with schizophrenia. Among the subset of targets involved in NS
development and function, the top scoring pathways were ephrin receptor signaling
and axonal guidance, processes that are critical for proper circuitry formation
and were shown to be disrupted in schizophrenia. These results suggest that
miR-137 may indeed play a substantial role in the genetic etiology of
schizophrenia by regulating networks involved in neural development and brain
function.

PMCID: PMC3636510
PMID: 23637704  [PubMed]


396. J Vis Exp. 2013 Apr 19;(74). doi: 10.3791/50286.

Generation of high quality chromatin immunoprecipitation DNA template for
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq).

Deliard S(1), Zhao J, Xia Q, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, USA.

ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq) methods directly offer whole-genome coverage, where
combining chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and massively parallel sequencing 
can be utilized to identify the repertoire of mammalian DNA sequences bound by
transcription factors in vivo. "Next-generation" genome sequencing technologies
provide 1-2 orders of magnitude increase in the amount of sequence that can be
cost-effectively generated over older technologies thus allowing for ChIP-seq
methods to directly provide whole-genome coverage for effective profiling of
mammalian protein-DNA interactions. For successful ChIP-seq approaches, one must 
generate high quality ChIP DNA template to obtain the best sequencing outcomes.
The description is based around experience with the protein product of the gene
most strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes, namely the
transcription factor transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2). This factor has also
been implicated in various cancers. Outlined is how to generate high quality ChIP
DNA template derived from the colorectal carcinoma cell line, HCT116, in order to
build a high-resolution map through sequencing to determine the genes bound by
TCF7L2, giving further insight in to its key role in the pathogenesis of complex 
traits.

PMCID: PMC3665311
PMID: 23629434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Immunity. 2013 May 23;38(5):943-57. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.04.006. Epub 2013 
Apr 25.

A clonogenic progenitor with prominent plasmacytoid dendritic cell developmental 
potential.

Onai N(1), Kurabayashi K, Hosoi-Amaike M, Toyama-Sorimachi N, Matsushima K, Inaba
K, Ohteki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biodefense Research, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 May 23;38(5):845-6.

Macrophage and dendritic cell (DC) progenitors (MDPs) and common DC progenitors
(CDPs) are bone marrow (BM) progenitors with DC differentiation potential.
However, both MDPs and CDPs give rise to large numbers of conventional DCs (cDCs)
and few plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), implying that more dedicated pDC progenitors
remain to be identified. Here we have described DC progenitors with a prominent
pDC differentiation potential. Although both MDPs and CDPs express the macrophage
colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) receptor (M-CSFR), the progenitors were
confined to a M-CSFR(-) fraction, identified as
Lin(-)c-Kit(int/lo)Flt3(+)M-CSFR(-), and expressed high amounts of E2-2 (also
known as Tcf4) an essential transcription factor for pDC development.
Importantly, they appeared to be directly derived from either CDPs or
lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitors (LMPPs). Collectively, our findings
provide insight into DC differentiation pathways and may lead to progenitor-based
therapeutic applications for infection and autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. BMC Genet. 2013 Apr 23;14:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-28.

Carriers of a novel frame-shift insertion in WNT16a possess elevated pancreatic
expression of TCF7L2.

Howard EW(1), Been LF, Lerner M, Brackett D, Lightfoot S, Bullen EC, Sanghera DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of TCF7L2 as a global type 2 diabetes (T2D) gene has
sparked investigations to explore the clinical utility of its variants for
guiding the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. However,
interpreting the resulting associations into function still remains unclear.
Canonical Wnt signaling regulates ß-catenin and its binding with TCF7L2, which in
turn is critical for the production of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). This
study examines the role of a novel frame-shift insertion discovered in a
conserved region of WNT16a, and it is proposed that this mutation affects T2D
susceptibility in conjunction with gene variants in TCF7L2.
RESULTS: Our results predicted that the insertion would convert the upstream open
reading frame in the Wnt16a mRNA to an alternative, in-frame translation
initiation site, resulting in the prevention of nonsense-mediated decay, leading 
to a consequent stabilization of the mutated WNT16a message. To examine the role 
of Wnt16a in the Wnt signaling pathway, DNA and serum samples from 2,034
individuals (48% with T2D) from the Sikh Diabetes Study were used in this
investigation. Prevalence of Wnt16a insertion did not differ among T2D cases
(33%) and controls (32%). However, there was a 3.2 fold increase in Wnt16a mRNA
levels in pancreatic tissues from the insertion carriers and a significant
increase (70%, p < 0.0001) in luciferase activity in the constructs carrying the 
insertion. The expression of TCF7L2 mRNA in pancreas was also elevated (~23-fold)
among the insertion carriers (p=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest synergistic effects of WNT16a insertion and the 
at-risk 'T' allele of TCF7L2 (rs7903146) for elevating the expression of TCF7L2
in human pancreas which may affect the regulation of downstream target genes
involved in the development of T2D through Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF7L2 signaling
pathway. However, further studies would be needed to mechanistically link the two
definitively.

PMCID: PMC3675375
PMID: 23617586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 15;8(4):e61867. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061867. Print 2013.

Acetylation of human TCF4 (TCF7L2) proteins attenuates inhibition by the HBP1
repressor and induces a conformational change in the TCF4::DNA complex.

Elfert S(1), Weise A, Bruser K, Biniossek ML, Jägle S, Senghaas N, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

The members of the TCF/LEF family of DNA-binding proteins are components of
diverse gene regulatory networks. As nuclear effectors of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
they act as assembly platforms for multimeric transcription complexes that either
repress or activate gene expression. Previously, it was shown that several
aspects of TCF/LEF protein function are regulated by post-translational
modification. The association of TCF/LEF family members with acetyltransferases
and deacetylases prompted us to investigate whether vertebrate TCF/LEF proteins
are subject to acetylation. Through co-expression with p300 and CBP and
subsequent analyses using mass spectrometry and immunodetection with
anti-acetyl-lysine antibodies we show that TCF4 can be acetylated at lysine K150 
by CBP. K150 acetylation is restricted to TCF4E splice variants and requires the 
simultaneous presence of ß-catenin and the unique TCF4E C-terminus. To examine
the functional consequences of K150 acetylation we substituted K150 with amino
acids representing the non-acetylated and acetylated states. Reporter gene assays
based on Wnt/ß-catenin-responsive promoter regions did not indicate a general
role of K150 acetylation in transactivation by TCF4E. However, in the presence of
CBP, non-acetylatable TCF4E with a K150R substitution was more susceptible to
inhibition by the HBP-1 repressor protein compared to wild-type TCF4E.
Acetylation of K150 using a bacterial expression system or amino acid
substitutions at K150 alter the electrophoretic properties of TCF4E::DNA
complexes. This result suggests that K150 acetylation leads to a conformational
change that may also represent the mechanism whereby acetylated TCF4E acquires
resistance against HBP1. In summary, TCF4 not only recruits acetyltransferases
but is also a substrate for these enzymes. The fact that acetylation affects only
a subset of TCF4 splice variants and is mediated preferentially by CBP suggests
that the conditional acetylation of TCF4E is a novel regulatory mechanism that
diversifies the transcriptional output of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in response to 
changing intracellular signaling milieus.

PMCID: PMC3626699
PMID: 23613959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17552-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.453985. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

T cell factor 4 is a pro-catabolic and apoptotic factor in human articular
chondrocytes by potentiating nuclear factor <U+03BA>B signaling.

Ma B(1), Zhong L, van Blitterswijk CA, Post JN, Karperien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, University of Twente, Enschede
7522NB, The Netherlands.

T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) transcription factors are
downstream effectors of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has been implicated in the
development and progression of osteoarthritis (OA). This study aimed to
investigate the role of TCF/LEF transcription factors in human articular
chondrocytes. Primary human osteoarthritic cartilage predominantly expressed TCF4
and to a lesser extent, LEF1 and TCF3 mRNA. Overexpression of TCF4, but not of
TCF3 or LEF1, induced MMP-1, -3, and -13 expression and generic MMP activity in
human chondrocytes. This was due to potentiating NF-<U+03BA>B signaling by a
protein-protein interaction between TCF4 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 activating established
NF-<U+03BA>B target genes such as MMPs and IL-6. LEF1 competed with TCF4 for binding to 
NF-<U+03BA>B p65. I<U+03BA>B-a was able to counteract the effect of TCF4 on NF-<U+03BA>B target gene
expression. Finally, we showed that TCF4 mRNA expression was elevated in OA
cartilage compared with healthy cartilage and induced chondrocyte apoptosis at
least partly through activating caspase 3/7. Our findings suggest that increased 
TCF4 expression may contribute to cartilage degeneration in OA by augmenting
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

PMCID: PMC3682554
PMID: 23603903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2013 Apr;46(4):382-93. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Association of rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a
meta-analysis.

Wang J(1), Zhang J, Li L, Wang Y, Wang Q, Zhai Y, You H, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Center of Preventive
Medicine Research and Assessment, Henan University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Zhengzhou, China.

Our objective was to evaluate the association of rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in the world population. We carried out a
survey of the literature about the effect of rs12255372 on genetic susceptibility
to T2DM by consulting PubMed, the Cochrane Library, and Embase from 2006 to 2012,
and then performed a meta-analysis of all the studies in order to evaluate the
association between rs12255372 and T2DM. A total of 33 articles including 42
studies (with 34,076 cases and 36,192 controls) were confirmed to be eligible and
were included in the final meta-analysis: 6 studies conducted on Europeans, 14 on
Caucasians, 17 on Asians, 2 on Africans, and 3 on Americans. Overall, the effect 
size was as follows: for the variant allele T (OR = 1.387, 95%CI = 1.351-1.424), 
for the TT genotype (OR = 1.933, 95%CI = 1.815-2.057), for the GT genotype (OR = 
1.363, 95%CI = 1.315-1.413), for the dominant model (OR = 1.425, 95%CI =
1.344-1.510), and for the recessive model (OR = 1.659, 95%CI = 1.563-1.761). In
summary, by pooling all available qualified data from genetic studies on
rs12255372 and T2DM, we have confirmed that rs12255372 is significantly
associated with susceptibility to T2DM in the global population.

PMCID: PMC3854403
PMID: 23579632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Obes. 2013;2013:396416. doi: 10.1155/2013/396416. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Genetics of obesity and type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

McCormack S(1), Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Obesity and type 2 diabetes are highly prevalent and lead to significant
morbidity and mortality. In the United States, the impact of these conditions may
be worse on historically underserved minorities, particularly African Americans. 
Genetic ancestry and differences in physiology are unlikely to be the sole or
primary determinants of these disparities. In addition, research in this area has
the ethically problematic possibility of conflating race with biology. Despite
these important considerations and the challenges of conducting this work,
population-based approaches for investigating the etiology of obesity and T2D may
yield useful information about the pathophysiology of disease, and have
implications that extend to all affected individuals. The purpose of this paper
is to describe what is understood about the genetic variation that underlies
obesity and T2D in African Americans and other individuals of more recent African
descent and to highlight several examples that illustrate how ensuring adequate
minority representation in genetic research improves its quality. For a variety
of reasons a number of unique insights have been possible as a result of these
efforts.

PMCID: PMC3614120
PMID: 23577239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060212. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with T2DM in the population of
Hyderabad, India.

Uma Jyothi K(1), Jayaraj M, Subburaj KS, Prasad KJ, Kumuda I, Lakshmi V, Reddy
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Anthropology Group, Biological Anthropology Unit, Indian Statistical
Institute, Hyderabad, India.

We attempt to evaluate the nature of association of TCF7L2 gene variants with
T2DM, for the first time in the population of Hyderabad, which is considered to
be diabetic capital of India. It is a case-control study of the three SNPs of
TCF7L2, rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs11196205, genotyped on Sequenom Massarray
platform, in a sample of 758 patients and 621 controls. The risk allele frequency
of the three SNPs was found to be significantly higher in the T2DM cases than
controls, implicating susceptibility for diabetes (p<0.01). The greatest risk of 
developing the disease was conferred by rs7903146. Further, the logistic
regression of genotypes of each SNP under log additive model, and the haplotypes 
constituted by at least one of the three risk alleles also show significantly
greater risk of developing T2DM when compared to the wild type haplotype.
Further, BMI and WHR emerge as significant covariates with confounding effects.
The strong association of the TCF7L2 SNPs with T2DM is consistent with the
findings among other Indian and Non-Indian populations, suggesting universal
phenomena of its association across ethnic groups globally, both within and
outside the Indian subcontinent, albeit the functional relevance of these SNPs
needs yet to be established.

PMCID: PMC3618330
PMID: 23577093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 19;336(2):359-69. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.03.031. Epub
2013 Apr 2.

The SxxSS motif of T-cell factor-4 isoforms modulates Wnt/ß-catenin signal
activation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tomimaru Y(1), Koga H, Shin TH, Xu CQ, Wands JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

T-cell factor (TCF) proteins represent key transcription factors in Wnt
signaling. We show that the SxxSS motif in TCF-4 regulates transcriptional
activity in HCC cells. TCF-4K mutants increased transcriptional activity compared
to TCF-4K (bearing the SxxSS); the binding pattern of co-factors in TCF-4K
mutants was similar to that in TCF-4J (lacking the SxxSS). TCF activity in TCF-4K
cells was suppressed by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2), but not
in TCF-4J cells. Together, our data indicates that the SxxSS motif in TCF-4K
regulates transcriptional activity by modifying co-factors in the ß-catenin/TCF-4
transcriptional complex and these events may be mediated through HIPK2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700609
PMID: 23562475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gene. 2013 Jun 15;522(2):214-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.089. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Impacts of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms on the susceptibility of hepatogenous
diabetes and hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients.

Ling Q(1), Dong F, Geng L, Liu Z, Xie H, Xu X, Zheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatogenous diabetes (HD) occurs as a complication of cirrhosis.
Whether genetic factors, rather than only liver damage, play roles in the
development of HD is unknown. TCF7L2 gene has been reported to be associated with
type 2 diabetes and also cancer risks. We aim to evaluate the impact of TCF7L2
gene on the susceptibility of HD and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in a Chinese 
Han population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 367 adult liver transplant candidates with liver
cirrhosis were included. Fifteen tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were 
selected from HapMap CHB database with a minor allele frequency of >0.2 and r(2) 
of >0.8. Another three SNPs were also chosen because of their close association
with type 2 diabetes in East Asian.
RESULTS: Patients with HD presented significantly poorer liver function, higher
incidence of cirrhotic complications and higher insulin resistance compared with 
non-HD patients. Three SNPs were differentially distributed between HD patients
and non-HD patients. In multivariate logistic analysis, TCF7L2 rs290487 and
rs6585194 polymorphisms were independently associated with HD after adjustment of
clinical factors. The TCF7L2 rs290487 C/C variant homozygote showed much higher
insulin resistance and significantly increased HD risk comparing with T/T and T/C
genotypes, while the genetic variant of rs6585194 was protectively against HD.
Three SNPs (rs290481, rs290487 and rs290489) located near the 3' end of TCF7L2
gene were associated with HCC risk with marginal significance. Patients carrying 
G-C-A haplotype had a significantly higher HCC risk than those with A-T-G.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 polymorphisms were associated with HD and maybe cancer risk
as well. Further studies with large samples are needed to verify these results.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23558246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059053. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Association of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) polymorphisms in TCF7L2
with type 2 diabetes in 9,619 Han Chinese population.

Wang J(1), Li L, Zhang J, Xie J, Luo X, Yu D, Zhao J, Feng T, Pang C, Yin L, Hu
F, Zhang J, Wang Y, Wang Q, Zhai Y, You H, Zhu T, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.

AIMS: We aimed to replicate the association of the rs290487 (IVS3C/T) and
rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) polymorphisms of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in Han Chinese people in Henan province, China.
METHODS: In all, 1,842 patients with T2DM and 7,777 normal glucose-tolerant
controls underwent genotyping for the T2DM-associated variants rs7903146
(IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T). W performed a meta-analysis of the association 
of the risk alleles of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) in TCF7L2 and
T2DM in Han Chinese by combining previous studies with the present study.
RESULTS: We found that T2DM was associated with the CC genotype (1.364,
1.137-1.636, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001), the recessive model (1.457, 1.156-1.838, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) of
rs290487 (IVS3C/T) and haplotype CC (1.116, 1.034-1.204, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004) in Han
Chinese. Moreover, our meta-analyses supported the association of the T allele
(IVS3C/T) of rs7903146 (1.36, 1.24-1.48; p <U+200A>=<U+200A>6.404×10(-12)) and T2DM but not the
C allele of rs290487 (IVS3C/T) (0.99, 0.85-1.15, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.890) in Han Chinese. We
found no interactions between behavioral risk factors (smoking, alcohol drinking,
and physical activity) and rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T)
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: The CC genotype and the recessive model of the variant rs290487
(IVS3C/T) and CC haplotype of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) in
TCF7L2 may be associated with T2DM in Han Chinese people in Henan province,
China.

PMCID: PMC3607568
PMID: 23536853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 1;27(7):734-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.209569.112. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Amplitude modulation of androgen signaling by c-MYC.

Ni M(1), Chen Y, Fei T, Li D, Lim E, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Androgen-stimulated growth of the molecular apocrine breast cancer subtype is
mediated by an androgen receptor (AR)-regulated transcriptional program. However,
the molecular details of this AR-centered regulatory network and the roles of
other transcription factors that cooperate with AR in the network remain elusive.
Here we report a positive feed-forward loop that enhances breast cancer growth
involving AR, AR coregulators, and downstream target genes. In the absence of an 
androgen signal, TCF7L2 interacts with FOXA1 at AR-binding sites and represses
the basal expression of AR target genes, including MYC. Direct AR regulation of
MYC cooperates with AR-mediated activation of HER2/HER3 signaling. HER2/HER3
signaling increases the transcriptional activity of MYC through phosphorylation
of MAD1, leading to increased levels of MYC/MAX heterodimers. MYC in turn
reinforces the transcriptional activation of androgen-responsive genes. These
results reveal a novel regulatory network in molecular apocrine breast cancers
regulated by androgen and AR in which MYC plays a central role as both a key
target and a cooperating transcription factor to drive oncogenic growth.

PMCID: PMC3639415
PMID: 23530127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Jun;56(6):314-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.03.005. Epub 2013
Mar 23.

263.4 kb deletion within the TCF4 gene consistent with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome,
inherited from a mosaic parent with normal phenotype.

Kousoulidou L(1), Tanteles G, Moutafi M, Sismani C, Patsalis PC, Anastasiadou V.

Author information: 
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a rare neurodevelopmental genetic disorder,
remaining under-diagnosed due to similarities with other known genetic syndromes.
It is mainly characterized by severe intellectual disability, overbreathing, a
typical facial gestalt, tendency to epilepsy and is caused by TCF4
haploinsufficiency. We report on a 14-year old boy, born to healthy
non-consanguineous parents, with a PTHS spectrum phenotype, presenting with
moderate to severe developmental delay, severe speech delay and facial
dysmorphism. Genetic investigation using array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (array-CGH) with a 400K custom array, revealed a 263.4 kb deletion 
within the TCF4 gene, removing exons 4-9. Parental array-CGH analysis was also
performed, indicating paternal mosaicism for the same deletion. The mosaicism was
confirmed by Quantitative Real-Time PCR. The current report describes a new TCF4 
deletion associated with a PTHS phenotype. Moreover, it is the first case to our 
knowledge, where such a deletion is shown to be inherited from a clinically
unaffected mosaic parent. Our results highlight the importance of parental
testing in this setting for more accurate and focused prenatal diagnosis. The
level and tissue-specificity of mosaicism in the father would be an interesting
direction for further studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23528641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059495. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

The association between gene polymorphism of TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in
Chinese Han population: a meta-analysis.

Dou H(1), Ma E, Yin L, Jin Y, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Tianjin, China. douhaoying11@126.com

In recent years, it has been widely accepted that transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in multiple ethnic
groups, especially its single nucleotide polymorphisms of rs7903146C/T,
rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C. However, the results previously obtained in
Chinese Han population are often inconsistent. For clearing this issue, herein we
performed meta-analysis based on the reports that can be found to assess the
association. In the meta-analysis, Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval
(95% CI) were calculated with random-effect model or fixed-effect model based on 
the heterogeneity analysis. The quality of included studies was evaluated by
using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. The sensitivity analysis was used to confirm
the reliability and stability of the meta-analysis. In total, 20 case-control
studies with 9122 cases of T2DM and 8017 controls were included. Among these
case-control studies, we selected 13 ones on rs7903146 C/T, 5 ones on rs12255372 
G/T, 8 ones on rs290487 T/C. The results indicated that rs7903146C/T polymorphism
was significantly associated with T2DM (T vs. C, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.73, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.39-2.16). 
There was no evidence that rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C polymorphisms increased 
T2DM risk (T vs. G, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.77, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.88-3.56; C vs. T, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.08, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.93-1.25). Subgroup analysis of different regions proved the relationship
between rs7903146C/T polymorphism and T2DM risk in both the northern and the
southern China. The association of rs290487 with T2DM was affected by body mass
index, whereas the association of rs7903146 and rs290487 with T2DM was influenced
neither by age nor by sex. In conclusion, this study indicated that the
rs7903146C/T polymorphism of the TCF7L2 gene had a significant effect on T2DM
risk in Chinese Han population, with rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C polymorphisms 
showing no significant effect.

PMCID: PMC3602305
PMID: 23527206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1117-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.010. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Repression of adipogenesis through promotion of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by TIS7
up-regulated in adipocytes under hypoxia.

Nakamura Y(1), Hinoi E, Iezaki T, Takada S, Hashizume S, Takahata Y, Tsuruta E,
Takahashi S, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

Although tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate induced sequence-7 (TIS7) has been
identified as a co-activator/repressor of gene transcription in different
eukaryotic cells, little attention has been paid to the functionality of TIS7 in 
adipocytes. Here, we evaluated the possible role of TIS7 in mechanisms underlying
the regulation of adipogenesis. TIS7 expression was preferentially up-regulated
in white adipose tissues (WAT) of obesity model mice as well as in pre-adipocytic
3T3-L1 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions. TIS7 promoter activity was
selectively enhanced by activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) among different 
transcription factors tested, while induction of TIS7 by hypoxic stress was
markedly prevented by knockdown of ATF6 by shRNA in 3T3-L1 cells. Overexpression 
of TIS7 markedly inhibited Oil Red O staining and expression of particular
adipogenic genes in 3T3-L1 cells. TIS7 synergistically promoted gene
transactivation mediated by Wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration
site family (Wnt)/ß-catenin, while blockade of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by a
dominant negative form of T-cell factor-4 (DN-TCF4) markedly prevented the
inhibition of adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells with TIS7 overexpression. TIS7
predominantly interacted with ß-catenin in the nucleus of WAT in the genetically 
obese ob/ob mice as well as in 3T3-L1 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions.
Both knockdown of TIS7 by shRNA and introduction of DN-TCF4 similarly reversed
the hypoxia-induced inhibition of adipogenic gene expression in 3T3-L1 cells.
These findings suggest that TIS7 could play a pivotal role in adipogenesis
through interacting with ß-catenin to promote the canonical Wnt signaling in
pre-adipocytes under hypoxic stress such as obesity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23517917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059555. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in Wnt signaling pathway genes
with breast cancer in Saudi patients.

Alanazi MS(1), Parine NR, Shaik JP, Alabdulkarim HA, Ajaj SA, Khan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Breast cancer is a complex heterogeneous disease involving genetic and epigenetic
alterations in genes encoding proteins that are components of various signaling
pathways. Candidate gene approach have identified association of genetic variants
in the Wnt signaling pathway genes and increased susceptibility to several
diseases including breast cancer. Due to the rarity of somatic mutations in key
genes of Wnt pathway, we investigated the association of genetic variants in
these genes with predisposition to breast cancers. We performed a case-control
study to identify risk variants by examining 15 SNPs located in 8 genes
associated with Wnt signaling. Genotypic analysis of individual locus showed
statistically significant association of five SNPs located in ß-catenin, AXIN2,
DKK3, SFRP3 and TCF7L2 with breast cancers. Increased risk was observed only with
the SNP in ß-catenin while the other four SNPs conferred protection against
breast cancers. Majority of these associations persisted after stratification of 
the cases based on estrogen receptor status and age of on-set of breast cancer.
The rs7775 SNP in exon 6 of SFRP3 gene that codes for either arginine or glycine 
exhibited very strong association with breast cancer, even after Bonferroni's
correction. Apart from these five variants, rs3923086 in AXIN2 and rs3763511 in
DKK4 that did not show any association in the overall population were
significantly associated with early on-set and estrogen receptor negative breast 
cancers, respectively. This is the first study to utilize pathway based approach 
to identify association of risk variants in the Wnt signaling pathway genes with 
breast cancers. Confirmation of our findings in larger populations of different
ethnicities would provide evidence for the role of Wnt pathway as well as
screening markers for early detection of breast carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3597615
PMID: 23516639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Mol Histol. 2013 Oct;44(5):555-63. doi: 10.1007/s10735-013-9504-9. Epub 2013
Mar 17.

ZNRF3 acts as a tumour suppressor by the Wnt signalling pathway in human gastric 
adenocarcinoma.

Zhou Y(1), Lan J, Wang W, Shi Q, Lan Y, Cheng Z, Guan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215006, People's Republic of China.

E3 ubiquitin ligases regulate a variety of biological processes through the
ubiquitin-proteasome system, together with ubiquitin activating enzyme E1 and
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2. Previous studies have demonstrated that zinc and
ring finger 3 (ZNRF3), which belongs to the E3 ubiquitin ligases family is
involved in the Wnt signalling pathway, which plays an important role in causing 
cancer. However, the expression and function of ZNRF3 in human gastric
adenocarcinoma still remains unclear. Immunohistochemical and western blot
analysis showed a significant down-regulation of ZNRF3 protein in gastric
adenocarcinoma tissues compared with adjacent normal gastric tissues. In
addition, there was a correlation between the down-regulation of ZNRF3 and poor
tissue differentiation in gastric adenocarcinoma. To investigate the potential
function of ZNRF3 in cell proliferation and apoptosis, a gastric cell line
SGC7901 was employed. The over-expression of wild-type ZNRF3, which was
accomplished by the transient transfection of recombinant pEGFP-ZNRF3 (or empty
plasmids as control) into the cell line SGC7901, was confirmed by western blot
analysis. Flow-cytometry-based and Cell Counting Kit-8 assays showed that
over-expression of wt ZNRF3 induced apoptosis and suppressed proliferation.
ZNRF3-overexpressing gastric cells displayed partly attenuated protein levels of 
beta-catenin and TCF-4 compared with those transfected with the empty plasmid.
Our study demonstrates a novel gastric adenocarcinoma suppressor and reveals that
ZNRF3 inhibits gastric cancer cell growth and promotes the cell apoptosis by
affecting the Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF signalling pathway.

PMID: 23504200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Genet Med. 2013 Aug;15(8):600-11. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.8. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Use of genomic panels to determine risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the
general population: a targeted evidence-based review.

Palomaki GE(1), Melillo S, Marrone M, Douglas MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Women & Infants Hospital,
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
gpalomaki@ipmms.org

This evidence review addresses whether type 2 diabetes genomic risk panels
improve health outcomes (e.g., reduce rates of developing type 2 diabetes) in
low- or high-risk adults; two clinical scenarios promulgated by commercial
companies offering such testing. Evidence for the analytic validity of available 
genomic profiles was inadequate. Clinical validity ranged from inadequate to
convincing for 30 variants identified on five type 2 diabetes genomic panels and 
by genome-wide association studies. Eight common variants were identified for
general population use; evidence credibility based on published criteria was
strong for two variants, moderate for two variants, and weak for four variants.
TCF7L2 had the largest per-allele odds ratio of 1.39 (95% confidence interval
1.33-1.46). Models combining the best four, best eight, and all 30 variants used 
summary effect sizes, reported genotype frequencies, and assumed independent
effects. Areas under the curve were 0.547, 0.551, and 0.570, respectively. In
high-risk populations, per-allele odds ratios for TCF7L2 alone were similar to
those of the general population. TCF7L2, in combination with other variants,
yielded minimal improvement in risk reclassification. Evidence on TCF7L2 clinical
validity was adequate. Three studies addressed the clinical utility of
intervention effectiveness, stratified by TCF7L2 genotype; none found significant
interactions. Clinical utility evidence was inadequate. In addition to analytic
validity and clinical utility knowledge gaps, additional gaps were identified
regarding how to inform, produce, and evaluate models combining multiple
variants.

PMCID: PMC4684162
PMID: 23492876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Genet Med. 2013 Aug;15(8):612-7. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.9. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Recommendations from the EGAPP Working Group: does genomic profiling to assess
type 2 diabetes risk improve health outcomes?

Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice and Prevention (EGAPP) Working
Group; Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice and Prevention (EGAPP)
Working Group.

Collaborators: Calonge N, Berg JS, Campos-Outcalt D, Djulbegovic B, Ganiats TG,
Janssens C, Klein RD, Offit K, Pauker SG, Piper M, Richards CS, Strickland OL,
Tunis S, Williams MS, Zallen D.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS: The Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice
and Prevention (EGAPP) Working Group (EWG) found insufficient evidence to
recommend testing for predictive variants in 28 variants (listed in Table 1) to
assess risk for type 2 diabetes in the general population, on the basis of
studies in populations of northern European descent. The EWG found that the
magnitude of net health benefit from the use of any of these tests alone or in
combination is close to zero. The EWG discourages clinical use unless further
evidence supports improved clinical outcomes.The EWG found insufficient evidence 
to recommend testing for the TCF7L2 gene to assess risk for type 2 diabetes in
high-risk individuals. The EWG found that the magnitude of net health benefit
from the use of this test is close to zero. The EWG discourages clinical use
unless further evidence supports improved clinical outcomes.On the basis of the
available evidence for both the scenarios, the overall certainty of net health
benefit is deemed "low."
RATIONALE: It has been suggested that genomic profiling in the general population
or in high-risk populations for type 2 diabetes might lead to management changes 
(e.g., earlier initiation or higher rates of medical interventions, or targeted
recommendations for behavioral change) that improve type 2 diabetes outcomes or
prevent type 2 diabetes. The EWG found no direct evidence to support this
possibility; therefore, this review sought indirect evidence aimed at documenting
the extent to which genomic profiling alters type 2 diabetes risk estimation,
alone and in combination with traditional risk factors, and the extent to which
risk classification improves health outcomes.
ANALYTIC VALIDITY: Assay-related evidence on available genomic profiling tests
was deemed inadequate. However, on the basis of existing technologies that have
been or may be used, the analytic sensitivity and specificity of tests for
individual gene variants might be at least satisfactory.
CLINICAL VALIDITY: Twenty-eight candidate markers were evaluated in the general
population. Evidence on clinical validity was rated inadequate for 24 of these
associations (86%) and adequate for 4 (14%). Inadequate grades were based on
limited evidence, poor replication, existence of possible biases, or combinations
of these factors. Type 2 diabetes genomic profiling provided areas under the
receiver operator characteristics curve of 55%-57%, with 4, 8, and 28 genes. Only
TCF7L2 had convincing evidence of an association with type 2 diabetes with an
odds ratio of 1.39 (95% confidence interval: 1.33-1.46).TCF7L2 was evaluated for 
high-risk populations, and the overall odds ratio was 1.66 (95% confidence
interval: 1.22-2.27) for association with progression to type 2 diabetes.
CLINICAL UTILITY: No studies were available to provide direct evidence on the
balance of benefits and harms for genetic profiling for type 2 diabetes alone or 
in addition to traditional risk factors in the general population.Evidence for
high-risk populations and TCF7L2 was inadequate on the basis of two identified
studies. These studies found close to zero additional benefit with the addition
of genomic markers to traditional risk factors (diet, body mass index, and
glucose tolerance).
CONTEXTUAL ISSUES: Prevention of type 2 diabetes is a public health priority.
Improvements in the outcomes associated with genomic profiling could have
important impacts. Traditional risk factors (e.g., body mass index, weight, fat
mass, and exercise) have an advantage in clinical screening and risk assessment
strategies because they measure the actual targets for therapy (e.g., fasting
plasma glucose and medical interventions). To be useful in predicting disease
risk, genomic testing should improve the predictive value of these traditional
risk factors. Some issues important for clinical utility remain unknown, such as 
the level of risk that changes intervention, whether long-term disease outcomes
will improve, how individuals being tested will understand/respond to test
results and interact with the health-care system, and whether testing will
motivate behavior change or amplify potential harms.

PMID: 23492873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 28;335(2):361-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.02.058. Epub
2013 Mar 6.

Modulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in human oligodendroglioma cells by
Sox17 regulates proliferation and differentiation.

Chen HL(1), Chew LJ, Packer RJ, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Oligodendrogliomas originate from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), whose 
development is regulated by the Sonic hedgehog and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways. We 
investigated the contribution of these pathways in the proliferation and
differentiation of human oligodendroglioma cells (HOG). Inhibition of Hedgehog
signaling with cyclopamine decreased cell survival and increased phosphorylated
beta-catenin without altering myelin protein levels. Conversely, treatment of HOG
with the Wnt antagonist secreted frizzled related protein (SFRP1), led to
increased myelin protein levels and reduced cell proliferation, suggesting cell
cycle arrest and differentiation. Unlike normal primary human OPCs, beta-catenin 
in HOG cells is not associated with endogenous Sox17 protein despite high levels 
of both proteins. Retroviral overexpression of recombinant Sox17 increased HOG
cell cycle exit and apoptosis, and raised myelin protein levels and the
percentage of O4(+) cells, indicating increased differentiation. Recombinant
Sox17 also increased beta-catenin-TCF4-Sox17 complex formation and decreased
total cellular levels of beta-catenin. These changes were associated with
increased SFRP1, and reduced expression of Wnt-1 and Frizzled-1, -3 and -7 RNA,
indicating that Sox17 induced a Hedgehog target, and regulated Wnt signaling at
multiple levels. Our studies indicate that Wnt signaling regulates HOG cell cycle
arrest and differentiation, and that recombinant Sox17 mediates modulation of the
Wnt pathway through changes in beta-catenin, SFRP1 and Wnt/Frizzled expression.
Our results thus identify Sox17 as a potential molecular target to include in HOG
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3669657
PMID: 23474492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Dis Model Mech. 2013 May;6(3):802-10. doi: 10.1242/dmm.011163. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

H. pylori virulence factor CagA increases intestinal cell proliferation by Wnt
pathway activation in a transgenic zebrafish model.

Neal JT(1), Peterson TS, Kent ML, Guillemin K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Infection with Helicobacter pylori is a major risk factor for the development of 
gastric cancer, and infection with strains carrying the virulence factor CagA
significantly increases this risk. To investigate the mechanisms by which CagA
promotes carcinogenesis, we generated transgenic zebrafish expressing CagA
ubiquitously or in the anterior intestine. Transgenic zebrafish expressing either
the wild-type or a phosphorylation-resistant form of CagA exhibited significantly
increased rates of intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and showed
significant upregulation of the Wnt target genes cyclinD1, axin2 and the
zebrafish c-myc ortholog myca. Coexpression of CagA with a loss-of-function
allele encoding the ß-catenin destruction complex protein Axin1 resulted in a
further increase in intestinal proliferation. Coexpression of CagA with a null
allele of the key ß-catenin transcriptional cofactor Tcf4 restored intestinal
proliferation to wild-type levels. These results provide in vivo evidence of Wnt 
pathway activation by CagA downstream of or in parallel to the ß-catenin
destruction complex and upstream of Tcf4. Long-term transgenic expression of
wild-type CagA, but not the phosphorylation-resistant form, resulted in
significant hyperplasia of the adult intestinal epithelium. We further utilized
this model to demonstrate that oncogenic cooperation between CagA and a
loss-of-function allele of p53 is sufficient to induce high rates of intestinal
small cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, establishing the utility of our
transgenic zebrafish model in the study of CagA-associated gastrointestinal
cancers.

PMCID: PMC3634662
PMID: 23471915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Jul;38(1):2153-65. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12179. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Myelin loss and oligodendrocyte pathology in white matter tracts following
traumatic brain injury in the rat.

Flygt J(1), Djupsjö A, Lenne F, Marklund N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala SE-751 85,
Sweden.

Axonal injury is an important contributor to the behavioral deficits observed
following traumatic brain injury (TBI). Additionally, loss of myelin and/or
oligodendrocytes can negatively influence signal transduction and axon integrity.
Apoptotic oligodendrocytes, changes in the oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) 
population and loss of myelin were evaluated at 2, 7 and 21 days following TBI.
We used the central fluid percussion injury model (n = 18 and three controls) and
the lateral fluid percussion injury model (n = 15 and three controls). The
external capsule, fimbriae and corpus callosum were analysed. With Luxol Fast
Blue and RIP staining, myelin loss was observed in both models, in all evaluated 
regions and at all post-injury time points, as compared with sham-injured
controls (P = 0.05). Accumulation of ß-amyloid precursor protein was observed in 
white matter tracts in both models in areas with preserved and reduced myelin
staining. White matter microglial/macrophage activation, evaluated by isolectin
B4 immunostaining, was marked at the early time points. In contrast, the glial
scar, evaluated by glial fibrillary acidic protein staining, showed its highest
intensity 21 days post-injury in both models. The number of apoptotic
oligodendrocytes, detected by CC1/caspase-3 co-labeling, was increased in both
models in all evaluated regions. Finally, the numbers of OPCs, evaluated with the
markers Tcf4 and Olig2, were increased from day 2 (Olig2) or day 7 (Tcf4)
post-injury (P = 0.05). Our results indicate that TBI induces oligodendrocyte
apoptosis and widespread myelin loss, followed by a concomitant increase in the
number of OPCs. Prevention of myelin loss and oligodendrocyte death may represent
novel therapeutic targets for TBI.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMID: 23458840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Am J Perinatol. 2014 Jan;31(1):69-76. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1334451. Epub 2013 Mar 
1.

Maternal genotype and gestational diabetes.

Stuebe AM(1), Wise A(2), Nguyen T(3), Herring A(2), North KE(4), Siega-Riz AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (2)Department of Biostatistics,
Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (3)Division of Genetics and Endocrinology,
Children's Hospital of Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, Carolina 
Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether genetic variants associated with glucose
homeostasis are associated with gestational diabetes (GDM).
STUDY DESIGN: We genotyped 899 self-identified Caucasian women and 386
self-identified African-American women in the Pregnancy, Infection and Nutrition 
(PIN) Studies cohorts for 38 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with type II diabetes (T2DM) and/or glucose homeostasis in European populations.
RESULTS: GDM was diagnosed in 56 of 899 (6.2%) Caucasian and 24 of 386 (6.2%)
African-American women. Among Caucasian women, GDM was associated with carriage
of TCF7L2 rs7901695, MTNR1B rs10830963 and GCKR rs780094 alleles that are
associated with T2DM and fasting glucose in nonpregnant populations. Among
African-American participants, we found an increased risk among TSPAN8 rs7961581 
C allele homozygotes and reduced risk among carriers of the JAZF1 rs864745 T
allele.
CONCLUSION: We found several SNPs that are associated with GDM risk in the PIN
cohorts. Maternal genotyping may identify women at risk for impaired gestational 
glucose tolerance.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMCID: PMC3884679
PMID: 23456907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Epigenetics. 2013 Apr;8(4):373-82. doi: 10.4161/epi.24113. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Epigenetic regulation of the Wnt signaling inhibitor DACT2 in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang X(1), Yang Y(1), Liu X(1), Herman JG(2), Brock MV(2), Licchesi JD(2), Yue
W(3), Pei X(3), Guo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology; Chinese PLA General Hospital;
Beijing, P.R. China. (2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Institute at Johns
Hopkins; Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD USA. (3)Stem Cells and
Regenerative Medicine Lab; Beijing Institute of Transfusion Medicine; Beijing,
P.R. China.

DACT2 (Dapper, Dishevelled-associated antagonist of ß-catenin homolog 2) is a
member of the DACT family involved in the regulation of embryonic development.
Human DACT2 is localized on 6q27, a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in 
human cancers. However, the regulation of DACT2 expression and function in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear. In this study, genetic and
epigenetic changes of DACT2 were analyzed in HCC cell lines and primary cancer.
We found no single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associated with HCC. Promoter
region methylation was correlated with loss or reduction of DACT2 expression, and
restoration of DACT2 expression was induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-AZA) in 
HCC cell lines. Promoter region methylation was found in 54.84% of primary HCC.
Reduction of DACT2 expression was associated with promoter hypermethylation, and 
expression of DACT2 was inversely related to ß-catenin expression in primary HCC.
DACT2 suppressed cell proliferation, induced G 2-M arrest in cell lines and
inhibited tumor growth in xenograft nude mice. The transcriptional activity of
TCF-4 and the expression of Wnt signaling downstream genes were suppressed by
DACT2 re-expression and reactivated by depletion of DACT2. In conclusion, DACT2
is frequently methylated in HCC and its expression is regulated by promoter
hypermethylation. DACT2 suppresses HCC by inhibiting Wnt signaling in human HCC.

PMCID: PMC3674046
PMID: 23449122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056242. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

ABCD2 is a direct target of ß-catenin and TCF-4: implications for X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy therapy.

Park CY(1), Kim HS, Jang J, Lee H, Lee JS, Yoo JE, Lee DR, Kim DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seodaemun-gu,
Seoul, Korea.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a peroxisomal disorder caused by
mutations in the ABCD1 gene that encodes the peroxisomal ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter subfamily D member 1 protein (ABCD1), which is referred to as
the adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP). Induction of the ABCD2 gene, the closest
homolog of ABCD1, has been mentioned as a possible therapeutic option for the
defective ABCD1 protein in X-ALD. However, little is known about the
transcriptional regulation of ABCD2 gene expression. Here, through in silico
analysis, we found two putative TCF-4 binding elements between nucleotide
positions -360 and -260 of the promoter region of the ABCD2 gene. The
transcriptional activity of the ABCD2 promoter was strongly increased by ectopic 
expression of ß-catenin and TCF-4. In addition, mutation of either or both TCF-4 
binding elements by site-directed mutagenesis decreased promoter activity. This
was further validated by the finding that ß-catenin and the promoter of the ABCD2
gene were pulled down with a ß-catenin antibody in a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover, real-time PCR analysis revealed that
ß-catenin and TCF-4 increased mRNA levels of ABCD2 in both a hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line and primary fibroblasts from an X-ALD patient. Interestingly,
we found that the levels of very long chain fatty acids were decreased by ectopic
expression of ABCD2-GFP as well as ß-catenin and TCF-4. Taken together, our
results demonstrate for the first time the direct regulation of ABCD2 by
ß-catenin and TCF-4.

PMCID: PMC3578850
PMID: 23437103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 13;33(7):933-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.37. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Activation of ß-catenin/TCF targets following loss of the tumor suppressor SNF5.

Mora-Blanco EL(1), Mishina Y(2), Tillman EJ(1), Cho YJ(3), Thom CS(1), Pomeroy
SL(3), Shao W(2), Roberts CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Department
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Novartis Institute For
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, Children's
Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.

The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is a master regulator of developmental
cell-fate decisions, although the key target pathways are poorly characterized.
Here, we interrogated the contribution of the SWI/SNF subunit and tumor
suppressor SNF5 to the regulation of developmental pathways using conditional
mouse and cell culture models. We find that loss of SNF5 phenocopies ß-catenin
hyperactivation and that SNF5 is essential for regulating Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
target expression. These data provide insight into chromatin-based mechanisms
that underlie developmental regulation and elucidate the emerging theme that
mutation of this tumor suppressor complex can activate developmental pathways by 
uncoupling them from upstream control.

PMID: 23435428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Diabetes. 2013 Jul;62(7):2613-7. doi: 10.2337/db12-1093. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

TCF7L2 variation and proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

Luo J(1), Zhao L, Chen AY, Zhang X, Zhu J, Zhao J, Ouyang H, Luo H, Song Y, Lee
J, Patel SH, Shaw PX, Sadda S, Zhuo Y, Rosenfeld MG, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is the most severe vision-threatening
complication of diabetes. For investigation of genetic association between TCF7L2
and PDR in Caucasian type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its functional
consequences, 383 T2DM patients with PDR (T2DM-PDR) and 756 T2DM patients without
diabetic retinopathy (T2DM-no DR) were genotyped with rs7903146 in TCF7L2. We
found that risk allele (T) frequency of rs7903146 was significantly higher in
T2DM-PDR patients (allelic P = 2.52E-04). In lymphoblastoid cells induced to
undergo endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by treatment of tunicamycin, higher
fold change of TCF7L2 and VEGFA mRNA levels were observed in rs7903146-TT cells
than in rs7903146-CC cells (P = 0.02 for TCF7L2; P = 0.004 for VEGFA), suggesting
that ER stress plays a role in PDR pathogenesis. Silencing TCF7L2 resulted in
decreased mRNA levels of both TCF7L2 and VEGFA (P < 0.001). Retinas of
oxygen-induced retinopathy mice (a model for PDR) had higher TCF7L2 and VEGFA
mRNA levels than those of controls (P = 2.9E-04 for TCF7L2; P = 1.9E-07 for
VEGFA). Together, data from our study show that TCF7L2-rs7903146 is associated
with PDR in Caucasian T2DM and suggest that TCF7L2 promotes pathological retinal 
neovascularization via ER stress-dependent upregulation of VEGFA.

PMCID: PMC3712060
PMID: 23434931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):706-8. doi: 10.2337/db12-1418.

TCF7L2 and glucose metabolism: time to look beyond the pancreas.

Nobrega MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
nobrega@uchicago.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):789-800.

PMCID: PMC3581232
PMID: 23431017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055895. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

A microarray platform-independent classification tool for cell of origin class
allows comparative analysis of gene expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Care MA(1), Barrans S, Worrillow L, Jack A, Westhead DR, Tooze RM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

Cell of origin classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) identifies
subsets with biological and clinical significance. Despite the established nature
of the classification existing studies display variability in classifier
implementation, and a comparative analysis across multiple data sets is lacking. 
Here we describe the validation of a cell of origin classifier for DLBCL, based
on balanced voting between 4 machine-learning tools: the DLBCL automatic
classifier (DAC). This shows superior survival separation for assigned Activated 
B-cell (ABC) and Germinal Center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL classes relative to a range
of other classifiers. DAC is effective on data derived from multiple microarray
platforms and formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples and is parsimonious, using
20 classifier genes. We use DAC to perform a comparative analysis of gene
expression in 10 data sets (2030 cases). We generate ranked meta-profiles of
genes showing consistent class-association using =6 data sets as a cut-off: ABC
(414 genes) and GCB (415 genes). The transcription factor ZBTB32 emerges as the
most consistent and differentially expressed gene in ABC-DLBCL while other
transcription factors such as ARID3A, BATF, and TCF4 are also amongst the 24
genes associated with this class in all datasets. Analysis of enrichment of 12323
gene signatures against meta-profiles and all data sets individually confirms
consistent associations with signatures of molecular pathways, chromosomal
cytobands, and transcription factor binding sites. We provide DAC as an open
access Windows application, and the accompanying meta-analyses as a resource.

PMCID: PMC3570548
PMID: 23424639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Neuro Oncol. 2013 May;15(5):578-88. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not004. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

miR-92b controls glioma proliferation and invasion through regulating
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling via Nemo-like kinase.

Wang K(1), Wang X, Zou J, Zhang A, Wan Y, Pu P, Song Z, Qian C, Chen Y, Yang S,
Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Hangzhou Xiasha Hospital, Sir Run Run Shaw
Hospital, Medical College, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Peoples Republic of
China.

Erratum in
    Neuro Oncol. 2013 Jul;15(7):970.

BACKGROUND: Nemo-like kinase (NLK) is an evolutionarily conserved protein kinase 
involved in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which has been reported to be associated 
with gliomagenesis. In the present study, we aimed to identify a concrete
mechanism of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway regulation by microRNAs (miRNAs) in glioma.
METHODS: Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and in situ
hybridization were conducted to detect the expression of miR-92b. The cell
proliferation rate and cell cycle kinetics were detected using
3-(4,5)-dimethylthiahiazo (-z-y1)-3,5-di-phenytetrazoliumromide (MTT) assay and
flow cytometry, cell invasion and migration were evaluated using Transwell assay 
and wound healing assay, and cell apoptosis was detected using annexin V
staining. Furthermore, the relevant molecules regulating proliferation and
invasion were examined using Western blot analysis, immunohistochemistry, and
immunofluorescence staining. Luciferase reporter assay was used to identify the
direct regulation of NLK by miR-92b and beta-catenin/TCF4 activity.
RESULTS: We first showed that the expression of miR-92b was elevated in both
glioma samples and glioma cells. Furthermore, down-regulation of miR-92b
triggered growth inhibition, induced apoptosis, and suppressed invasion of glioma
in vitro and in vivo. Luciferase assay and Western blot analysis revealed that
NLK is a direct target of miR-92b. Restoring expression of NLK inhibited glioma
proliferation and invasion. Mechanistic investigation revealed that miR-92b
deletion suppressed beta-catenin/TCF-4 transcription activity by targeting NLK.
Moreover, expression of NLK was inversely correlated with miR-92b in glioma
samples and was predictive of patient survival in a retrospective analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify a role for miR-92b in glioma proliferation and
invasion after activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling via NLK.

PMCID: PMC3635522
PMID: 23416699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Feb 28;702(1-3):85-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.01.046.
Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Effect of carboxymethylated chitosan on the biosynthesis of NGF and activation of
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in the proliferation of Schwann cells.

Tao HY(1), He B, Liu SQ, Wei AL, Tao FH, Tao HL, Deng WX, Li HH, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, 238 Jiefang
Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan 430060, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.

The proliferation of Schwann cells around injured peripheral nerves supports the 
process of Wallerian degeneration and is critical for axonal regeneration. In
this publication, carboxymethylated chitosan (CMCS) was studied to determine its 
capacity (i) to induce proliferation and secretion of nerve growth factor (NGF)
and (ii) to activate Wingless-type(Wnt) protein/ß-catenin signaling pathways in
rat Schwann cells. CMCS was found to induce Schwann cell proliferation and NGF
synthesis in Schwann cell in a dose and time dependent manner. CMCS was shown to 
activate factors in the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, including Dvl-1,
ß-catenin, Tcf4, Lef1, C-myc, and Cyclin D1 which are active in the proliferation
of Schwann cells and biosynthesis of NGF of Schwann cell. Overall, this study
suggests that CMCS can promote the proliferation of cultured Schwann cells and
synthesis of NGF by activating the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23399769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):197-209. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.01.009.

LRP6 enhances glucose metabolism by promoting TCF7L2-dependent insulin receptor
expression and IGF receptor stabilization in humans.

Singh R(1), De Aguiar RB, Naik S, Mani S, Ostadsharif K, Wencker D, Sotoudeh M,
Malekzadeh R, Sherwin RS, Mani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Common genetic variations in Wnt signaling genes have been associated with
metabolic syndrome and diabetes by mechanisms that are poorly understood. A rare 
nonconservative mutation in Wnt coreceptor LRP6 (LRP6(R611C)) has been shown to
underlie autosomal dominant early onset coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes,
and metabolic syndrome. We examined the interplay between Wnt and insulin
signaling pathways in skeletal muscle and skin fibroblasts of healthy nondiabetic
LRP6(R611C) mutation carriers. LRP6 mutation carriers exhibited hyperinsulinemia 
and reduced insulin sensitivity compared to noncarrier relatives in response to
oral glucose ingestion, which correlated with a significant decline in tissue
expression of the insulin receptor and insulin signaling activity. Further
investigations showed that the LRP6(R611C) mutation diminishes TCF7L2-dependent
transcription of the IR while it increases the stability of IGFR and enhances
mTORC1 activity. These findings identify the Wnt/LRP6/TCF7L2 axis as a regulator 
of glucose metabolism and a potential therapeutic target for insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3589523
PMID: 23395167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Cancer. 2013;4(2):96-103. doi: 10.7150/jca.5470. Epub 2013 Jan 5.

Crosstalk between Wnt Signaling and RNA Processing in Colorectal Cancer.

Bordonaro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, The Commonwealth Medical College, 525 Pine
Street, Scranton, PA 18509, USA.

RNA processing involves a variety of processes affecting gene expression,
including the removal of introns through RNA splicing, as well as 3' end
processing (cleavage and polyadenylation). Alternative RNA processing is
fundamentally important for gene regulation, and aberrant processing is
associated with the initiation and progression of cancer. Deregulated Wnt
signaling, which is the initiating event in the development of most cases of
human colorectal cancer (CRC), has been linked to modified RNA processing, which 
may contribute to Wnt-mediated colonic carcinogenesis. Crosstalk between Wnt
signaling and alternative RNA splicing with relevance to CRC includes effects on 
the expression of Rac1b, an alternatively spliced gene associated with
tumorigenesis, which exhibits alternative RNA splicing that is influenced by Wnt 
activity. In addition, Tcf4, a crucial component of Wnt signaling, also exhibits 
alternative splicing, which is likely involved in colonic tumorigenesis.
Modulation of 3' end formation, including of the Wnt target gene COX-2, also can 
influence the neoplastic process, with implications for CRC. While many human
genes are dependent on introns and splicing for normal levels of gene expression,
naturally intronless genes exist with a unique metabolism that allows for
intron-independent gene expression. Effects of Wnt activity on the RNA metabolism
of the intronless Wnt-target gene c-jun is a likely contributor to cancer
development. Further, butyrate, a breakdown product of dietary fiber and a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, upregulates Wnt activity in CRC cells, and also
modulates RNA processing; therefore, the interplay between Wnt activity, the
modulation of this activity by butyrate, and differential RNA metabolism in
colonic cells can significantly influence tumorigenesis. Determining the role
played by altered RNA processing in Wnt-mediated neoplasia may lead to novel
interventions aimed at restoring normal RNA metabolism for therapeutic benefit.
Therefore, this minireview presents a brief overview of several aspects of RNA
processing of relevance to cancer, which potentially influence, or are influenced
by, Wnt signaling activity.

PMCID: PMC3563071
PMID: 23386908  [PubMed]


429. Carcinogenesis. 2013 May;34(5):962-73. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt027. Epub 2013 Jan 
27.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling enhances hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in hepatocellular carcinoma via crosstalk with hif-1a signaling.

Zhang Q(1), Bai X, Chen W, Ma T, Hu Q, Liang C, Xie S, Chen C, Hu L, Xu S, Liang 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical process for tumor invasion 
and metastasis. Hypoxia may induce EMT, and upregulated ß-catenin expression has 
been found in various tumors. In this study, we investigate the role of ß-catenin
in hypoxia-induced EMT in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Induction of EMT in HCC
cell lines by hypoxia was confirmed by altered morphology, expression change of
EMT-associated markers and enhanced invasion capacity. We showed that
hypoxia-induced EMT could be enhanced by addition of recombinant Wnt3a while it
was repressed by ß-catenin small interfering RNA. An interaction between
ß-catenin and hypoxia-induced factor-1a (hif-1a) was found, and an underlying
competition for ß-catenin between hif-1a and T-cell factor-4 was implied.
Notably, increased hif-1a activity was accompanied with more significant EMT
features. We also showed that the pro-EMT effect of ß-catenin in hypoxia was
deprived in the absence of hif-1a. Moreover, ß-catenin was found to be
responsible for the maintenance of viability and proliferation for tumor cells
undergoing hypoxia. We further showed a correlation between hif-1a and ß-catenin 
expression, and corresponding expression of EMT-associated markers in human HCC
tissues. Our results suggest that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling enhances
hypoxia-induced EMT in HCC by increasing the EMT-associated activity of hif-1a
and preventing tumor cell death.

PMID: 23358852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. FEBS Lett. 2013 Mar 1;587(5):522-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.034. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

Synthesis of novel inhibitors blocking Wnt signaling downstream of ß-catenin.

Halbedl S(1), Kratzer MC, Rahm K, Crosta N, Masters KS, Zippert J, Bräse S, Gradl
D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Cell- and Developmental Biology, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Large scale screening of libraries consisting of natural and small molecules led 
to the identification of many small molecule inhibitors repressing Wnt/ß-Catenin 
signaling. However, targeted synthesis of novel Wnt pathway inhibitors has been
rarely described. We developed a modular and expedient way to create the aromatic
ring system with an aliphatic ring in between. Our synthesis opens up the
possibility, in principle, to substitute all positions at the ring system with
any desired substituent. Here, we tested five different haloquinone analogs
carrying methoxy- and hydroxy-groups at different positions. Bona fide Wnt
activity assays in cell culture and in Xenopus embryos revealed that two of these
compounds act as potent inhibitors of aberrant activated Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Int J Cancer. 2013 Aug 1;133(3):556-67. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28060. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Pituitary homeobox 2 (PITX2) protects renal cancer cell lines against doxorubicin
toxicity by transcriptional activation of the multidrug transporter ABCB1.

Lee WK(1), Chakraborty PK, Thévenod F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, ZBAF, Witten/Herdecke University,
Witten, North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany.

The multidrug resistance (MDR) P-glycoprotein ABCB1 plays a major role in MDR of 
malignant cells and is regulated by various transcription factors, including
Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4. The transcription factor PITX2 (Pituitary homeobox-2) is
essential for embryonic development. PITX2 operates by recruiting and interacting
with ß-catenin to increase the expression of growth-regulating genes, such as
cyclin D1/2 and c-Myc. The importance of PITX2 in malignancy is not yet known.
Here we demonstrate that in the renal cancer cell lines ACHN and A498, the level 
of ABCB1 expression and function correlate with nuclear PITX2 localization and
PITX2-luciferase reporter gene activity (A498<U+2009>><U+2009>ACHN). In A498 cells, doxorubicin
toxicity is augmented by the ABCB1 inhibitor, PSC833. PITX2 overexpression
increases ABCB1 expression and cell survival in ACHN cells. Silencing of PITX2 by
siRNA downregulates ABCB1 and induces a greater chemotherapeutic response to
doxorubicin in A498 cells, as determined by MTT cell viability and clonogenic
survival assays. Two PITX2 binding sequences were identified in the ABCB1
promoter sequence. PITX2 binding was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. 
ß-Catenin is not required for PITX2 upregulation of ABCB1 because ABCB1 mRNA
increased and doxorubicin toxicity decreased upon PITX2 overexpression in
ß-catenin(-/-) cells. The data show for the first time that ABCB1 is a target
gene of PITX2 transcriptional activity, promoting MDR and cell survival of cancer
cells.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23354914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053944. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Association study of 25 type 2 diabetes related Loci with measures of obesity in 
Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Sovio U, Rafiq S, Kranthi Kumar MV, Janipalli CS, Evans D, 
Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor A, Kinra S, Sullivan R, Bowen L, Timpson N, Smith GD,
Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S, Chandak GR; Indian
Migration Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Obesity is an established risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) and they are
metabolically related through the mechanism of insulin resistance. In order to
explore how common genetic variants associated with T2D correlate with body mass 
index (BMI), we examined the influence of 25 T2D associated loci on obesity risk.
We used 5056 individuals (2528 sib-pairs) recruited in Indian Migration Study and
conducted within sib-pair analysis for six obesity phenotypes. We found
associations of variants in CXCR4 (rs932206) and HHEX (rs5015480) with higher
body mass index (BMI) (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.002), respectively and
weight (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.001), respectively. CXCR4 variant was
also strongly associated with body fat (ß=0.10, p=0.0004). In addition, we
demonstrated associations of CXCR4 and HHEX with overweight/obesity (OR=1.6,
p=0.003) and (OR=1.4, p=0.002), respectively, in 1333 sib-pairs (2666
individuals). We observed marginal evidence of associations between variants at
six loci (TCF7L2, NGN3, FOXA2, LOC646279, FLJ39370 and THADA) and waist hip ratio
(WHR), BMI and/or overweight which needs to be validated in larger set of
samples. All the above findings were independent of daily energy consumption and 
physical activity level. The risk score estimates based on eight significant loci
(including nominal associations) showed associations with WHR and body fat which 
were independent of BMI. In summary, we establish the role of T2D associated loci
in influencing the measures of obesity in Indian population, suggesting common
underlying pathophysiology across populations.

PMCID: PMC3547960
PMID: 23349771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.01.016. Epub 2013 Jan 
21.

Reply to: "New onset diabetes after transplantation: a type 1.5 diabetes or
latent autoimmune diabetes of adults?".

Ling Q, Xu X, Dong F, Zheng S.

Comment on
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60.
    J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7.

PMID: 23348239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;19(5):1071-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2675.
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

ZEB1 Promotes invasiveness of colorectal carcinoma cells through the opposing
regulation of uPA and PAI-1.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O, Siles L, Amendola PG, Darling DS, Cuatrecasas
M, Castells A, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: Carcinoma cells enhance their invasive capacity through
dedifferentiation and dissolution of intercellular adhesions. A key activator of 
this process is the ZEB1 transcription factor, which is induced in invading
cancer cells by canonical Wnt signaling (ß-catenin/TCF4). Tumor invasiveness also
entails proteolytic remodeling of the peritumoral stroma. This study aimed to
investigate the potential regulation by ZEB1 of the plasminogen proteolytic
system constituted by the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and its
inhibitor, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Through multiple experimental approaches, colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) cell lines and samples from human primary CRC and ZEB1 (-/-) mice
were used to examine ZEB1-mediated regulation of uPA and PAI-1 at the protein,
mRNA, and transcriptional level.
RESULTS: ZEB1 regulates uPA and PAI-1 in opposite directions: induces uPA and
inhibits PAI-1. In vivo expression of uPA depends on ZEB1 as it is severely
reduced in the developing intestine of ZEB1 null (-/-) mice. Optimal induction of
uPA by Wnt signaling requires ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 binds to the uPA promoter and
activates its transcription through a mechanism implicating the histone
acetyltransferase p300. In contrast, inhibition of PAI-1 by ZEB1 does not involve
transcriptional repression but rather downregulation of mRNA stability.
ZEB1-mediated tumor cell migration and invasion depend on its induction of uPA.
ZEB1 coexpresses with uPA in cancer cells at the invasive front of CRCs.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 promotes tumor invasiveness not only via induction in cancer
cells of a motile dedifferentiated phenotype but also by differential regulation 
of genes involved in stroma remodeling.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23340304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.12.029. Epub 2013 Jan
20.

New onset diabetes after transplantation: a type 1.5 diabetes or latent
autoimmune diabetes of adults?

Eshraghian A.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1.

Comment on
    J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7.

PMID: 23339955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Biochem J. 2013 May 1;451(3):395-405. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120873.

ICAT is a novel Ptf1a interactor that regulates pancreatic acinar differentiation
and displays altered expression in tumours.

Campos ML(1), Sánchez-Arévalo Lobo VJ, Rodolosse A, Gottardi CJ, Mafficini A,
Beghelli S, Scardoni M, Bassi C, Scarpa A, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Carcinogénesis Epitelial, Programa de Patología Molecular,
CNIO-Spanish National Cancer Research Center, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    Biochem J. 2013 Jul 1;453(1):154.

The PTF1 (pancreas transcription factor 1) complex is a master regulator of
differentiation of acinar cells, responsible for the production of digestive
enzymes. In the adult pancreas, PTF1 contains two pancreas-restricted
transcription factors: Ptf1a and Rbpjl. PTF1 recruits P/CAF [p300/CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein)-binding protein-associated factor] which 
acetylates Ptf1a and enhances its transcriptional activity. Using yeast
two-hybrid screening, we identified ICAT (inhibitor of ß-catenin and Tcf4) as a
novel Ptf1a interactor. ICAT regulates the Wnt pathway and cell proliferation. We
validated and mapped the ICAT-Ptf1a interaction in vitro and in vivo. We
demonstrated that, following its overexpression in acinar tumour cells, ICAT
regulates negatively PTF1 activity in vitro and in vivo. This effect was
independent of ß-catenin and was mediated by direct binding to Ptf1a and
displacement of P/CAF. ICAT also modulated the expression of Pdx1 and Sox9 in
acinar tumour cells. ICAT overexpression reduced the interaction of Ptf1a with
Rbpjl and P/CAF and impaired Ptf1a acetylation by P/CAF. ICAT did not affect the 
subcellular localization of Ptf1a. In human pancreas, ICAT displayed a
cell-type-specific distribution; in acinar and endocrine cells, it was nuclear,
whereas in ductal cells, it was cytoplasmic. In ductal adenocarcinomas, ICAT
displayed mainly a nuclear or mixed distribution and the former was an
independent marker of survival. ICAT regulates acinar differentiation and it does
so through a novel Wnt pathway-independent mechanism that may contribute to
pancreatic disease.

PMID: 23339455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Med Genet. 2013 Mar;50(3):144-50. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101351. Epub 2013
Jan 12.

Breakpoint mapping by next generation sequencing reveals causative gene
disruption in patients carrying apparently balanced chromosome rearrangements
with intellectual deficiency and/or congenital malformations.

Schluth-Bolard C(1), Labalme A, Cordier MP, Till M, Nadeau G, Tevissen H, Lesca
G, Boutry-Kryza N, Rossignol S, Rocas D, Dubruc E, Edery P, Sanlaville D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Service de Génétique, Centre
de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, 59, boulevard Pinel, BRON 69677 Cedex, France. 
caroline.schluth-bolard@chu-lyon.fr

BACKGROUND: Apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements (ABCR) are associated 
with an abnormal phenotype in 6% of cases. This may be due to cryptic genomic
imbalances or to the disruption of genes at the breakpoint. However, breakpoint
cloning using conventional methods (ie, fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH),
Southern blot) is often laborious and time consuming. In this work, we used next 
generation sequencing (NGS) to locate breakpoints at the molecular level in four 
patients with multiple congenital abnormalities and/or intellectual deficiency
(MCA/ID) who were carrying ABCR (one translocation, one complex chromosomal
rearrangement and two inversions), which corresponded to nine breakpoints.
METHODS: Genomic imbalance was previously excluded by array comparative genomic
hybridisation (CGH) in all four patients. Whole genome paired-end protocol was
used to identify breakpoints. The results were verified by FISH and by PCR with
Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We were able to map all nine breakpoints. NGS revealed an additional
breakpoint due to a cryptic inversion at a breakpoint junction in one patient.
Nine of 10 breakpoints occurred in repetitive elements and five genes were
disrupted in their intronic sequence (TCF4, SHANK2, PPFIA1, RAB19, KCNQ1).
CONCLUSIONS: NGS is a powerful tool allowing rapid breakpoint cloning of ABCR at 
the molecular level. We showed that in three out of four patients, gene
disruption could account for the phenotype, allowing adapted genetic counselling 
and stopping unnecessary investigations. We propose that patients carrying ABCR
with an abnormal phenotype should be explored systematically by NGS once a
genomic imbalance has been excluded by array CGH.

PMID: 23315544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jan 12;14:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-8.

Meta-analysis of associations between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and risk of type 2
diabetes mellitus in the Chinese population.

Wang J(1), Hu F, Feng T, Zhao J, Yin L, Li L, Wang Y, Wang Q, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, 450000, People's Republic of China. dongsheng_hu@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Associations between transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) have been evaluated extensively
in multiple ethnic groups. TCF7L2 has emerged as the strongest T2DM
susceptibility gene in Europeans, but the findings have been inconsistent in the 
Chinese population. The purpose of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the
associations between TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and T2DM risk 
in the Chinese population.
METHODS: We performed searches in the PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and Chinese
databases (CNKI, CQVIP and Wanfang databases) for literature published from
January 2007 to February 2012. We reviewed all relevant articles on TCF7L2
polymorphisms and susceptibility to T2DM in the Chinese population written in
English and Chinese. Two reviewers extracted data independently using a
standardized protocol, and any discrepancies were adjudicated by a third
reviewer. Fixed-effects and random-effects meta-analyses were performed to pool
the odds ratios (ORs). Publication bias and heterogeneity were examined.
RESULTS: A total of 21 articles were confirmed to be eligible for and included in
this meta-analysis: 7 (with 3942 cases and 3502 controls) concerning rs11196218
(IVS-/+4G>A), 8 (with 3377 cases and 2975 controls) concerning rs290487
(IVS3-/+C>T), and 14 (with 7902 cases and 7436 controls) concerning rs7903146
(IVS3-/+C>T). Overall, the results showed a significant association between
rs7903146 and T2DM risk. The pooled ORs were 1.54 for the comparison of T and C
alleles (95% CI [confidence interval]: 1.37-1.74, p = 1.47 × 10-12, I2 = 25.20%) 
and 1.56 for TC heterozygotes and CC homozygotes (95% CI : 1.38-1.76, p = 8.25 × 
10-9, I2 = 21.00%). The rs11196218(IVS4G>A) and rs290487 (IVS3C>T) SNPs were not 
associated with T2DM risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs7903146 SNP of the TCF7L2 gene is associated with increased
susceptibility to T2DM in the Chinese population as a whole as well as northern
Chinese and southern Chinese as subgroups.

PMCID: PMC3575230
PMID: 23311683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6478-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.419184. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

SOX9 regulates low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) and
T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) expression and Wnt/ß-catenin activation in breast cancer.

Wang H(1), He L, Ma F, Regan MM, Balk SP, Richardson AL, Yuan X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Gene expression profiling has identified breast cancer (BCa) subtypes, including 
an aggressive basal-like (BL) subtype. The molecular signals underlying the
behavior observed in BL-BCa group are largely unknown, although recent results
indicate a prevalent increase in Wnt/ß-catenin activity. Our immunohistochemistry
study confirmed that SOX9, one of the BL-BCa signature genes, was expressed by
most BL-BCa, and its expression correlated with indicators of poor prognosis.
Importantly, BCa gene expression profiling strongly associated SOX9 with the
expression of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway components, LRP6 and TCF4. In cancer cell
lines, SOX9 silencing reduced cell proliferation and invasion, LRP6 and TCF4
transcription, and decreased Wnt/ß-catenin activation. SOX9 expression was also
increased by Wnt, indicating that SOX9 is at the center of a positive feedback
loop that enhances Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Consistently, SOX9 overexpression in 
BCa cell lines and transgenic SOX9 expression in breast epithelium caused
increased LRP6 and TCF4 expression and Wnt/ß-catenin activation. These results
identify SOX9-mediated Wnt/ß-catenin activation as one of the molecular
mechanisms underlying aberrant Wnt/ß-catenin activity in BCa, especially in the
BL-BCa subgroup.

PMCID: PMC3585081
PMID: 23306204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 3:S16. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S3-S16. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

Genome-wide meta-analysis of genetic susceptible genes for Type 2 Diabetes.

Hale PJ(1), López-Yunez AM, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Many genetic studies, including single gene studies and Genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), aim to identify risk alleles for genetic diseases
such as Type II Diabetes (T2D). However, in T2D studies, there is a significant
amount of the hereditary risk that cannot be simply explained by individual risk 
genes. There is a need for developing systems biology approaches to integrate
comprehensive genetic information and provide new insight on T2D biology.
METHODS: We performed comprehensive integrative analysis of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNP's) individually curated from T2D GWAS results and mapped them 
to T2D candidate risk genes. Using protein-protein interaction data, we
constructed a T2D-specific molecular interaction network consisting of T2D
genetic risk genes and their interacting gene partners. We then studied the
relationship between these T2D genes and curated gene sets.
RESULTS: We determined that T2D candidate risk genes are concentrated in certain 
parts of the genome, specifically in chromosome 20. Using the T2D genetic
network, we identified highly-interconnected network "hub" genes. By
incorporating T2D GWAS results, T2D pathways, and T2D genes' functional category 
information, we further ranked T2D risk genes, T2D-related pathways, and
T2D-related functional categories. We found that highly-interconnected T2D
disease network "hub" genes most highly associated to T2D genetic risks to be
PI3KR1, ESR1, and ENPP1. The well-characterized TCF7L2, contractor to our
expectation, was not among the highest-ranked T2D gene list. Many interacted
pathways play a role in T2D genetic risks, which includes insulin signalling
pathway, type II diabetes pathway, maturity onset diabetes of the young,
adipocytokine signalling pathway, and pathways in cancer. We also observed
significant crosstalk among T2D gene subnetworks which include insulin secretion,
regulation of insulin secretion, response to peptide hormone stimulus, response
to insulin stimulus, peptide secretion, glucose homeostasis, and hormone
transport. Overview maps involving T2D genes, gene sets, pathways, and their
interactions are all reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Large-scale systems biology meta-analyses of GWAS results can
improve interpretations of genetic variations and genetic risk factors. T2D
genetic risks can be attributable to the summative genetic effects of many genes 
involved in a broad range of signalling pathways and functional networks. The
framework developed for T2D studies may serve as a guide for studying other
complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3524015
PMID: 23281828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Oncotarget. 2012 Dec;3(12):1546-56.

Down-regulation of Sox7 is associated with aberrant activation of Wnt/b-catenin
signaling in endometrial cancer.

Chan DW(1), Mak CS, Leung TH, Chan KK, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, the
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PRChina.

Although the mortality rate of endometrial cancer is comparatively low in
gynecologic malignancies, a rising trend of this cancer has been observed for the
past decade. The understanding of the molecular mechanism will favor for the
clinical management of this disease. Aberrant activation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway plays a major role in the pathogenesis of endometrioid
adenocarcinoma including this cancer type. In this study, we reported that Sox7, 
one of Sox transcriptional factors, was frequently underexpressed in endometrial 
cancer and importantly, it was associated with dysregulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling activity. Immunohistochemical and quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed
that Sox7 was underexpressed and was associated with high-grade tumor (P=0.021), 
increased expressions of ß-catenin (P=0.038) and its downstream targets; CyclinD1
(P less than 0.001) and FGF9 (P less than 0.001). In addition, using HEK293T cell
model, we found that Sox7 was able to inhibit TCF/LEF-1-dependent luciferase
activity induced by Wnt-1. This was further proved by that Sox7 could
significantly suppress the expressions of Wnt targets; Cyclin D1 and C-myc in
endometrial cells. Immuno-fluorescent microscopy revealed that Sox7 was
co-localizaed with either mutant ß-catenin or TCF4 protein in nucleus, while
co-immunopreciptation assay demonstrated that Sox7 could physically interact with
not only wild-type but also mutant ß-catenin, as well as TCF4 proteins.
Functionally, enforced expression of Sox7 could significantly inhibit endometrial
or endometrioid ovarian cancer cells (OEA) harboring either wild-type or mutant
ß-catenin. These data suggest Sox7 is a negative regulator of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway through impeding the transcriptional machinery of
ß-catenin/TCF/LEF-1 transcriptional complex, and the loss of expression may be
involved in the pathogenesis of endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC3681493
PMID: 23295859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Mar;15(3):279-89. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nos306. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Unique genome-wide map of TCF4 and STAT3 targets using ChIP-seq reveals their
association with new molecular subtypes of glioblastoma.

Zhang JX(1), Zhang J, Yan W, Wang YY, Han L, Yue X, Liu N, You YP, Jiang T, Pu
PY, Kang CS.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology,
Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin, China

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of beta-catenin/TCF4 and STAT3 signaling in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) has been reported. However, the molecular
mechanisms related to this process are still poorly understood.
METHODS: Genome-wide screening of the binding characteristics of the
transcription factors TCF4 and STAT3 in GBM cells was performed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) assay. Hierarchical clustering was used
to analyze the association of TCF4 and STAT3 coregulated genes with The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) GBM subtypes (classical, mesenchymal, neural, and proneural).
New molecular classification of GBM was proposed and validated in Western and
Asian populations.
RESULTS: We identified 1250 overlapping putative target genes that were
coregulated by TCF4 and STAT3. Further, the coregulated genes had the potential
to guide TCGA GBM subtypes. Finally, we proposed a new molecular classification
of GBM into 2 subtypes (proneural-like and mesenchymal-like) and showed that the 
new classification could be applied to both Western and Asian populations. In
addition, the GBM response to temozolomide therapy differed depending on its
subtype; mesenchymal-like GBM benefited, while there was no benefit for
proneural-like GBM.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive study to combine a ChIP-seq assay of
TCF4 and STAT3 and data mining of patient cohorts to derive molecular subtypes of
GBM.

PMCID: PMC3578485
PMID: 23295773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2012 Nov;56(8):479-84.

Association of the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism at the Transcription 
Factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus with type 2 diabetes in Brazilian subjects.

Barra GB(1), Dutra LA, Watanabe SC, Costa PG, Cruz PS, Azevedo MF, Amato AA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto e Laboratório Sabin de Análises Clínicas, Unidade de Biologia
Molecular, Brasília, DF, Brazil. gbarra@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of the T allele of the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 of TCF7L2 with the occurrence of T2D in a
sample of subjects followed up at the Brasilia University Hospital.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was genotyped by
allele-specific PCR in 113 patients with known T2D and in 139 non-diabetic
controls in Brasilia, Brazil.
RESULTS: We found that the T allele of the SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was
significantly associated with T2D risk (odds ratio of 3.92 for genotype TT in the
recessive genetic model, p = 0.004 and 1.5 for T allele, p = 0.032).
CONCLUSION: These results reinforce previous findings on the consistent
association of this genetic factor and the risk of T2D in populations of diverse 
ethnic backgrounds.

PMID: 23295285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52964. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052964. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

iNOS activation regulates ß-catenin association with its partners in endothelial 
cells.

Gonzalez D(1), Rojas A, Herrera MB, Conlan RS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for NanoHealth, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea,
United Kingdom. d.gonzalez@swansea.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Signals that disrupt ß-catenin association to cadherins may influence
the translocation of ß-catenin to the nucleus to regulate transcription.
Post-translational modification of proteins is a signalling event that may lead
to changes in structural conformation, association or function of the target
proteins. NO and its derivatives induce nitration of proteins during
inflammation. It has been described that animals treated with NO donors showed
increased permeability due to modulation of VE-cadherin/catenin complex. We,
therefore, aim to evaluate the effect of iNOS activation on the expression,
nuclear localisation and function of ß-catenin in endothelial cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Expression, nuclear localisation,
post-translational modifications and function of ß-catenin was analysed by cell
fractionation, immunoprecipitation, immunoblots, QRT-PCR and permeability assays 
in murine endothelial cells (H5V). Influence of macrophage activation on
expression of VE-cadherin/p120-catenin/ß-catenin complex in co-cultured H5V cells
was also assessed. Activation of macrophages to produce NO provoked a decrease in
VE-cadherin/p120-catenin/ß-catenin expression in H5V cells. Phosphorylation of
ß-catenin, p120-catenin and VE-cadherin, and reduction in the barrier properties 
of the cell monolayer was associated with iNOS induction. Moreover, high NO
levels provoked nitration of ß-catenin, and induced its translocation to the
nucleus. In the nucleus of NOS activated cells, nitration levels of ß-catenin
influenced its association with TCF4 and p65 proteins. High levels of NO altered 
ß-catenin mediated gene expression of NF<U+03BA>B and Wnt target genes without affecting
cell viability.
CONCLUSIONS: NOS activity modulates ß-catenin post-translational modifications,
function and its association with different partners to promote endothelial cell 
survival. Therapeutic manipulation of iNOS levels may remove a critical
cytoprotective mechanism of importance in tumour angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3532412
PMID: 23285236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052711. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Regulation of amphiregulin gene expression by ß-catenin signaling in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells: a novel crosstalk between FGF19 and the EGFR
system.

Latasa MU(1), Salis F, Urtasun R, Garcia-Irigoyen O, Elizalde M, Uriarte I,
Santamaria M, Feo F, Pascale RM, Prieto J, Berasain C, Avila MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Centre for Applied Medical Research, 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most prevalent liver tumor and a deadly
disease with limited therapeutic options. Dysregulation of cell signaling
pathways is a common denominator in tumorigenesis, including
hepatocarcinogenesis. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
system is commonly activated in HCC, and is currently being evaluated as a
therapeutic target in combination therapies. We and others have identified a
central role for the EGFR ligand amphiregulin (AR) in the proliferation, survival
and drug resistance of HCC cells. AR expression is frequently up-regulated in HCC
tissues and cells through mechanisms not completely known. Here we identify the
ß-catenin signaling pathway as a novel mechanism leading to transcriptional
activation of the AR gene in human HCC cells. Activation of ß-catenin signaling, 
or expression of the T41A ß-catenin active mutant, led to the induction of AR
expression involving three specific ß-catenin-Tcf responsive elements in its
proximal promoter. We demonstrate that HCC cells expressing the T41A ß-catenin
active mutant show enhanced proliferation that is dependent in part on AR
expression and EGFR signaling. We also demonstrate here a novel cross-talk of the
EGFR system with fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19). FGF19 is a recently
identified driver gene in hepatocarcinogenesis and an activator of ß-catenin
signaling in HCC and colon cancer cells. We show that FGF19 induced AR gene
expression through the ß-catenin pathway in human HCC cells. Importantly, AR
up-regulation and EGFR signaling participated in the induction of cyclin D1 and
cell proliferation elicited by FGF19. Finally, we demonstrate a positive
correlation between FGF19 and AR expression in human HCC tissues, therefore
supporting in clinical samples our experimental observations. These findings
identify the AR/EGFR system as a key mediator of FGF19 responses in HCC cells
involving ß-catenin signaling, and suggest that combined targeting of FGF19 and
AR/EGFR may enhance therapeutic efficacy.

PMCID: PMC3527604
PMID: 23285165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Feb;97(2):261-7. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.047936. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Within-person variation in the postprandial lipemic response of healthy adults.

Ryan MF(1), O'Grada CM, Morris C, Segurado R, Walsh MC, Gibney ER, Brennan L,
Roche HM, Gibney MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food and Health, University College Dublin Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland. miriam.ryan@ucd.ie

Erratum in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2014 Oct;100(4):1214. Grada, Colm O [corrected to O'Grada, Colm
M].

BACKGROUND: The response to dietary fat plays a key role in metabolic health.
Although this can vary widely between individuals, variation within an individual
and the associated contribution of phenotypic and genotypic factors to this
variation are less defined.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives were to quantify within-person variation in
triacylglycerol response by means of a novel variation score (S(v)) and to
explore the phenotypic and genotypic factors associated with this score.
DESIGN: Two consecutive 5-h oral-lipid-tolerance tests (OLTTs) were conducted in 
51 healthy adults aged 18-60 y with a BMI (in kg/m²) of 18.5 to 49.8. Detailed
body composition, physical function, biochemistry, and genotype data were
gathered.
RESULTS: The postprandial triacylglycerol response profile did not differ (P =
0.64) across OLTTs for the group; nor did average concentrations of functional
markers apolipoprotein C2 (P = 0.73) and apolipoprotein C3 (P = 0.74). S(v) was
low in most (82%) of the adults and was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with 
age, fasting triacylglycerol, triacylglycerol AUC, and fasting nonessential fatty
acids. Significant associations were also observed between S(v) and single
nucleotide polymorphisms in 7 genes (APOA1, IL1a, IL1ß, TLR4, TCF7L2, CCK1Rec,
and STAT3) after correction for phenotypic differences.
CONCLUSIONS: This work showed that the within-person variability in postprandial 
lipemic response is low in most healthy adults. It also showed that variability
in this response is associated with a defined set of phenotypic and genotypic
characteristics.

PMID: 23283501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. In Silico Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 13;1:15. doi: 10.1186/2193-9616-1-15. eCollection
2013.

Comparison of gene expression profiles in the blood, hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex of rats.

Witt SH(1), Sommer WH(2), Hansson AC(2), Sticht C(3), Rietschel M(1), Witt CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, J5, 68159 Mannheim,
Germany. (2)Institute of Psychopharmacology, Central Institute of Mental Health, 
Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, J5, 68159 Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Medical Research Center, University Hospital Mannheim, Medical Faculty
Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Anaesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care, University
Hospital Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University,
Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The comparability of gene expression between blood and brain tissues 
is a central issue in neuropsychiatric research where the analysis of molecular
mechanisms in the brain is of high importance for the understanding of the
diseases and the discovery of biomarkers. However, the accessibility of brain
tissue is limited. Therefore, knowledge about how easily accessible peripheral
tissue, e. g. blood, is comparable to and reflects gene expression of brain
regions will help to advance neuropsychiatric research.
DESCRIPTION: Gene expression in the blood, hippocampus (HC) and prefrontal cortex
(PFC) of genetically identical rats was compared using a genome-wide Affymetrix
gene expression microarray covering 29,215 expressed genes. A total of 56.8% of
15,717 expressed genes were co-expressed in blood and at least one brain tissue, 
while 55.3% of all genes were co-expressed in all three tissues simultaneously.
The overlapping genes included a set of genes of relevance to neuropsychiatric
diseases, in particular bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and alcohol addiction.
These genes included CLOCK, COMT, FAAH, NPY, NR3C1, NRGN, PBRM1, TCF4, and SYNE.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides baseline data on absolute gene expression and
differences between gene expression in the blood, HC and PFC brain tissue of
genetically identical rats. The present data represents a valuable resource for
future studies as it might be used for first information on gene expression
levels of genes of interest in blood and brain under baseline conditions.
Limitations of our study comprise possible contamination of brain tissue with
blood and the non-detection of genes with very low expression levels. Genes that 
are more highly expressed in the brain than in the blood are of particular
interest since changes in their expression, e.g. due to disease status, or
treatment, are likely to be detected in an experiment. In contrast, genes with
higher expression in the blood than in the brain are less informative since their
higher baseline levels could superimpose variation in brain.

PMCID: PMC4230692
PMID: 25505659  [PubMed]


448. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1595-607. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.053.

Diabetes risk gene and Wnt effector Tcf7l2/TCF4 controls hepatic response to
perinatal and adult metabolic demand.

Boj SF(1), van Es JH, Huch M, Li VS, José A, Hatzis P, Mokry M, Haegebarth A, van
den Born M, Chambon P, Voshol P, Dor Y, Cuppen E, Fillat C, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):157-9.

Most studies on TCF7L2 SNP variants in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
focus on a role of the encoded transcription factor TCF4 in ß cells. Here, a
mouse genetics approach shows that removal of TCF4 from ß cells does not affect
their function, whereas manipulating TCF4 levels in the liver has major effects
on metabolism. In Tcf7l2(-/-) mice, the immediate postnatal surge in liver
metabolism does not occur. Consequently, pups die due to hypoglycemia. By
combining chromatin immunoprecipitation with gene expression profiling, we
identify a TCF4-controlled metabolic gene program that is acutely activated in
the postnatal liver. In concordance, adult liver-specific Tcf7l2 knockout
mice show reduced hepatic glucose production during fasting and display improved 
glucose homeostasis when maintained on high-fat diet. Furthermore, liver-specific
TCF4 overexpression increases hepatic glucose production. These observations
imply that TCF4 directly activates metabolic genes and that inhibition of Wnt
signaling may be beneficial in metabolic disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23260145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4334-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.419168. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

miR-125b functions as a key mediator for snail-induced stem cell propagation and 
chemoresistance.

Liu Z(1), Liu H, Desai S, Schmitt DC, Zhou M, Khong HT, Klos KS, McClellan S,
Fodstad O, Tan M.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604,
USA.

Chemoresistance is a major obstacle in cancer treatment. Our previous studies
have shown that miR-125b plays an important role in chemoresistance. Here we
report a novel mechanism that up-regulation of miR-125b through Wnt signaling by 
Snail enriches cancer stem cells. Overexpression of Snail dramatically increases 
the expression of miR-125b through the Snail-activated Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 axis.
Snail confers chemoresistance by repressing Bak1 through up-regulation of
miR-125b. Restoring the expression of Bak1 or depleting miR-125b re-sensitizes
Snail-expressing cancer cells to Taxol, indicating that miR-125b is critical in
Snail-induced chemoresistance. Moreover, overexpression of miR-125b significantly
increases the cancer stem cell population (CD24-CD44+), while depletion of
miR-125b or rescue of the expression of Bak1 increases the non-stem cell
population (CD24+CD44+) in Snail-overexpressing cells. These findings strongly
support that miR-125b functions as a key mediator in Snail-induced cancer stem
cell enrichment and chemoresistance. This novel mechanism for Snail-induced stem 
cell propagation and chemoresistance may have important implications in the
development of strategies for overcoming cancer cell resistance to chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3567684
PMID: 23255607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051205. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Kaiso directs the transcriptional corepressor MTG16 to the Kaiso binding site in 
target promoters.

Barrett CW(1), Smith JJ, Lu LC, Markham N, Stengel KR, Short SP, Zhang B, Hunt
AA, Fingleton BM, Carnahan RH, Engel ME, Chen X, Beauchamp RD, Wilson KT, Hiebert
SW, Reynolds AB, Williams CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Myeloid translocation genes (MTGs) are transcriptional corepressors originally
identified in acute myelogenous leukemia that have recently been linked to
epithelial malignancy with non-synonymous mutations identified in both MTG8 and
MTG16 in colon, breast, and lung carcinoma in addition to functioning as negative
regulators of WNT and Notch signaling. A yeast two-hybrid approach was used to
discover novel MTG binding partners. This screen identified the Zinc fingers,
C2H2 and BTB domain containing (ZBTB) family members ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 as MTG16
interacting proteins. ZBTB4 is downregulated in breast cancer and modulates p53
responses. Because ZBTB33 (Kaiso), like MTG16, modulates Wnt signaling at the
level of TCF4, and its deletion suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in the
Apc(Min) mouse, we determined that Kaiso also interacted with MTG16 to modulate
transcription. The zinc finger domains of Kaiso as well as ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 bound
MTG16 and the association with Kaiso was confirmed using co-immunoprecipitation. 
MTG family members were required to efficiently repress both a heterologous
reporter construct containing Kaiso binding sites (4×KBS) and the known Kaiso
target, Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7/Matrilysin). Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies placed MTG16 in a complex occupying the Kaiso binding
site on the MMP-7 promoter. The presence of MTG16 in this complex, and its
contributions to transcriptional repression both required Kaiso binding to its
binding site on DNA, establishing MTG16-Kaiso binding as functionally relevant in
Kaiso-dependent transcriptional repression. Examination of a large multi-stage
CRC expression array dataset revealed patterns of Kaiso, MTG16, and MMP-7
expression supporting the hypothesis that loss of either Kaiso or MTG16 can
de-regulate a target promoter such as that of MMP-7. These findings provide new
insights into the mechanisms of transcriptional control by ZBTB family members
and broaden the scope of co-repressor functions for the MTG family, suggesting
coordinate regulation of transcription by Kaiso/MTG complexes in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3521008
PMID: 23251453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Mar;38(4):683-9. doi: 10.1038/npp.2012.234. Epub
2012 Nov 9.

Associations between TCF4 gene polymorphism and cognitive functions in
schizophrenia patients and healthy controls.

Zhu X(1), Gu H, Liu Z, Xu Z, Chen X, Sun X, Zhai J, Zhang Q, Chen M, Wang K, Deng
X, Ji F, Liu C, Li J, Dong Q, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)People's Dong-fang Hospital of Xuzhou, Xuzhou, China.

The SNP rs2958182 was reported to be significantly associated with schizophrenia 
(SCZ) in Han Chinese. This study examined this SNP's associations with cognitive 
functions in 580 SCZ patients and 498 controls. Cognitive functions were assessed
using the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-RC), the Attention
Network Task (ANT), the Stroop task, the dot pattern expectancy (DPX), task and
the N-back working memory task. Results showed significant or marginally
significant interaction effects between genotype and diagnosis status on IQ
(P=0.011) and attention-related tasks (ie, the forward digit span of WAIS-RC,
P=0.005; the ANT conflict effect; P=0.020, and its ratios over mean reaction time
(RT), P=0.036; the Stroop conflict effect, P=0.032, and its ratios over mean RT, 
P=0.062; and the DPX task's error rate under the BX condition, P<0.001, and the
error rate of BX minus the error rate of AY (BX-AY), P=0.002). There were no such
interaction effects on the measures of working memory (all P-values >0.05).
Further analysis of the significant genotype-by-diagnosis interactions showed
that the risk (T) allele was associated with better performance on cognitive
tasks in patients but with worse performance in controls. These results seem to
indicate that the association between this SNP and selected cognitive functions
may be of an inverted U-shaped pattern. Future research is needed to replicate
these results and to explore the biochemical mechanisms behind this association.

PMCID: PMC3572466
PMID: 23249814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Child Neurol. 2013 Dec;28(12):1698-701. doi: 10.1177/0883073812468054. Epub
2012 Dec 17.

A case of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome with absence of hyperventilation.

Inati A(1), Abbas HA, Korjian S, Daaboul Y, Harajeily M, Saab R.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics, Lebanese American University and University Medical
Center Rizk Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, hyperventilation,
and dysmorphic features due to TCF4 mutations. We report a case of Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome in a 2&frac12;-year-old boy presenting with psychomotor retardation,
recurrent respiratory tract infections, and dysmorphic features with absence of
hyperventilation or other breathing abnormalities. Comparative genomic
hybridization and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction were used to
confirm TCF4 haploinsufficiency. Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rare debilitating
disease that should be in the differential diagnosis of other neurodevelopmental 
disorders characterized by mental retardation and hypotonicity despite the
absence of hyperapnea and seizures. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction is another method to identify TCF4 and to confirm Pitt-Hopkins syndrome 
diagnosis.

PMID: 23248353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Jan;97(1):179-87. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.045583. Epub 2012
Dec 12.

Consumption of whole grain reduces risk of deteriorating glucose tolerance,
including progression to prediabetes.

Wirström T(1), Hilding A, Gu HF, Östenson CG, Björklund A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. tina@wirstrom.net

BACKGROUND: High whole-grain intake has been reportedly associated with reduced
risk of developing type 2 diabetes (T2D), which is an effect possibly subject to 
genetic effect modification. Confirmation in prospective studies and
investigations on the impact on prediabetes is needed.
OBJECTIVES: In a prospective population-based study, we investigated whether a
higher intake of whole grain protects against the development of prediabetes and 
T2D and tested for modulation by polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene.
DESIGN: We examined the 8-10-y incidence of prediabetes (impaired glucose
tolerance, impaired fasting glucose, or the combination of both) and T2D in
relation to the intake of whole grain. Baseline data were available for 3180
women and 2297 men aged 35-56 y.
RESULTS: A higher intake of whole grain (>59.1 compared with <30.6 g/d) was
associated with a 34% lower risk to deteriorate in glucose tolerance (to
prediabetes or T2D; women and men combined). The association remained after
adjustments for age, family history of diabetes, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
education, and blood pressure (OR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.63, 0.96). Risk reduction was 
significant in men (OR: 0.65; 95% CI: 0.49, 0.85) but not in women. Associations 
were significant for prediabetes per se (all, OR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.56, 0.94; men, 
OR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.40, 0.80). The intake of whole grain correlated inversely
with insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). The impact of whole-grain intake was
undetectable in men who harbored diabetogenic polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: A higher intake of whole grain is associated with decreased risk of 
deteriorating glucose tolerance including progression from normal glucose
tolerance to prediabetes by mechanisms likely tied to effects on insulin
sensitivity. Effect modifications by TCF7L2 genetic polymorphisms are supported.

PMID: 23235198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mitochondrion. 2013 Sep;13(5):436-43. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.12.001. Epub 2012 
Dec 9.

Primary fibroblasts of NDUFS4(-/-) mice display increased ROS levels and aberrant
mitochondrial morphology.

Valsecchi F(1), Grefte S, Roestenberg P, Joosten-Wagenaars J, Smeitink JA,
Willems PH, Koopman WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The human NDUFS4 gene encodes an accessory subunit of the first mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation complex (CI) and, when mutated, is associated with
progressive neurological disorders. Here we analyzed primary muscle and skin
fibroblasts from NDUFS4(-/-) mice with respect to reactive oxygen species (ROS)
levels and mitochondrial morphology. NDUFS4(-/-) fibroblasts displayed an
inactive CI subcomplex on native gels but proliferated normally and showed no
obvious signs of apoptosis. Oxidation of the ROS sensor hydroethidium was
increased and mitochondria were less branched and/or shorter in NDUFS4(-/-)
fibroblasts. We discuss the relevance of these findings with respect to previous 
results and therapy development.

Copyright © 2012 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23234723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Jan 15;23(2):569-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.11.013. 
Epub 2012 Nov 16.

Discovery of 4-phenyl-2-phenylaminopyridine based TNIK inhibitors.

Ho KK(1), Parnell KM, Yuan Y, Xu Y, Kultgen SG, Hamblin S, Hendrickson TF, Luo B,
Foulks JM, McCullar MV, Kanner SB.

Author information: 
(1)Astex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 2401 South Foothill Drive, Salt Lake City, UT
84109, USA. kanho99@yahoo.com

A series of compounds based on a 4-phenyl-2-phenylaminopyridine scaffold that are
potent and selective inhibitors of Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK)
activity are described. These compounds were used as tools to test the importance
of TNIK kinase activity in signaling and proliferation in Wnt-activated
colorectal cancer cells. The results indicate that pharmacological inhibition of 
TNIK kinase activity has minimal effects on either Wnt/TCF4/ß-catenin-driven
transcription or viability. The findings suggest that the kinase activity of TNIK
may be less important to Wnt signaling than other aspects of TNIK function, such 
as its putative role in stabilizing the TCF4/ß-catenin transcriptional complex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23232060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2013 Feb;19(2):98-108. doi: 10.1111/cns.12041. Epub 2012 Dec
11.

Aspirin-/TMZ-coloaded microspheres exert synergistic antiglioma efficacy via
inhibition of ß-catenin transactivation.

Shi ZD(1), Qian XM, Liu CY, Han L, Zhang KL, Chen LY, Zhang JX, Pu PY, Yuan XB,
Kang CS; Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Currently temozolomide (TMZ) as a potent agent is widely
used to treat the glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), whereas recurrence due to
intrinsic or acquired therapeutic resistance often occurs. Combination
chemotherapy with TMZ may be a promising therapeutic strategy to improve
treatment efficacy.
METHODS: Aspirin, TMZ, and aspirin-/TMZ-coloaded poly (L-lactide-co-glycolide)
(PLGA) microspheres were prepared by spray drying, and cytotoxicities of
glioblastoma cells were measured.
RESULTS: Aspirin microsphere treatment induced slight apoptosis and modestly
inhibited proliferation of LN229 and U87 cells in vitro and in vivo through
inhibition of ß-catenin transactivation. However, aspirin-/TMZ-coloaded
microspheres presented synergistic antitumor efficacy compared with single
TMZ-loaded microspheres. Aspirin/TMZ microspheres induced more apoptosis and
repressed proliferation of LN229 and U87 cells. Corresponding to inhibition of
ß-catenin signaling, ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity and STAT3 luciferase
activity were strongly suppressed, and downstream targets expression was
decreased. Furthermore, aspirin/TMZ microsphere intratumoral injection
downregulated the expression of ß-catenin, TCF4, pAKT, pSTAT3, and PCNA and
delayed tumor growth in nude mice harboring subcutaneous LN229 xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS: Aspirin sensitized TMZ chemotherapy efficacy through inhibition of
ß-catenin transactivation; furthermore, the coloaded microspheres achieved a
sustained release action to reduce the TMZ dosage, offering the potential for
improved treatment of glioblastomas.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23230963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2013 Apr;30(4):471-82. doi: 10.1007/s10585-012-9552-7. Epub 
2012 Dec 8.

Nuclear LEF1/TCF4 correlate with poor prognosis but not with nuclear ß-catenin in
cerebral metastasis of lung adenocarcinomas.

Bleckmann A(1), Siam L, Klemm F, Rietkötter E, Wegner C, Kramer F, Beissbarth T, 
Binder C, Stadelmann C, Pukrop T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37099 
Göttingen, Germany.

An essential function of the transcription factors LEF1/TCF4 in cerebral
metastases of lung adenocarcinomas has been described in mouse models, suggesting
a WNT/ß-catenin effect as potential mechanism. Their role in humans is still
unclear, thus we analyzed LEF1, TCF4, ß-catenin, and early stage prognostic
markers in 25 adenocarcinoma brain metastases using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
IHC revealed nuclear TCF4 in all adenocarcinoma samples, whereas only 36 %
depicted nuclear LEF1 and nuclear ß-catenin signals. Samples with nuclear LEF1 as
well as high TCF4 (++++) expression were associated with a shorter survival
(p = 0.01, HR = 6.68), while nuclear ß-catenin had no significant impact on
prognosis and did not significantly correlate with nuclear LEF1. High
proliferation index Ki67 was associated with shorter survival in late-stage
disease (p = 0.03, HR 3.27). Additionally, we generated a LEF1/TCF4 as well as an
AXIN2 signature, the latter as representative of WNT/ß-catenin activity,
following a bioinformatics approach with a gene expression dataset of cerebral
metastases in lung adenocarcinoma. To analyze the prognostic relevance in primary
lung adenocarcinomas, we applied both signatures to a microarray dataset of 58
primary lung adenocarcinomas. Only the LEF1/TCF4 signature was able to separate
clusters with impact on survival (p = 0.01, HR = 0.32). These clusters displayed 
diverging enrichment patterns of the cell cycle pathway. In conclusion, our data 
show that LEF1/TCF4, but not ß-catenin, have prognostic relevance in primary and 
cerebrally metastasized human lung adenocarcinomas. In contrast to the previous
in vivo findings, these results indicate that LEF1/TCF4 act independently of
ß-catenin in this setting.

PMCID: PMC3616220
PMID: 23224985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):953-66. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2397. Epub
2012 Nov 30.

Chromosome instability modulated by BMI1-AURKA signaling drives progression in
head and neck cancer.

Chou CH(1), Yang NK, Liu TY, Tai SK, Hsu DS, Chen YW, Chen YJ, Chang CC, Tzeng
CH, Yang MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Chromosomal instability (CIN) is widely considered a hallmark of cancer, but its 
precise roles in cancer stem cells (CSC) and malignant progression remain
uncertain. BMI1 is a member of the Polycomb group of chromatin-modifier proteins 
that is essential for stem cell self-renewal. In human cancers, BMI1
overexpression drives stem-like properties associated with induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that promotes invasion, metastasis, and
poor prognosis. Here, we report that BMI1 mediates its diverse effects through
upregulation of the mitotic kinase Aurora A, which is encoded by the AURKA gene. 
Two mechanisms were found to be responsible for BMI1-induced AURKA expression.
First, BMI1 activated the Akt pathway, thereby upregulating AURKA expression
through activation of the ß-catenin/TCF4 transcription factor complex. Second,
BMI1 repressed miRNA let-7i through a Polycomb complex-dependent mechanism,
thereby relieving AURKA expression from let-7i suppression. AURKA upregulation by
BMI1 exerts several effects, including centrosomal amplification and aneuploidy, 
antiapoptosis, and cell-cycle progression through p53 degradation and EMT through
stabilization of Snail. Inhibiting Aurora A kinase activity attenuated
BMI1-induced tumor growth in vivo. In clinical specimens of head and neck cancer,
we found that coamplification of BMI1 and AURKA correlated with poorer prognosis.
Together, our results link CSCs, EMT, and CIN through the BMI1-AURKA axis and
suggest therapeutic use from inhibiting Aurora A in head and neck cancers, which 
overexpress BMI1.

PMID: 23204235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):965-76. doi: 10.2337/db12-0266. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Transferability and fine mapping of type 2 diabetes loci in African Americans:
the Candidate Gene Association Resource Plus Study.

Ng MC(1), Saxena R, Li J, Palmer ND, Dimitrov L, Xu J, Rasmussen-Torvik LJ, Zmuda
JM, Siscovick DS, Patel SR, Crook ED, Sims M, Chen YD, Bertoni AG, Li M, Grant
SF, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Psaty BM, Pankow JS, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Rotter
JI, Wilson JG, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. mng@wakehealth.edu

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) disproportionally affects African Americans (AfA) but, to
date, genetic variants identified from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are
primarily from European and Asian populations. We examined the single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) and locus transferability of 40 reported T2D loci in six AfA
GWAS consisting of 2,806 T2D case subjects with or without end-stage renal
disease and 4,265 control subjects from the Candidate Gene Association Resource
Plus Study. Our results revealed that seven index SNPs at the TCF7L2, KLF14,
KCNQ1, ADCY5, CDKAL1, JAZF1, and GCKR loci were significantly associated with T2D
(P < 0.05). The strongest association was observed at TCF7L2 rs7903146 (odds
ratio [OR] 1.30; P = 6.86 × 10<U+207B>8). Locus-wide analysis demonstrated significant
associations (P(emp) < 0.05) at regional best SNPs in the TCF7L2, KLF14, and
HMGA2 loci as well as suggestive signals in KCNQ1 after correction for the
effective number of SNPs at each locus. Of these loci, the regional best SNPs
were in differential linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the index and adjacent
SNPs. Our findings suggest that some loci discovered in prior reports affect T2D 
susceptibility in AfA with similar effect sizes. The reduced and differential LD 
pattern in AfA compared with European and Asian populations may facilitate fine
mapping of causal variants at loci shared across populations.

PMCID: PMC3581206
PMID: 23193183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mutagenesis. 2013 Jan;28(1):25-37. doi: 10.1093/mutage/ges048. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes risk: a comprehensive and updated
meta-analysis involving 121,174 subjects.

Peng S(1), Zhu Y, Lü B, Xu F, Li X, Lai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310058, PR China.

Recently, many new loci associated with type 2 diabetes have been uncovered by
genetic association studies and genome-wide association studies. As more reports 
are made, particularly with respect to varying ethnicities, there is a need to
determine more precisely the effect sizes in each major racial group. In
addition, some reports have claimed ethnic-specific associations with alternative
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and to that end there has been a degree
of confusion. We conducted a meta-analysis using an additive genetic model. Eight
polymorphisms in 155 studies with 121174 subjects (53385 cases and 67789
controls) were addressed in this meta-analysis. Significant associations were
found between type 2 diabetes and rs7903146, rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695,
rs7895340 and rs4506565, with summary odds ratios (ORs) (95% confidence interval)
of 1.39 (1.34-1.45), 1.33 (1.27-1.40), 1.20 (1.14-1.26), 1.32 (1.25-1.39), 1.21
(1.13-1.29) and 1.39 (1.29-1.49), respectively. In addition, no significant
associations were found between the two polymorphisms (rs290487 and rs11196218)
and type 2 diabetes. The summary ORs for the six statistically significant
associations (P < 0.05) were further evaluated by estimating the false-positive
report probability, with results indicating that all of the six significant
associations were considered noteworthy, and may plausibly be true associations. 
Significant associations were found between the six polymorphisms (rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695, rs7895340 and rs4506565) in the TCF7L2 gene
and type 2 diabetes risk, and the other two polymorphisms (rs11196218 and
rs290487) were not found to be significantly associated with type 2 diabetes.
Subgroups analyses show that significant associations are not found between the
six SNPs (rs7903146, rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695, rs7895340, and rs4506565)
and the type 2 diabetes in some ethnic populations.

PMID: 23188737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049083. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

A common trinucleotide repeat expansion within the transcription factor 4 (TCF4, 
E2-2) gene predicts Fuchs corneal dystrophy.

Wieben ED(1), Aleff RA, Tosakulwong N, Butz ML, Highsmith WE, Edwards AO, Baratz 
KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a common, familial disease of the
corneal endothelium and is the leading indication for corneal transplantation.
Variation in the transcription factor 4 (TCF4) gene has been identified as a
major contributor to the disease. We tested for an association between an
intronic TGC trinucleotide repeat in TCF4 and FECD by determining repeat length
in 66 affected participants with severe FECD and 63 participants with normal
corneas in a 3-stage discovery/replication/validation study. PCR primers flanking
the TGC repeat were used to amplify leukocyte-derived genomic DNA. Repeat length 
was determined by direct sequencing, short tandem repeat (STR) assay and Southern
blotting. Genomic Southern blots were used to evaluate samples for which only a
single allele was identified by STR analysis. Compiling data for 3 arms of the
study, a TGC repeat length >50 was present in 79% of FECD cases and in 3% of
normal controls cases (p<0.001). Among cases, 52 of 66 (79%) subjects had >50 TGC
repeats, 13 (20%) had <40 repeats and 1 (2%) had an intermediate repeat length.
In comparison, only 2 of 63 (3%) unaffected control subjects had >50 repeats, 60 
(95%) had <40 repeats and 1 (2%) had an intermediate repeat length. The repeat
length was greater than 1000 in 4 FECD cases. The sensitivity and specificity of 
>50 TGC repeats identifying FECD in this patient cohort was 79% and 96%,
respectively Expanded TGC repeat was more specific for FECD cases than the
previously identified, highly associated, single nucleotide polymorphism,
rs613872 (specificity = 79%). The TGC trinucleotide repeat expansion in TCF4 is
strongly associated with FECD, and a repeat length >50 is highly specific for the
disease This association suggests that trinucleotide expansion may play a
pathogenic role in the majority of FECD cases and is a predictor of disease risk.

PMCID: PMC3504061
PMID: 23185296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Dec;158A(12):3174-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35588. Epub 2012
Nov 19.

Mosaic 18q21.2 deletions including the TCF4 gene: a clinical report.

Rossi M(1), Labalme A, Cordier MP, Till M, Blanchard G, Dubois R, Guibaud L,
Heissat S, Javouhey E, Lachaux A, Mure PY, Ville D, Edery P, Sanlaville D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de référence des anomalies du développement, Service de Cytogénétique
Constitutionnelle, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France.
massimiliano.rossi01@chu-lyon.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by distinctive facial dysmorphism, 
profound intellectual disability, and the possible occurrence of epilepsy and
breathing anomalies. It is caused by haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 gene. No
significant difference in clinical severity has been reported to date between
PTHS patients carrying 18q21 deletions including the TCF4 gene, and those
harboring TCF4 point mutations, suggesting a lack of genotype/phenotype
correlation. Moreover, the size of 18q21 deletions including the TCF4 gene does
not appear to have a significant effect on the phenotypic severity, suggesting
that TCF4 haploinsufficiency is the most important prognostic factor in 18q
deletions. We describe two unrelated patients presenting with clinical features
reminiscent of PTHS and carrying mosaic interstitial 18q21 deletions
characterized by array comparative genomic hybridization. One of the patients
presented the lowest level of mosaic 18q21 deletion reported to date (5-10%). Our
report and a review of the literature show that the mosaic status does not appear
to have a significant effect on the clinical severity of 18q21 deletions, which
are associated with a poor neurological outcome, whereas a mosaic TCF4 point
mutation can result in a significantly milder phenotype. Malformations of
internal organs are currently considered to be rare in PTHS. The patients
described here had visceral anomalies, suggesting that a full morphological
assessment, including heart and abdominal ultrasound scans, should be performed
systematically in PTHS patients.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23165966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Brain Struct Funct. 2013 Nov;218(6):1531-49. doi: 10.1007/s00429-012-0474-6. Epub
2012 Nov 15.

Postnatal isoform switch and protein localization of LEF1 and TCF7L2
transcription factors in cortical, thalamic, and mesencephalic regions of the
adult mouse brain.

Nagalski A(1), Irimia M, Szewczyk L, Ferran JL, Misztal K, Kuznicki J, Wisniewska
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, 4 Ks. Trojdena Street, 02-109, Warsaw, Poland.

ß-Catenin signaling, leading to the activation of lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor 1/T cell factor (LEF1/TCF) transcription factors, plays a well-established
role in transcription regulation during development and tissue homeostasis. In
the adult organism, the activity of this pathway has been found in stem cell
niches and postmitotic thalamic neurons. Recently, studies show that mutations in
components of ß-catenin signaling networks have been associated with several
psychiatric disorders, indicating the involvement of ß-catenin and LEF1/TCF
proteins in the proper functioning of the brain. Here, we report a comprehensive 
analysis of LEF1/TCF protein localization and the expression profile of their
isoforms in cortical, thalamic, and midbrain regions in mice. We detected LEF1
and TCF7L2 proteins in neurons of the thalamus and dorsal midbrain, i.e.,
subcortical regions specialized in the integration of diverse sources of sensory 
information. These neurons also exhibited nuclear localization of ß-catenin,
suggesting the involvement of ß-catenin/LEF1/TCF7L2 in the regulation of gene
expression in these regions. Analysis of alternative splicing and promoter usage 
identified brain-specific TCF7L2 isoforms and revealed a developmentally
coordinated transition in the composition of LEF1 and TCF7L2 isoforms. In the
case of TCF7L2, the typical brain isoforms lack the so-called C clamp; in
addition, the dominant-negative isoforms are predominant in the embryonic
thalamus but disappear postnatally. The present study provides a necessary
framework to understand the role of LEF1/TCF factors in thalamic and midbrain
development until adulthood and predicts that the regulatory role of these
proteins in the adult brain is significantly different from their role in the
embryonic brain or other non-neural tissues.

PMCID: PMC3825142
PMID: 23152144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 1;176(11):995-1001. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws176. Epub 2012
Nov 9.

Evaluation of genome-wide association study-identified type 2 diabetes loci in
African Americans.

Long J(1), Edwards T, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Zheng W, Shu XO, Blot WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Departmentof Medicine, School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37203-1738, USA.
jirong.long@vanderbilt.edu

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is up to twice as prevalent among African Americans as
Caucasians. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
multiple common genetic risk variants for T2D; however, none of these studies
were conducted exclusively among subjects of African ancestry. Investigating
these known loci in other populations would be an expedient way to evaluate the
generalizability of the current findings. The authors evaluated 29 known T2D loci
in a large southeastern US cohort study including 4,288 African Americans (1,554 
cases and 2,734 controls) enrolled during 2002-2009. Seven of the 29 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) examined were found to be associated with T2D
risk at P = 0.05, including rs6769511 (IGF2BP2), 2 SNPs in the WFS1 gene
(rs4689388 and rs1801214), rs7903146 (TCF7L2), and 3 SNPs in the KCNQ1 gene
(rs231362, rs2237892, and rs2237897). Notably, the association for rs7903146
reached the GWAS significance level (P = 3.6 × 10(-8)), with an odds ratio per T 
allele of 1.32 (95% confidence interval: 1.20, 1.46). Regional analyses using
GWAS data from Vanderbilt University's BioVU DNA biobank showed significant
associations (P < 0.05) with 9 loci, though no association was observed for the
index SNPs reported in European- or Asian-ancestry populations. These results
extend some of the recent GWAS findings to African Americans and may guide future
efforts to identify causal variants for T2D.

PMCID: PMC3571243
PMID: 23144361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Gene. 2013 Jan 25;513(2):244-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.086. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants are strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in Tunisian Arab subjects.

Turki A(1), Al-Zaben GS, Mtiraoui N, Marmmuoch H, Mahjoub T, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

Genome-wide association studies validated transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) 
gene as confirmed type 2 diabetes (T2DM) susceptibility locus, and an ethnic
contribution of TCF7L2 variants to T2DM risk was indicated. The aim of this study
was to replicate in a Tunisian Arab population identified associations of common 
TCF7L2 variants with T2DM. We tested the association of TCF7L2 variants:
rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and rs12255372, with T2DM in 900 Tunisian
patients and 875 control subjects. TCF7L2 genotyping was done by allelic
discrimination/real-time PCR method. Minor allele frequencies of rs4506565
(P=2.4×10(-8)), rs7903146 (P=1.2×10(-6)), rs12243326 (P=8.4×10(-8)) and
rs12255372 (P=1.1×10(-5)) were significantly higher in cases. The four tested
TCF7L2 variants were in linkage disequilibrium, and 4-locus (rs4506565,
rs7903146, rs12243326, rs12255372) haplotype analysis demonstrated that haplotype
1111 was negatively associated (Pc<0.001), while haplotypes 2222 (Pc=0.008) and
2211 (Pc=0.020) were positively associated with T2DM risk, after controlling for 
a number of covariates. The strong contribution of TCF7L2 gene variants to T2DM
among Tunisians is in line with similar findings in other ethnic groups,
confirming TCF7L2 as a common T2DM candidate gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23142382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cancer Lett. 2013 Feb 28;329(2):174-80. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.10.025. Epub
2012 Nov 7.

MiR-24 regulates the proliferation and invasion of glioma by ST7L via
ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling.

Chen L(1), Zhang A, Li Y, Zhang K, Han L, Du W, Yan W, Li R, Wang Y, Wang K, Pu
P, Jiang T, Jiang C, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300060,
China.

Erratum in
    Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 28;337(1):145.

MicroRNAs are strongly implicated as affecting glioma, but their specific roles
and functions have yet to be fully elucidated. In this study, we defined the
expression and function of miR-24, which we found to be upregulated in glioma
samples and glioma cells by qRT-PCR. Downregulation of miR-24 in glioma cell
lines inhibited proliferation and invasion and induced apoptosis. Using
computational and expression analysis, ST7L was identified as a candidate target 
of miR-24. A reporter assay with the 3'UTR of ST7L cloned downstream of a
luciferase gene showed increased luciferase activity in the absence of miR-24,
providing strong evidence that miR-24 is a direct regulator of ST7L. Furthermore,
we observed that restoration of ST7L activity resulted in effects that were
similar to those from transfecting a miR-24 inhibitor into glioma cells.
Mechanistic investigation revealed that the deletion of miR-24 suppressed
ß-catenin/Tcf-4 transcription activity by targeting ST7L. In conclusion, our
study demonstrates that miR-24 upregulation is common in glioma and that
suppression of miR-24 expression inhibits cell proliferation and invasion,
suggesting that miR-24 may act as an oncogene in glioma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23142218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jan;162B(1):1-16. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32109. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

TCF4 (e2-2; ITF2): a schizophrenia-associated gene with pleiotropic effects on
human disease.

Navarrete K(1), Pedroso I, De Jong S, Stefansson H, Steinberg S, Stefansson K,
Ophoff RA, Schalkwyk LC, Collier DA.

Author information: 
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, King's College London,
Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.

Common SNPs in the transcription factor 4 (TCF4; ITF2, E2-2, SEF-2) gene, which
encodes a basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factor, are associated with
schizophrenia, conferring a small increase in risk. Other common SNPs in the gene
are associated with the common eye disorder Fuch's corneal dystrophy, while rare,
mostly de novo inactivating mutations cause Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. In this
review, we present a systematic bioinformatics and literature review of the
genomics, biological function and interactome of TCF4 in the context of
schizophrenia. The TCF4 gene is present in all vertebrates, and although protein 
length varies, there is high conservation of primary sequence, including the DNA 
binding domain. Humans have a unique leucine-rich nuclear export signal. There
are two main isoforms (A and B), as well as complex splicing generating many
possible N-terminal amino acid sequences. TCF4 is highly expressed in the brain, 
where plays a role in neurodevelopment, interacting with class II bHLH
transcription factors Math1, HASH1, and neuroD2. The Ca(2+) sensor protein
calmodulin interacts with the DNA binding domain of TCF4, inhibiting
transcriptional activation. It is also the target of microRNAs, including mir137,
which is implicated in schizophrenia. The schizophrenia-associated SNPs are in
linkage disequilibrium with common variants within putative DNA regulatory
elements, suggesting that regulation of expression may underlie association with 
schizophrenia. Combined gene co-expression analyses and curated protein-protein
interaction data provide a network involving TCF4 and other putative
schizophrenia susceptibility genes. These findings suggest new opportunities for 
understanding the molecular basis of schizophrenia and other mental disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23129290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. IUBMB Life. 2012 Dec;64(12):971-4. doi: 10.1002/iub.1090. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

New functions of protein kinase Gcn2 in yeast and mammals.

Murguía JR(1), Serrano R.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica 
de Valencia-CSIC, Valencia, Spain.

The classical role of the conserved Gcn2 kinase of yeast and mammals is to
activate the translation of the transcription factors Gcn4 in yeast and
activating transcription factor 4 in mammals by phosphorylating the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a. Gcn2 is activated by uncharged tRNAs in
response to amino acid starvation and this regulatory system is important for
tolerance to nutrient deprivation and other stresses and for development,
differentiation, and normal function of mammalian organs. In the past few years, 
the classical Gcn2 pathway has been shown to modulate life span, tumor cell
survival, and immune responses. In addition, Gcn2 modulates translation of novel 
mRNAs such as those of an unknown regulator of leucine transport and of
sulfiredoxin SRX1 in yeast (activation of translation) and of inducible nitric
oxide synthase, ErBb2, HIF1a, and 5'-terminal oligopyrimidine tract mRNAs in
mammals (inhibition of translation). Finally, Gcn2 directly phosphorylates novel 
proteins such as methionyl-tRNA synthetase in mammals, and this triggers a
pathway for DNA repair. These findings anticipate many expanding roles of Gcn2 in
the future, with relevance for stress responses and human disease.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 23129244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Ann Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;77(1):31-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00734.x. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Anorectal atresia and variants at predicted regulatory sites in candidate genes.

Carter TC(1), Kay DM, Browne ML, Liu A, Romitti PA, Kuehn D, Conley MR, Caggana
M, Druschel CM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda 20892,
MD, USA.

Anorectal atresia is a serious birth defect of largely unknown etiology but
candidate genes have been identified in animal studies and human syndromes.
Because alterations in the activity of these genes might lead to anorectal
atresia, we selected 71 common variants predicted to be in transcription factor
binding sites, CpG windows, splice sites, and miRNA target sites of 25 candidate 
genes, and tested for their association with anorectal atresia. The study
population comprised 150 anorectal atresia cases and 623 control infants without 
major malformations. Variants predicted to affect transcription factor binding,
splicing, and DNA methylation in WNT3A, PCSK5, TCF4, MKKS, GLI2, HOXD12, and BMP4
were associated with anorectal atresia based on a nominal P value < 0.05. The
GLI2 and BMP4 variants are reported to be moderately associated with gene
expression changes (Spearman's rank correlation coefficients between -0.260 and
0.226). We did not find evidence for interaction between maternal pre-pregnancy
obesity and variants in MKKS, a gene previously associated with obesity, on the
risk of anorectal atresia. Our results for MKKS support previously suggested
associations with anorectal malformations. Our findings suggest that more
research is needed to determine whether altered GLI2 and BMP4 expression is
important in anorectal atresia in humans.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/University College London.

PMCID: PMC3535506
PMID: 23127126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046742. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Differing roles for TCF4 and COL8A2 in central corneal thickness and fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Igo RP Jr(1), Kopplin LJ, Joseph P, Truitt B, Fondran J, Bardenstein D, Aldave
AJ, Croasdale CR, Price MO, Rosenwasser M, Lass JH, Iyengar SK; FECD Genetics
Multi-center Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the most common late-onset,
vision-threatening corneal dystrophy in the United States, affecting about 4% of 
the population. Advanced FECD involves a thickening of the cornea from stromal
edema and changes in Descemet membrane. To understand the relationship between
FECD and central corneal thickness (CCT), we characterized common genetic
variation in COL8A2 and TCF4, genes previously implicated in CCT and/or FECD.
Other genes previously associated with FECD (PITX2, ZEB1, SLC4A11), and genes
only known to affect CCT (COL5A1, FOXO1, AVGR8, ZNF469) were also interrogated.
FECD probands, relatives and controls were recruited from 32 clinical sites; a
total of 532 cases and 204 controls were genotyped and tested for association of 
FECD case/control status, a 7-step FECD severity scale and CCT, adjusting for age
and sex. Association of FECD grade with TCF4 was highly significant (OR=<U+200A>6.01 at 
rs613872; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.8×10(-25)), and remained significant when adjusted for changes in
CCT (OR=<U+200A>4.84; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.2×10(-16)). Association of CCT with TCF4 was also
significant (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.1×10(-7)), but was abolished with adjustment for FECD grade
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.92). After adjusting for FECD grade, markers in other genes examined were 
modestly associated (p ~ 0.001) with FECD and/or CCT. Thus, common variants in
TCF4 appear to influence FECD directly, and CCT secondarily via FECD.
Additionally, changes in corneal thickness due to the effect of other loci may
modify disease severity, age-at-onset, or other biomechanical characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3479099
PMID: 23110055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Dec;98(3):e23-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.09.044. Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants are strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in Lebanese subjects.

Nemr R(1), Turki A, Echtay A, Al-Zaben GS, Daher HS, Irani-Hakime NA, Keleshian
SH, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Medical Center Rizk Hospital, Beirut, 
Lebanon.

We tested the association of TCF7L2 variants with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in 691
Lebanese people and 919 controls. rs7901695, rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326,
rs7895340, and rs12255372 minor allele frequencies were higher in T2DM. Haplotype
analysis
(rs7901695-rs4506565-rs7903146-rs12243326-rs7895340-rs11196205-rs12255372)
identified positively- (2122112, 2222222) and negatively- (1111111)
T2DM-associated haplotypes. TCF7L2 is a common T2DM candidate gene in Lebanese
people.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23107111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1294-301. doi: 10.1038/ng.2435. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

Bayesian refinement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common diseases.

Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium(1), Maller JB, McVean G, Byrnes J,
Vukcevic D, Palin K, Su Z, Howson JM, Auton A, Myers S, Morris A, Pirinen M,
Brown MA, Burton PR, Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Hall AS, Hattersley AT,
Hill AV, Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Craddock
N, Hurles M, Ouwehand W, Parkes M, Rahman N, Duncanson A, Todd JA, Kwiatkowski
DP, Samani NJ, Gough SC, McCarthy MI, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

Collaborators: Aerts J, Ahmad T, Arbury H, Attwood A, Auton A, Ball SG, Balmforth
AJ, Barnes C, Barrett JC, Barroso I, Barton A, Bennett AJ, Bhaskar S, Blaszczyk
K, Bowes J, Brand OJ, Braund PS, Bredin F, Breen G, Brown MJ, Bruce IN, Bull J,
Burren OS, Burton J, Byrnes J, Caesar S, Cardin N, Clee CM, Coffey AJ, Connell
JM, Conrad DF, Cooper JD, Dominiczak AF, Downes K, Drummond HE, Dudakia D, Dunham
A, Ebbs B, Eccles D, Edkins S, Edwards C, Elliot A, Emery P, Evans DM, Evans G,
Eyre S, Farmer A, Ferrier IN, Flynn E, Forbes A, Forty L, Franklyn JA, Frayling
TM, Freathy RM, Giannoulatou E, Gibbs P, Gilbert P, Gordon-Smith K, Gray E, Green
E, Groves CJ, Grozeva D, Gwilliam R, Hall A, Hammond N, Hardy M, Harrison P,
Hassanali N, Hebaishi H, Hines S, Hinks A, Hitman GA, Hocking L, Holmes C, Howard
E, Howard P, Howson JM, Hughes D, Hunt S, Isaacs JD, Jain M, Jewell DP, Johnson
T, Jolley JD, Jones IR, Jones LA, Kirov G, Langford CF, Lango-Allen H, Lathrop
GM, Lee J, Lee KL, Lees C, Lewis K, Lindgren CM, Maisuria-Armer M, Maller J,
Mansfield J, Marchini JL, Martin P, Massey DC, McArdle WL, McGuffin P, McLay KE, 
McVean G, Mentzer A, Mimmack ML, Morgan AE, Morris AP, Mowat C, Munroe PB, Myers 
S, Newman W, Nimmo ER, O'Donovan MC, Onipinla A, Ovington NR, Owen MJ, Palin K,
Palotie A, Parnell K, Pearson R, Pernet D, Perry JR, Phillips A, Plagnol V,
Prescott NJ, Prokopenko I, Quail MA, Rafelt S, Rayner NW, Reid DM, Renwick A,
Ring SM, Robertson N, Robson S, Russell E, St Clair D, Sambrook JG, Sanderson JD,
Sawcer SJ, Schuilenburg H, Scott CE, Scott R, Seal S, Shaw-Hawkins S, Shields BM,
Simmonds MJ, Smyth DJ, Somaskantharajah E, Spanova K, Steer S, Stephens J,
Stevens HE, Stirrups K, Stone MA, Strachan DP, Su Z, Symmons DP, Thompson JR,
Thomson W, Tobin MD, Travers ME, Turnbull C, Vukcevic D, Wain LV, Walker M,
Walker NM, Wallace C, Warren-Perry M, Watkins NA, Webster J, Weedon MN, Wilson
AG, Woodburn M, Wordsworth BP, Yau C, Young AH, Zeggini E, Brown MA, Burton PR,
Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, Hill AV,
Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Hurles ME,
Duncanson A, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Rahman N, Todd JA, Samani NJ, Kwiatkowski DP,
McCarthy MI, Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

To further investigate susceptibility loci identified by genome-wide association 
studies, we genotyped 5,500 SNPs across 14 associated regions in 8,000 samples
from a control group and 3 diseases: type 2 diabetes (T2D), coronary artery
disease (CAD) and Graves' disease. We defined, using Bayes theorem, credible sets
of SNPs that were 95% likely, based on posterior probability, to contain the
causal disease-associated SNPs. In 3 of the 14 regions, TCF7L2 (T2D), CTLA4
(Graves' disease) and CDKN2A-CDKN2B (T2D), much of the posterior probability
rested on a single SNP, and, in 4 other regions (CDKN2A-CDKN2B (CAD) and CDKAL1, 
FTO and HHEX (T2D)), the 95% sets were small, thereby excluding most SNPs as
potentially causal. Very few SNPs in our credible sets had annotated functions,
illustrating the limitations in understanding the mechanisms underlying
susceptibility to common diseases. Our results also show the value of more
detailed mapping to target sequences for functional studies.

PMCID: PMC3791416
PMID: 23104008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Dermatol Sci. 2012 Dec;68(3):157-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.09.011. Epub 
2012 Sep 28.

Versican gene: regulation by the ß-catenin signaling pathway plays a significant 
role in dermal papilla cell aggregative growth.

Yang Y(1), Li Y, Wang Y, Wu J, Yang G, Yang T, Gao Y, Lu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Daping Hospital, Research Institute of Surgery,
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400042, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Dermal papilla cells (DPCs), which exhibit a multilayer aggregative
growth character in in vitro culture, are closely related to induction of hair
follicles (HFs) formation, and are associated with the development and cycle
regulation of HFs. Versican, a large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan and one of 
the major components of the extracellular matrix, plays an essential role in hair
follicle formation. And also the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway performs a
crutial function in induction during hair follicle growth and embryogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the role of versican and ß-catenin in regulating DPCs 
aggregative growth, and to explore the versican gene expression regulation
mechanism by TCF-4/ß-catenin signaling pathway.
METHODS: We first cultured DPCs at different passages, and detected the change in
ß-catenin and versican expression in DPCs of various passages by RT-PCR and
Western blot. Then we knockdowned the versican and ß-catenin gene, evaluated and 
verificated the binding capability of TCF-4/ß-catenin to TOP elements in versican
gene promoter region at varied passage DPCs by EMSA and ChIP Assay, finally
observed the effect of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway inhibition on DPC aggregative
growth.
RESULTS: With the increase of passage, DPCs lost the aggregative property, the
versican mRNA and protein level in DPCs was on a gradual decline, while not
significant declining tendency of ß-catenin. The mRNA of both ß-catenin and
versican reduced simultaneously after ß-catenin siRNA transfection. The binding
ability of TCF-4/ß-catenin of varied-passage DPCs to cultured versican promoters 
diminished with the increase of DPC passages. And versican inhibition or
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway blocking could both produce considerable effect on the
aggregative growth of low-passage DPCs.
CONCLUSION: Wnt/ß-catenin signal transducting system regulates DPC aggregative
growth through modifying versican expression by means of acting on the versican
gene upstream promoter.

Copyright © 2012 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23099107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 21;287(52):43472-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.428466. Epub
2012 Oct 24.

Human SMC2 protein, a core subunit of human condensin complex, is a novel
transcriptional target of the WNT signaling pathway and a new therapeutic target.

Dávalos V(1), Súarez-López L, Castaño J, Messent A, Abasolo I, Fernandez Y,
Guerra-Moreno A, Espín E, Armengol M, Musulen E, Ariza A, Sayós J, Arango D,
Schwartz S Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Delivery and Targeting Group, Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Research
Centre for Nanomedicine (CIBBIM-Nanomedicine), Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona 08035 Spain.

Human SMC2 is part of the condensin complex, which is responsible for tightly
packaging replicated genomic DNA prior to segregation into daughter cells.
Engagement of the WNT signaling pathway is known to have a mitogenic effect on
cells, but relatively little is known about WNT interaction with mitotic
structural organizer proteins. In this work, we described the novel
transcriptional regulation of SMC2 protein by direct binding of the
ß-catenin·TCF4 transcription factor to the SMC2 promoter. Furthermore, we
identified the precise region in the SMC2 promoter that is required for
ß-catenin-mediated promoter activation. Finally, we explored the functional
significance of down-regulating SMC2 protein in vivo. Treatment of WNT-activated 
intestinal tumor cells with SMC2 siRNA significantly reduced cell proliferation
in nude mice, compared with untreated controls (p = 0.02). Therefore, we propose 
that WNT signaling can directly activate SMC2 transcription as a key player in
the mitotic cell division machinery. Furthermore, SMC2 represents a new target
for oncological therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3527934
PMID: 23095742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2657-8. doi: 10.2337/db12-0891.

Understanding the elusive mechanism of action of TCF7L2 in metabolism.

Grant SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Applied Genomics, The Childrens
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. grants@chop.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2807-13.

PMCID: PMC3478546
PMID: 23093653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 30;287(49):41364-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.377739. Epub
2012 Oct 18.

ß-Catenin and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-d coordinate dynamic
chromatin loops for the transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor A
gene in colon cancer cells.

Hwang I(1), Kim J, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Lab for RNA Cell Biology, BK21 Graduate Program for RNA
Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, and Department of Molecular
Biology, Dankook University, Gyeonggi-do 448-701, Republic of Korea.

Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) mRNA is regulated by ß-catenin and
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor d (PPAR-d) activation in colon cancer 
cells, but the detailed mechanism remains to be elucidated. As chromatin loops
are generally hubs for transcription factors, we tested here whether ß-catenin
could modulate chromatin looping near the VEGFA gene and play any important role 
for PPAR-d activated VEGFA transcription. First, we identified the far upstream
site as an important site for VEGFA transcription by luciferase assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation in colorectal carcinoma HCT116 cells. Chromatin
conformation capture analysis also revealed the chromatin loops formed by the
ß-catenin bindings on these sites near the VEGFA gene. Dynamic association and
dissociation of ß-catenin/TCF-4/PPAR-d on the far upstream site and
ß-catenin/NF-<U+03BA>B p65 on the downstream site were also detected depending on PPAR-d
activation. Interestingly, ß-catenin-mediated chromatin loops were relieved by
PPAR-d activation, suggesting a regulatory role of ß-catenin for VEGFA
transcription. Based on these data, we propose a model for PPAR-d-activated VEGFA
transcription that relies on ß-catenin-mediated chromatin looping as a
prerequisite for the activation. Our findings could extend to other ß-catenin
regulated target genes and could provide a general mechanism and novel paradigm
for ß-catenin-mediated oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3510834
PMID: 23086933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2807-13. doi: 10.2337/db12-0239. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Adipose tissue TCF7L2 splicing is regulated by weight loss and associates with
glucose and fatty acid metabolism.

Kaminska D(1), Kuulasmaa T, Venesmaa S, Käkelä P, Vaittinen M, Pulkkinen L,
Pääkkönen M, Gylling H, Laakso M, Pihlajamäki J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2657-8.

We investigated the effects of obesity surgery-induced weight loss on
transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) alternative splicing in adipose
tissue and liver. Furthermore, we determined the association of TCF7L2 splicing
with the levels of plasma glucose and serum free fatty acids (FFAs) in three
independent studies (n = 216). Expression of the short mRNA variant, lacking
exons 12, 13, and 13a, decreased after weight loss in subcutaneous fat (n = 46)
and liver (n = 11) and was more common in subcutaneous fat of subjects with type 
2 diabetes than in subjects with normal glucose tolerance in obese individuals (n
= 54) and a population-based sample (n = 49). Additionally, there was a positive 
correlation between this variant and the level of fasting glucose in nondiabetic 
individuals (n = 113). This association between TCF7L2 splicing and plasma
glucose was independent of the TCF7L2 genotype. Finally, this variant was
associated with high levels of serum FFAs during hyperinsulinemia, suggesting
impaired insulin action in adipose tissue, whereas no association with insulin
secretion or insulin-stimulated whole-body glucose uptake was observed. Our study
shows that the short TCF7L2 mRNA variant in subcutaneous fat is regulated by
weight loss and is associated with hyperglycemia and impaired insulin action in
adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC3478533
PMID: 23086040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(2):593-602. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2299-7.
Epub 2012 Oct 21.

Associations between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and risk of breast cancer among
Hispanic and non-Hispanic white women: the Breast Cancer Health Disparities
Study.

Connor AE(1), Baumgartner RN, Baumgartner KB, Kerber RA, Pinkston C, John EM,
Torres-Mejia G, Hines L, Giuliano A, Wolff RK, Slattery ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Population Health, School of Public Health &
Information Sciences, University of Louisville, 485 E. Gray St., Louisville, KY
40202, USA. aeconn02@louisville.edu

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is part of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway and plays a critical role in cell development and growth
regulation. TCF7L2 variants rs12255372 and rs7903146 have been associated with
risk of Type 2 diabetes. Few epidemiological studies have examined the
association between TCF7L2 and breast cancer risk. We investigated the
associations between 25 TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and breast 
cancer in Hispanic and non-Hispanic white (NHW) women from the 4-Corner's Breast 
Cancer Study, the San Francisco Bay Area Breast Cancer Study, and the Mexico
Breast Cancer Study. A total of 4,703 Hispanic (2,093 cases, 2,610 controls) and 
3,031 NHW (1,431 cases, 1,600 controls) women were included. Odds ratios (OR) and
95 % confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using logistic regression to
estimate the association between the TCF7L2 SNPs and breast cancer risk. We also 
examined effect modification by self-reported ethnicity, genetic admixture, and
diabetes history. After adjusting for multiple comparisons, four TCF7L2 SNPs were
significantly associated with breast cancer overall: rs7903146 (OR(TT) 1.24; 95 %
CI 1.03-1.49), rs3750805 (OR(AT/TT) 1.15; 95 % CI 1.03-1.28), rs7900150 (OR(AA)
1.23; 95 % 1.07-1.42), and rs1225404 (OR(CC) 0.82; 95 % 0.70-0.94). Among women
with a history of diabetes, the TT genotype of rs3750804 increased breast cancer 
risk (OR, 2.46; 95 % CI 1.28-4.73). However, there was no association among women
without a diabetes history (OR, 1.06; 95 % CI 0.85-1.32). We did not find
significant interactions by ethnicity or by genetic admixture. Findings support
an association between TCF7L2 and breast cancer and history of diabetes modifies 
this association for specific variants.

PMCID: PMC3662467
PMID: 23085767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 5;373(1-2):29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.10.009.
Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Genetics of the polycystic ovary syndrome.

Kosova G(1), Urbanek M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, United States.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a highly complex endocrine disorder,
characterized by hyperandrogenemia, menstrual irregularities and polycystic
ovaries. A strong genetic component to the etiology of PCOS is evident. However, 
due to the genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of PCOS and the lack of
insufficiently large cohorts, studies to identify specific contributing genes to 
date have yielded only few conclusive results. In this review we discuss the
current status of the genetic analysis of PCOS including the results of numerous 
association studies with candidate genes involved in TGF-ß and insulin signaling,
type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity susceptibility. Furthermore, we address
current challenges in genetic studies of PCOS, and the promise of new approaches,
including genome-wide association studies and next-generation sequencing.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3609918
PMID: 23079471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Islets. 2012 Sep-Oct;4(5):323-32. doi: 10.4161/isl.22282. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

From genotype to human ß cell phenotype and beyond.

Marchetti P(1), Syed F, Suleiman M, Bugliani M, Marselli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
piero.marchetti@med.unipi.it

Polygenic type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a multi-factorial disease due to the
interplay between genes and the environment. Over the years, several genes/loci
have been associated with this type of diabetes, with the majority of them being 
related to ß cell dysfunction. In this review, the available information on how
polymorphisms in T2DM-associated genes/loci do directly affect the properties of 
human islet cells are presented and discussed, including some clinical
implications and the role of epigenetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3524138
PMID: 23073174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Jan 15;237:348-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.10.001. Epub
2012 Oct 13.

Deficits in trace fear memory in a mouse model of the schizophrenia risk gene
TCF4.

Brzózka MM(1), Rossner MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, Research Group Gene Expression 
and Signaling, Hermann-Rein-Str. 3, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TCF4 was confirmed in the 
combined analysis of several large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) as one 
of the rare highly replicated significant schizophrenia (SZ) susceptibility genes
in large case-control cohorts. Focused genetic association studies showed that
TCF4 influences verbal learning and memory, and modulates sensorimotor gating.
Mice overexpressing Tcf4 in the forebrain (Tcf4tg) display cognitive deficits in 
hippocampus-dependent learning tasks and impairment of prepulse inhibition, a
well-established endophenotype of SZ. The spectrum of cognitive deficits in SZ
subjects, however, is broad and covers attention, working memory, and
anticipation. Collectively, these higher order cognitive processes and the recall
of remote memories are thought to depend mainly on prefrontal cortical networks. 
To further investigate cognitive disturbances in Tcf4tg mice, we employed the
trace fear conditioning paradigm that requires attention and critically depends
on the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). We show that Tcf4tg mice display deficits
in recent and remote trace fear memory and are impaired at anticipating aversive 
stimuli. We also assessed mRNA expression of the neuronal activity-regulated gene
Fos in the ACC and hippocampus. Upon trace conditioning, Fos expression is
reduced in Tcf4tg mice as compared to controls, which parallels cognitive
impairments in this learning paradigm. Collectively, these data indicate that the
reduced cognitive performance in Tcf4tg mice includes deficits at the level of
attention and behavioral anticipation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23069005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Nov;4(11):1415-27. doi: 10.1039/c2ib20072d.

SAMNet: a network-based approach to integrate multi-dimensional high throughput
datasets.

Gosline SJ(1), Spencer SJ, Ursu O, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The rapid development of high throughput biotechnologies has led to an onslaught 
of data describing genetic perturbations and changes in mRNA and protein levels
in the cell. Because each assay provides a one-dimensional snapshot of active
signaling pathways, it has become desirable to perform multiple assays (e.g. mRNA
expression and phospho-proteomics) to measure a single condition. However, as
experiments expand to accommodate various cellular conditions, proper analysis
and interpretation of these data have become more challenging. Here we introduce 
a novel approach called SAMNet, for Simultaneous Analysis of Multiple Networks,
that is able to interpret diverse assays over multiple perturbations. The
algorithm uses a constrained optimization approach to integrate mRNA expression
data with upstream genes, selecting edges in the protein-protein interaction
network that best explain the changes across all perturbations. The result is a
putative set of protein interactions that succinctly summarizes the results from 
all experiments, highlighting the network elements unique to each perturbation.
We evaluated SAMNet in both yeast and human datasets. The yeast dataset measured 
the cellular response to seven different transition metals, and the human dataset
measured cellular changes in four different lung cancer models of
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), a crucial process in tumor metastasis.
SAMNet was able to identify canonical yeast metal-processing genes unique to each
commodity in the yeast dataset, as well as human genes such as ß-catenin and
TCF7L2/TCF4 that are required for EMT signaling but escaped detection in the mRNA
and phospho-proteomic data. Moreover, SAMNet also highlighted drugs likely to
modulate EMT, identifying a series of less canonical genes known to be affected
by the BCR-ABL inhibitor imatinib (Gleevec), suggesting a possible influence of
this drug on EMT.

PMCID: PMC3501250
PMID: 23060147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Oct 10;5:561. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-561.

Association between the IVS4G>T mutation in the TCF7L2 gene and susceptibility to
diabetes in cystic fibrosis patients.

Furgeri DT(1), Marson FA, Ribeiro AF, Bertuzzo CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Clinical complications appear to be a decisive factor for the
prognosis of patients. Diabetes is an important complication of cystic
fibrosis(CF). In our study we evaluated the association between the IVS4G>T
mutation in the TCF7L2 gene with the presence of diabetes in patients with CF.
FINDINGS: We evaluated 145 patients with CF in relation to the genotype of the
IVS4G>T mutation. For this, the PCR method associated with specific enzyme
digestion was used. The genotypes G/G, G/T and T/T were observed to have
frequencies of 54 (37.2%), 78 (53.8%) and 13 (9%), respectively. There was no
association between genotype and the occurrence of diabetes among patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In our sample, no association was found between the IVS4G>T mutation
in the TCF7L2 gene and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3519805
PMID: 23050589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.09.025. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Association between donor and recipient TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and the risk of
new-onset diabetes mellitus after liver transplantation in a Han Chinese
population.

Ling Q(1), Xie H, Lu D, Wei X, Gao F, Zhou L, Xu X, Zheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1.
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60.

BACKGROUNDS & AIMS: New-onset diabetes mellitus (NODM) is a frequent and serious 
complication arising after liver transplantation (LT). Transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms have been reported to strongly associate with
type 2 diabetes. In addition, the donor liver plays a vital role in regulating
blood glucose levels. In this study, we aim at evaluating the association between
donor and recipient TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with NODM after LT.
METHODS: A total of 125 patients undergoing primary LT, without a history of
diabetes were included. Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs290487,
rs7903146, rs11196205, and rs12255372), closely associated with type 2 diabetes
in the Eastern Asia population, were genotyped and analyzed.
RESULTS: Both donor and recipient rs290487 polymorphisms (CC vs. TT genotype)
were found to be significantly associated with NODM. In multivariate analysis,
donor rs290487 genetic variation (OR = 2.172 per each C allele, p = 0.015), blood
tacrolimus levels at 1 month post-LT >10 ng/ml (OR = 3.264, p = 0.017), and
recipient age >55 years (OR = 2.638, p = 0.043) were identified as independent
risk factors of NODM. Furthermore, donor rs290487 CC genotype could predict a
high probability (>40%) of the onset of NODM. Predictive model containing donor
rs290487 polymorphism showed a significantly higher prognostic ability on NODM
than the model with only clinical parameters (p = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: Donor TCF7L2 rs290487 polymorphism is associated with an increased
risk of NODM after LT and has a potential clinical value for the prediction of
NODM.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23041303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Biochem. 2013 Jan;153(1):43-50. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs117. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease 1
during tertiary dentinogenesis.

Yoshioka S(1), Takahashi Y, Abe M, Michikami I, Imazato S, Wakisaka S, Hayashi M,
Ebisu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry and Endodontology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Tertiary dentin is deposited inside teeth after various stimuli and serves as a
major defensive wall to preserve pulp cells. However, the molecular mechanisms of
the activation of quiescent odontoblasts, immature pulp cells and tertiary dentin
formation are still unclear. Therefore, we performed a comprehensive gene
expression analysis of pulp cells after cavity preparation of 9-week-old rat
molars to clarify the critical molecules in tertiary dentinogenesis. As a result,
mRNA expression of various molecules was up- or down-regulated. Notably, several 
members of the matrix metalloprotease family and their endogenous inhibitors were
up-regulated after cavity preparation. In situ hybridization showed that tissue
inhibitor of metalloprotease 1 (Timp1) was widely and continuously distributed in
the pulp beneath the cavity in vivo. We also observed accumulation of ß-catenin
in the pulp cells beneath the cavity by fluorescence immunohistochemistry.
Furthermore, Timp1 transcription was repressed by a dominant-negative TCF4 in
immature undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, but not altered in mature
odontoblast-like cells. These results indicate that cavity preparation may
activate the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and Timp1 may be
correlatively involved in pulp repair. Timp1 might play crucial roles in
reactivation of immature pulp cells for tertiary dentinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3527996
PMID: 23038674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 Nov;96(5):1129-36. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.038125. Epub 2012
Oct 3.

TCF7L2 genetic variants modulate the effect of dietary fat intake on changes in
body composition during a weight-loss intervention.

Mattei J(1), Qi Q, Hu FB, Sacks FM, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 gene variants have been associated with increased risk of type
2 diabetes and higher adiposity. Observational studies and short-term trials have
suggested that macronutrients may modify these effects. However, to our
knowledge, this has yet to be verified in long-term interventions.
OBJECTIVE: In a long-term intervention setting, we investigated the effects of
TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 and dietary total fat on changes in
body composition and subsequent glycemic control.
DESIGN: Data were analyzed for 591 participants in the Preventing Overweight
Using Novel Dietary Strategies (Pounds Lost) trial, which is a 2-y weight-loss
randomized clinical trial of diets that differed in macronutrient proportions.
Adjusted means for changes in body composition at 6 and 24 mo were obtained for
gene main effects and interactions with a low-fat diet (20% from energy) compared
with a high-fat diet (40% from energy). Interactions with protein and
carbohydrate intakes were also tested. Predicted changes in glycemic control from
changes in adiposity were determined by genotype and diet type.
RESULTS: Significant interactions were observed for rs12255372 TT (risk genotype)
and fat intake for changes in BMI, total fat mass, and trunk fat mass (all P/q < 
0.05) at 6 mo, with nonsignificant larger decreases for TT carriers on a low-fat 
diet. No significant associations were observed at 24 mo or for other
macronutrients. Changes in body composition for TT carriers predicted reductions 
in plasma glucose and insulin only on the low-fat diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with the TCF7L2 rs12255372 risk genotype may reduce body
adiposity by consuming a diet lower in total fat. These reductions may induce
better glycemic control for such individuals predisposed to type 2 diabetes. The 
Pounds Lost trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00072995.

PMCID: PMC3471200
PMID: 23034957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Blood. 2012 Nov 22;120(22):4363-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-441311. Epub 2012 
Oct 1.

The signal transducers STAT5 and STAT3 control expression of Id2 and E2-2 during 
dendritic cell development.

Li HS(1), Yang CY, Nallaparaju KC, Zhang H, Liu YJ, Goldrath AW, Watowich SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cytokines and transcription factors play key roles in dendritic cell (DC)
development, yet information about regulatory interactions between these signals 
remains limited. Here we show that the cytokines GM-CSF and Flt3L induce the
transcriptional mediators Id2 and E2-2 and control DC lineage diversification by 
STAT-dependent pathways. We found that STAT5 is required for tissue CD103(+) DC
generation and plasmacytoid DC (pDC) suppression in steady state or response to
GM-CSF. STAT5 stimulates GM-CSF-dependent expression of Id2, which controls
CD103(+) DC production and pDC inhibition. By contrast, pDCs, but not CD103(+)
DCs, are dependent on STAT3. Consistently, STAT3 stimulates Flt3L-responsive
expression of the pDC regulator Tcf4 (E2-2). These data suggest that STATs
contribute to DC development by controlling transcription factors involved in
lineage differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3507145
PMID: 23033267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Bone. 2013 Jan;52(1):145-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.09.029. Epub 2012 Sep 29.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling activates bone morphogenetic protein 2 expression in
osteoblasts.

Zhang R(1), Oyajobi BO, Harris SE, Chen D, Tsao C, Deng HW, Zhao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The BMP and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathways cooperatively regulate osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. Although BMP signaling regulates gene
expression of the Wnt pathway, much less is known about whether Wnt signaling
modulates BMP expression in osteoblasts. Given the presence of putative Tcf/Lef
response elements that bind ß-catenin/TCF transcription complex in the BMP2
promoter, we hypothesized that the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway stimulates BMP2
expression in osteogenic cells. In this study, we showed that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling is active in various osteoblast or osteoblast precursor cell lines,
including MC3T3-E1, 2T3, C2C12, and C3H10T1/2 cells. Furthermore, crosstalk
between the BMP and Wnt pathways affected BMP signaling activity, osteoblast
differentiation, and bone formation, suggesting Wnt signaling is an upstream
regulator of BMP signaling. Activation of Wnt signaling by Wnt3a or
overexpression of ß-catenin/TCF4 both stimulated BMP2 transcription at promoter
and mRNA levels. In contrast, transcription of BMP2 in osteogenic cells was
decreased by either blocking the Wnt pathway with DKK1 and sFRP4, or inhibiting
ß-catenin/TCF4 activity with FWD1/ß-TrCP, ICAT, or <U+0394>TCF4. Using a site-directed
mutagenesis approach, we confirmed that Wnt/ß-catenin transactivation of BMP2
transcription is directly mediated through the Tcf/Lef response elements in the
BMP2 promoter. These results, which demonstrate that the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling 
pathway is an upstream activator of BMP2 expression in osteoblasts, provide novel
insights into the nature of functional cross talk integrating the BMP and
Wnt/ß-catenin pathways in osteoblastic differentiation and maintenance of
skeletal homeostasis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3712130
PMID: 23032104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. APMIS. 2013 Feb;121(2):120-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02947.x. Epub 2012
Jul 21.

The expression and significance of WWOX and ß-catenin in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Li YP(1), Wu CC, Chen WT, Huang YC, Chai CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

WW domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) is a novel tumor suppressor gene, and 
its expression is reduced in various cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC). WWOX has been reported to be downregulated in HCC cell lines as well as in
primary HCC tissues. It has been suggested that WWOX is implicated in
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, which is frequently affected in HCC. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the expression of WWOX, ß-catenin and T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) in
HCC. Our result showed that downregulation of WWOX in HCC was correlated with
cytoplasmic accumulation of ß-catenin. In addition, strong nuclear TCF4
expression was associated with tumor grade and stage in HCC. In conclusion, our
result implied that downregulation of WWOX might lead to accumulation of
cytoplasmic ß-catenin and the subsequent activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway in HCC.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 23030478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45617. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045617. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Inhibition of Tcf-4 induces apoptosis and enhances chemosensitivity of colon
cancer cells.

Xie J(1), Xiang DB, Wang H, Zhao C, Chen J, Xiong F, Li TY, Wang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
jiangxie_cd@hotmail.com

Aberrant activation of ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling has been implicated in human
carcinogenesis, including colorectal cancer. In this study, we compared the
effects of Tcf-4 knockdown with ß-catenin knockdown on cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and chemosensitivity in SW480 and HCT116 colon cancer cells using
adenoviral vector-mediated short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Our results show that,
compared to ß-catenin knockdown, Tcf-4 knockdown more effectively inhibited
colony formation, induced apoptosis, and increased 5-FU and oxaliplatin-mediated 
cytotoxicity in colon cancer cells. We further investigated the mechanisms
involved in the different efficacies observed with ß-catenin and Tcf-4 knockdown 
in colon cancer cells. FOXO4 is a member of the subfamily of mammalian FOXO
forkhead transcription factors and plays a major role in controlling cellular
proliferation, apoptosis, and DNA repair. Our data showed that the protein level 
of FOXO4 did not change after treatment with both ß-catenin and Tcf-4 shRNA.
However, ß-catenin shRNA was found to increase the accumulation of phosphorylated
FOXO4 S193 and decrease the expression of FOXO target genes p27Kip1 and MnSOD,
whereas Tcf-4 shRNA showed the opposite effect. Therefore, compared to ß-catenin 
knockdown, Tcf-4 knockdown shows better efficacy for inhibiting proliferation and
inducing apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells, which may be related to increased 
FOXO4 transcriptional activity. These results suggest that Tcf-4 is an attractive
potential therapeutic target for colorectal cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3454396
PMID: 23029137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045462. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Activating mutations in ß-catenin in colon cancer cells alter their interaction
with macrophages; the role of snail.

Kaler P(1), Augenlicht L, Klampfer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tumor cells become addicted to both activated oncogenes and to
proliferative and pro-survival signals provided by the abnormal tumor
microenvironment. Although numerous soluble factors have been identified that
shape the crosstalk between tumor cells and stroma, it has not been established
how oncogenic mutations in the tumor cells alter their interaction with normal
cells in the tumor microenvironment.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We showed that the isogenic HCT116 and Hke-3 cells, which
differ only by the presence of the mutant kRas allele, both stimulate macrophages
to produce IL1ß. In turn, macrophages enhanced Wnt signaling, proliferation and
survival in both HCT116 and Hke-3 cells, demonstrating that signaling by
oncogenic kRas in tumor cells does not impact their interaction with macrophages.
HCT116 cells are heterozygous for ß-catenin (HCT116(WT/MT)), harboring one wild
type (WT) and one mutant (MT) allele, but isogenic lines that carry only the WT
(HCT116(WT)) or MT ß-catenin allele (HCT116(MT)) have been generated. We showed
that macrophages promoted Wnt signaling in cells that carry the MT ß-catenin
allele, but not in HCT116(WT) cells. Consistent with this observation,
macrophages and IL1ß failed to stabilize Snail in HCT116(WT) cells, and to
protect these cells from TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Finally, we demonstrated that
HCT116 cells expressing dominant negative TCF4 (dnTCF4) or HCT116 cells with
silenced Snail failed to stimulate IL1ß production in macrophages, demonstrating 
that tumor cells activate macrophages via a Wnt-dependent factor.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data demonstrate that oncogenic ß-catenin mutations in tumor
cells, and subsequent activation of Wnt signaling, not only trigger
cell-intrinsic alterations, but also have a significant impact on the crosstalk
of tumor cells with the tumor associated macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3448637
PMID: 23029025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002986. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

TCF7L2 modulates glucose homeostasis by regulating CREB- and FoxO1-dependent
transcriptional pathway in the liver.

Oh KJ(1), Park J, Kim SS, Oh H, Choi CS, Koo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology and Samsung Biomedical Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Peripheral insulin resistance contributes to the development of type 2 diabetes. 
TCF7L2 has been tightly associated with this disease, although the exact
mechanism was largely elusive. Here we propose a novel role of TCF7L2 in hepatic 
glucose metabolism in mammals. Expression of medium and short isoforms of TCF7L2 
was greatly diminished in livers of diet-induced and genetic mouse models of
insulin resistance, prompting us to delineate the functional role of these
isoforms in hepatic glucose metabolism. Knockdown of hepatic TCF7L2 promoted
increased blood glucose levels and glucose intolerance with increased
gluconeogenic gene expression in wild-type mice, in accordance with the PCR array
data showing that only the gluconeogenic pathway is specifically up-regulated
upon depletion of hepatic TCF7L2. Conversely, overexpression of a nuclear isoform
of TCF7L2 in high-fat diet-fed mice ameliorated hyperglycemia with improved
glucose tolerance, suggesting a role of this factor in hepatic glucose
metabolism. Indeed, we observed a binding of TCF7L2 to promoters of gluconeogenic
genes; and expression of TCF7L2 inhibited adjacent promoter occupancies of CREB, 
CRTC2, and FoxO1, critical transcriptional modules in hepatic gluconeogenesis, to
disrupt target gene transcription. Finally, haploinsufficiency of TCF7L2 in mice 
displayed higher glucose levels and impaired glucose tolerance, which were
rescued by hepatic expression of a nuclear isoform of TCF7L2 at the physiological
level. Collectively, these data suggest a crucial role of TCF7L2 in hepatic
glucose metabolism; reduced hepatic expression of nuclear isoforms of this factor
might be a critical instigator of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3459990
PMID: 23028378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Diagn Ther. 2012 Oct;16(5):285-302. doi: 10.1007/s40291-012-0002-7.

Individualized therapy for type 2 diabetes: clinical implications of
pharmacogenetic data.

Mannino GC(1), Sesti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Graecia of
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is characterized by insulin resistance,
abnormally elevated hepatic glucose production, and reduced glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Treatment with antihyperglycemic agents is initially
successful in type 2 diabetes, but it is often associated with a high secondary
failure rate, and the addition of insulin is eventually necessary for many
patients, in order to restore acceptable glycemic control and to reduce the risk 
of development and progression of disease complications. Notably, even patients
who appear to have similar requirements of antidiabetic regimens show great
variability in drug disposition, glycemic response, tolerability, and incidence
of adverse effects during treatment. Pharmacogenomics is a promising area of
investigation and involves the search for genetic polymorphisms that may explain 
the interindividual variability in antidiabetic therapy response. The initial
positive results portend that genomic efforts will be able to shed important
light on variability in pharmacologic traits. In this review, we summarize the
current understanding of genetic polymorphisms that may affect the responses of
subjects with T2DM to antidiabetic treatment. These genes belong to three major
classes: genes involved in drug metabolism and transporters that influence
pharmacokinetics (including the cytochrome P450 [CYP] superfamily, the organic
anion transporting polypeptide [OATP] family, and the polyspecific organic cation
transporter [OCT] family); genes encoding drug targets and receptors (including
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma [PPARG], the adenosine
triphosphate [ATP]-sensitive potassium channel [K(ATP)], and incretin receptors);
and genes involved in the causal pathway of T2DM that are able to modify the
effects of drugs (including adipokines, transcription factor 7-like 2 (T cell
specific, HMG-box) [TCF7L2], insulin receptor substrate 1 [IRS1], nitric oxide
synthase 1 (neuronal) adaptor protein [NOS1AP], and solute carrier family 30
(zinc transporter), member 8 [SLC30A8]). In addition to these three major
classes, we also review the available evidence on novel genes (CDK5 regulatory
subunit associated protein 1-like 1 [CDKAL1], insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA
binding protein 2 [IGF2BP2], potassium voltage-gated channel, KQT-like subfamily,
member 1 [KCNQ1], paired box 4 [PAX4] and neuronal differentiation 1 [NEUROD1]
transcription factors, ataxia telangiectasia mutated [ATM], and serine racemase
[SRR]) that have recently been proposed as possible modulators of therapeutic
response in subjects with T2DM.

PMID: 23018631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012 Jan-Mar;6(1):54-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2012.05.014.
Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes mellitus and other specific types of diabetes; its
role in treatment modalities.

Kota SK(1), Meher LK, Jammula S, Kota SK, Modi KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Medwin Hospital, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh,
India. hidocsunil@ibibo.com

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is among the most challenging health issues of
the 21st century and is associated with an alarming rise in the incidence. The
pathophysiological processes that lead to development of T2DM are still unclear, 
however impairment in insulin secretion and/or action is clearly indicated. Type 
2 diabetes is a polygenic disorder with multiple genes located on different
chromosomes contributing to its susceptibility. Analysis of the genetic factors
is further complicated by the fact that numerous environmental factors interact
with genes to produce the disorder. Only a minority of cases of type 2 diabetes
are caused by single gene defects and one example is maturity onset diabetes of
the young (MODY). Previous studies indicated that variants in genes encoding the 
pancreatic ß-cell K+ATP channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and SUR1 (ABCC8) are
associated with neonatal diabetes. Six different types of maturity onset diabetes
of young (MODY) have been identified based on characteristic gene defect. The
common Pro12Ala polymorphism in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
(PPAR-<U+03B3>) gene was confirmed in several studies to be associated with type 2
diabetes as well. More recently, studies reported variants within a novel gene,
TCF7L2, as a putative susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes across many ethnic 
backgrounds around the world. MODY patients respond better to sulphonylureas and 
metformin, while neonatal diabetes patients with genetic mutations can be changed
from insulin to oral drugs. We hereby provide a comprehensive review on the role 
of genetics in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Copyright © 2012 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23014256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012 Jan-Mar;6(1):48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2012.05.002.
Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Relationship of transcription factor 7 like 2 gene rs7903146 variation with type 
2 diabetes and obesity related parameters.

Kahveci C(1), Koldemir M, Cagatay P, Bayer H, Yildiz S, Bagriacik N, Duman BS.

Author information: 
(1)Marmara University, Faculty of Science and Arts, Department of Biology,
Istanbul, Turkey.

AIMS: The allele frequencies of transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
rs7903146 polymorphism in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and non-T2DM controls
were determined.
METHODS: TCF7L2 rs7903146 genotypes were determined with qPCR.
RESULTS: The TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 genotype frequencies for homozygous wild type 
(C/C), heterozygous (C/T) and homozygous polymorphic (T/T) for T2DM patients were
determined, respectively, as 71.4%, 14.3%, 14.3% and 72.5%, 11.8%, 15.7% for
controls. The weight, length and lean body mass were higher in C/T+T/T compared
to C/C carriers. Glucose, insulin, insulin resistance and homeostatic model
assessment (HOMA) were nonsignificantly higher in rs7903146C/T+T/T in comparison 
to C/C. TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 genotypes were not found to interact with drugs.
The absence of any difference between genotype frequencies among study groups
indicates that no association persists with TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 polymorphism
and T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of rs7903146 variation over some obesity variables
suggest that this variation may effect T2DM development via obesity.

Copyright © 2012 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23014255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Diabetologia. 2013 Jan;56(1):121-5. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2730-y. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

In vitro scan for enhancers at the TCF7L2 locus.

Savic D(1), Park SY, Bailey KA, Bell GI, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, 920 E. 58th St, CLSC
319A, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent functional characterisations of genome-wide association
study (GWAS) loci suggest that cis-regulatory variation may be a common paradigm 
for complex disease susceptibility. Several studies point to a similar mechanism 
at the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) GWAS locus for type 2 diabetes. To 
address this possibility, we carried out an in vitro scan of this
diabetes-associated locus to fine-map cis-regulatory sequences within this
genomic interval.
METHODS: A systematic cell-based enhancer strategy was employed to interrogate
all sequences within the 92 kb type-2-diabetes-association interval for
cis-regulatory activity in a panel of cell lines (HCT-116, Neuro-2a, C2C12, U2OS,
MIN6 and HepG2). We further evaluated chromatin state at a subset of these
regions in HCT-116 and U2OS cells and examined allelic-specific enhancer
properties at the type-2-diabetes-associated single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs7903146.
RESULTS: In total, we assigned cis-regulatory activity to approximately 30%
(9/28) of constructs tested. Notably, a subset of enhancers was active across
multiple cell lines and overlapped with key epigenetic markers suggestive of
cis-regulatory sequences. We further replicated the allelic-specific properties
for SNP rs7903146 in pancreatic beta cells and additionally demonstrate identical
allelic-specific enhancer effects in other cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a detailed map of cis-regulatory elements
within the TCF7L2 GWAS locus and support the hypothesis of cis-regulatory
variation leading to type 2 diabetes predisposition. The detection of
allelic-specific effects for SNP rs7903146 in multiple cell lines further alludes
to the likelihood of a peripheral defect in disease aetiology.

PMCID: PMC3525810
PMID: 23011354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Gene. 2013 Jan 1;512(1):76-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.034. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Han
Chinese population: a meta-analysis.

Zhang BC(1), Li WM, Zhu MY, Xu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been reported to be 
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but the available data on this
relationship are inconsistent in Han Chinese populations. A meta-analysis was
performed to quantitatively analyze the association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms 
with T2DM using previous case-control studies in Chinese Han populations. Several
electronic databases were searched for relevant articles up to May 2012. After
data collection and gene loci selection, a meta-analysis was performed to assess 
heterogeneity, combine results and evaluate variations. Publication bias was
examined by the Egger's linear regression test. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) 
test and by omitting one study at a time were employed for the sensitivity
analysis. Eighteen studies from sixteen eligible papers were included in the
meta-analysis. Ten eligible studies were analyzed for rs7903146, and eight were
analyzed for rs290487. We found that the rs7903146 T allele was associated with
an increased risk for T2DM under a dominant model, a co-dominant model and an
allele contrast model, with an OR of 1.54 (1.32, 1.79), an OR of 1.53 (1.31,
1.79) and an OR of 1.52 (1.31, 1.76), respectively. The rs290487 C allele showed 
no significant overall association with T2DM, yielding ORs of 1.08 (0.88, 1.32)
under a dominant model, with strong evidence of heterogeneity. Similar results
were also obtained in other genetic models. Sensitivity analysis confirmed the
reliability and stability of this meta-analysis. The accumulated evidence
suggested that the rs7903146 T allele was associated with an increased risk for
T2DM, but the rs290487 C allele is not associated with T2DM in the Chinese Han
population. More well-designed large studies are required for the validation of
this association.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Ophthalmic Genet. 2013 Mar-Jun;34(1-2):32-4. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2012.726396.
Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Confirmation of the association between the TCF4 risk allele and Fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy in patients from the Midwestern United States.

Stamler JF(1), Roos BR, Wagoner MD, Goins KM, Kitzmann AS, Riley JB, Stone EM,
Fingert JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa Carver
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the role of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
(rs613872) in the TCF4 gene in Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in
patients from Iowa.
METHODS: A cohort of 82 patients with FECD and 163 normal control subjects from
Iowa were genotyped at the SNP rs613872 using a real-time allelic discrimination 
assay.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the alleles of rs613872 were compared between FECD
patients and control subjects. A highly significant association (p-value = 2.96 ×
10(-10)) was detected between this SNP and FECD. Comparison of the genotypes of
SNP rs613872 between FECD patients and control subjects produced a p-value of
2.43 × 10(-10).
CONCLUSION: Prior reports have shown that SNP rs613872 in the TCF4 gene is highly
associated with FECD. Our study confirms this association and shows that the TCF4
gene has an important role in the pathogenesis of corneal disease in patients
from Iowa.

PMID: 22998502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):651-8. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0323-2.

From mice to humans.

McMurray F(1), Moir L, Cox RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Harwell, Mammalian Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell
Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, OX11 0RD, UK.

The genomes of many species have now been completely sequenced including human
and mouse. Great progress has been made in understanding the complex genetics
that underlie diabetes and obesity in human populations. One of the current
challenges is the functional identification and characterization of the genes
within loci that are being mapped. There are many approaches to this problem and 
this review outlines the valuable role that the mouse can play. We outline the
mouse resources that are available to the research community, including knockouts
with conditional potential for every gene, and the efforts of the International
Mouse Phenotyping Consortium to attach phenotype information to these genes. We
also briefly consider the potential of TALEN technology to tailor-make new mouse 
models of specific mutations discovered in humans. Finally, we consider the
recent progress in characterizing the GWAS genes FTO, TCF7L2, CDKAL1, and SLC30A8
in engineered mouse models.

PMCID: PMC3488608
PMID: 22996130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):686-96. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0326-z.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes in East Asian populations.

Cho YS(1), Lee JY, Park KS, Nho CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Hallym University, Gangwon-do, Chuncheon,
200-702, Republic of Korea. yooncho33@hallym.ac.kr

Because type 2 diabetes (T2D) is highly familial, there has been a concentrated
effort to uncover the genetic basis of T2D worldwide over the last decade. In
East Asians, T2D is experiencing a rapidly rising prevalence that is
characterized by a relatively lower body mass index, as compared with that in
Europeans. To date, at least 15 convincing T2D loci have been identified from
large-scale genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses in East Asians.
Many of these are likely responsible for pancreatic ß cell function, as indicated
in studies from Europeans. Many T2D loci have been replicated across the ethnic
groups. There are, however, substantial interethnic differences in frequency and 
effect size of these risk alleles. Despite accumulating genetic information on
T2D, there are still limitations in our ability to explain the rapidly rising
prevalence and lean phenotype of disease observed in East Asians, suggesting that
more extensive work using diverse research strategies is needed in the future.

PMID: 22993124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Nov 1;303(9):E1166-76. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00249.2012. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 is upregulated by insulin and represses
hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Ip W(1), Shao W, Chiang YT, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) are strongly associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes. TCF7L2 and
ß-catenin (ß-cat) form the bipartite transcription factor cat/TCF in stimulating 
Wnt target gene expression. cat/TCF may also mediate the effect of other
signaling cascades, including that of cAMP and insulin in cell-type specific
manners. As carriers of TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes risk SNPs demonstrated increased
hepatic glucose production, we aimed to determine whether TCF7L2 expression is
regulated by nutrient availability and whether TCF7L2 and Wnt regulate hepatic
gluconeogenesis. We examined hepatic Wnt activity in the TOPGAL transgenic mouse,
assessed hepatic TCF7L2 expression in mice upon feeding, determined the effect of
insulin on TCF7L2 expression and ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation, and investigated
the effect of Wnt activation and TCF7L2 knockdown on gluconeogenic gene
expression and glucose production in hepatocytes. Wnt activity was observed in
pericentral hepatocytes in the TOPGAL mouse, whereas TCF7L2 expression was
detected in human and mouse hepatocytes. Insulin and feeding stimulated hepatic
TCF7L2 expression in vitro and in vivo, respectively. In addition, insulin
activated ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation. Wnt activation by intraperitoneal lithium
injection repressed hepatic gluconeogenic gene expression in vivo, whereas
lithium or Wnt-3a reduced gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose production in
hepatic cells in vitro. Small interfering RNA-mediated TCF7L2 knockdown increased
glucose production and gluconeogenic gene expression in cultured hepatocytes.
These observations suggest that Wnt signaling and TCF7L2 are negative regulators 
of hepatic gluconeogenesis, and TCF7L2 is among the downstream effectors of
insulin in hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC3492858
PMID: 22967502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):789-800. doi: 10.2337/db12-0365. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 controls gut and brain proglucagon gene
expression and glucose homeostasis.

Shao W(1), Wang D, Chiang YT, Ip W, Zhu L, Xu F, Columbus J, Belsham DD, Irwin
DM, Zhang H, Wen X, Wang Q, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):706-8.

The type 2 diabetes risk gene TCF7L2 is the effector of the Wnt signaling
pathway. We found previously that in gut endocrine L-cell lines, TCF7L2 controls 
transcription of the proglucagon gene (gcg), which encodes the incretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). Whereas peripheral GLP-1 stimulates insulin
secretion, brain GLP-1 controls energy homeostasis through yet-to-be defined
mechanisms. We aim to determine the metabolic effect of a functional knockdown of
TCF7L2 by generating transgenic mice that express dominant-negative TCF7L2
(TCF7L2DN) specifically in gcg-expressing cells. The gcg-TCF7L2DN transgenic mice
showed reduced gcg expression in their gut and brain, but not in pancreas.
Defects in glucose homeostasis were observed in these mice, associated with
attenuated plasma insulin levels in response to glucose challenge. The defect in 
glucose disposal was exacerbated with high-fat diet. Brain Wnt activity and
feeding-mediated hypothalamic AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) repression in
these mice were impaired. Peripheral injection of the cAMP-promoting agent
forskolin increased brain ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation and brain gcg expression
and restored feeding-mediated hypothalamic AMPK repression. We conclude that
TCF7L2 and Wnt signaling control gut and brain gcg expression and glucose
homeostasis and speculate that positive cross-talk between Wnt and GLP-1/cAMP
signaling is an underlying mechanism for brain GLP-1 in exerting its metabolic
functions.

PMCID: PMC3581223
PMID: 22966074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Apr;31(3):228-36. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2876. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

The Wnt/ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4 pathway up-regulates high-mobility group A1
expression in colon cancer.

Bush BM(1), Brock AT, Deng JA, Nelson RA, Sumter TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Physics, and Geology, Winthrop University, Rock Hill,
SC 29733, USA.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) encodes proteins that act as mediators in viral
integration, modification of chromatin structure, neoplastic transformation and
metastatic progression. Because HMGA1 is overexpressed in most cancers and has
transcriptional relationships with several Wnt-responsive genes, we explored the 
involvement of HMGA1 in Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling. In adenomatous polyposis 
coli (APC(Min/+)) mice, we observed significant up-regulation of HMGA1 mRNA and
protein in intestinal tumours when compared with normal intestinal mucosa.
Conversely, restoration of Wnt signalling by the zinc induction of wild-type APC 
resulted in HMGA1 down-regulation in HT-29 cells. Because APC mutations are
associated with mobilization of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional complex and
subsequent activation of downstream oncogenic targets, we analyzed the
5'-flanking sequence of HMGA1 for putative TCF-4 binding elements. We identified 
two regions that specifically bind the ß-catenin/TCF-4 complex in vitro and in
vivo, identifying HMGA1 as an immediate target of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling 
pathway in colon cancer. Collectively, these findings strongly implicate
Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling in regulating HMGA1 to further expand the
extensive regulatory network affected by Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3616152
PMID: 22961697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Stem Cells. 2012 Nov;30(11):2366-77. doi: 10.1002/stem.1219.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors stimulate dedifferentiation of human breast cancer
cells through WNT/ß-catenin signaling.

Debeb BG(1), Lacerda L, Xu W, Larson R, Solley T, Atkinson R, Sulman EP, Ueno NT,
Krishnamurthy S, Reuben JM, Buchholz TA, Woodward WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Recent studies have shown that differentiated cancer cells can dedifferentiate
into cancer stem cells (CSCs) although to date no studies have reported whether
this transition is influenced by systemic anti-cancer agents. Valproic acid (VA) 
is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that promotes self-renewal and
expansion of hematopoietic stem cells and facilitates the generation of induced
pluripotent stem cells from somatic cells and is currently being investigated in 
breast cancer clinical trials. We hypothesized that HDAC inhibitors reprogram
differentiated cancer cells toward the more resistant stem cell-like state. Two
highly aggressive breast cancer cell lines, SUM159 and MDA-231, were sorted based
on aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity and subsequently ALDH-negative and
ALDH-positive cells were treated with one of two known HDAC inhibitors, VA or
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid. In addition, primary tumor cells from patients
with metastatic breast cancer were evaluated for ALDH activity following
treatment with HDAC inhibitors. We demonstrate that single-cell-sorted
ALDH-negative cells spontaneously generated ALDH-positive cells in vitro.
Treatment of ALDH-negative cells with HDAC inhibitors promoted the expansion of
ALDH-positive cells and increased mammosphere-forming efficiency. Most
importantly, it significantly increased the tumor-initiating capacity of
ALDH-negative cells in limiting dilution outgrowth assays. Moreover, while HDAC
inhibitors upregulated ß-catenin expression and significantly increased WNT
reporter activity, a TCF4 dominant negative construct abolished
HDAC-inhibitor-induced expansion of CSCs. These results demonstrate that HDAC
inhibitors promote the expansion of breast CSCs through dedifferentiation and
have important clinical implications for the use of HDAC inhibitors in the
treatment of cancer.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4545658
PMID: 22961641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r52.

Cell type-specific binding patterns reveal that TCF7L2 can be tethered to the
genome by association with GATA3.

Frietze S(1), Wang R, Yao L, Tak YG, Ye Z, Gaddis M, Witt H, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TCF7L2 transcription factor is linked to a variety of human
diseases, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. One mechanism by which TCF7L2
could influence expression of genes involved in diverse diseases is by binding to
distinct regulatory regions in different tissues. To test this hypothesis, we
performed ChIP-seq for TCF7L2 in six human cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified 116,000 non-redundant TCF7L2 binding sites, with only
1,864 sites common to the six cell lines. Using ChIP-seq, we showed that many
genomic regions that are marked by both H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are also bound by
TCF7L2, suggesting that TCF7L2 plays a critical role in enhancer activity.
Bioinformatic analysis of the cell type-specific TCF7L2 binding sites revealed
enrichment for multiple transcription factors, including HNF4alpha and FOXA2
motifs in HepG2 cells and the GATA3 motif in MCF7 cells. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that TCF7L2 co-localizes with HNF4alpha and FOXA2 in HepG2 cells and
with GATA3 in MCF7 cells. Interestingly, in MCF7 cells the TCF7L2 motif is
enriched in most TCF7L2 sites but is not enriched in the sites bound by both
GATA3 and TCF7L2. This analysis suggested that GATA3 might tether TCF7L2 to the
genome at these sites. To test this hypothesis, we depleted GATA3 in MCF7 cells
and showed that TCF7L2 binding was lost at a subset of sites. RNA-seq analysis
suggested that TCF7L2 represses transcription when tethered to the genome via
GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate a novel relationship between GATA3 and
TCF7L2, and reveal important insights into TCF7L2-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3491396
PMID: 22951069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Diabetologia. 2012 Dec;55(12):3296-307. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2693-z. Epub 2012
Sep 4.

TCF7L2 promotes beta cell regeneration in human and mouse pancreas.

Shu L(1), Zien K, Gutjahr G, Oberholzer J, Pattou F, Kerr-Conte J, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Interactions Bremen, University of Bremen, Leobener
Strasse NW2, Bremen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Diabetes is characterised by loss and dysfunction of the beta
cell. A major goal of diabetes therapy is to promote the formation of new beta
cells. Polymorphisms of T cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with type 
2 diabetes, negatively regulating beta cell survival and function. Here, we
provide evidence for a role of TCF7L2 in beta cell proliferation and
regeneration.
METHODS: Pancreatic sections from three mouse models (high-fat diet, exendin-4
and streptozotocin-treated mice) and from healthy individuals and patients with
type 2 diabetes were used to investigate the association of beta cell
regeneration and TCF7L2 levels. To analyse a direct effect of TCF7L2 on duct cell
to beta cell conversion, TCF7L2 was overexpressed in isolated exocrine cells.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 levels correlated with beta cell compensation during high-fat
diet feeding. TCF7L2 was increased together with pancreatic duct cell
proliferation and differentiation. Small islet-like cell clusters (ICCs) that
contained TCF7L2 originated in the vicinity of the ductal epithelium. In human
isolated exocrine tissue, TCF7L2 overexpression induced proliferation of
pancreatic duct cells and ICC formation next to duct cells, an effect dependent
on the JAK2/STAT3 pathway.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The present study demonstrates that TCF7L2
overexpression fosters beta cell regeneration. Our findings imply correlation of 
TCF7L2 levels and new beta cell formation.

PMID: 22945304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Genet. 2012 Aug;91(2):251-5.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variations associated with earlier
age-onset of type 2 diabetes in Thai patients.

Tangjittipokin W(1), Chongjarean N, Plengvidhya N, Homsanit M, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

PMID: 22942101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Nov 15;21(22):5010-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds339. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Pancreatic beta-cell function and type 2 diabetes risk: quantify the causal
effect using a Mendelian randomization approach based on meta-analyses.

Song Y(1), Yeung E, Liu A, Vanderweele TJ, Chen L, Lu C, Liu C, Schisterman EF,
Ning Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing,
China.

The objective of the study is to quantify the causal effect of ß-cell function on
type 2 diabetes by minimizing residual confounding and reverse causation. We
employed a Mendelian randomization (MR) approach using TCF7L2 variant rs7903146
as an instrument for lifelong levels of ß-cell function. We first conducted two
sets of meta-analyses to quantify the association of the TCF7L2 variant with the 
risk of type 2 diabetes among 55 436 cases and 106 020 controls from 66 studies
by calculating pooled odds ratio (OR) and to quantify the associations with
multiple direct or indirect measures of ß-cell function among 35 052 non-diabetic
individuals from 31 studies by calculating pooled mean difference. We further
applied the method of MR to obtain the causal estimates for the effect of ß-cell 
function on type 2 diabetes risk based on findings from the meta-analyses. The OR
[95% confidence interval (CI)] was 0.87 (0.81-0.93) for each five unit increment 
in homeostasis model assessment of insulin secretion (HOMA-%B) (P = 3.0 ×
10(-5)). In addition, for measures based on intravenous glucose tolerance test,
ORs (95% CI) associated with type 2 diabetes risk were 0.24 (0.08-0.74) (P =
0.01) and 0.14 (0.04-0.48) (P = 0.002) for per 1 standard deviation increment in 
insulin sensitivity index and disposition index, respectively. Findings from the 
present study lend support to a causal role of pancreatic ß-cell function itself 
in the etiology of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3607483
PMID: 22936689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Nov 1;84(9):1143-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.08.011. Epub
2012 Aug 19.

The ß-catenin/TCF complex as a novel target of resveratrol in the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway.

Chen HJ(1), Hsu LS, Shia YT, Lin MW, Lin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Molecular Systems Biomedicine, China Medical University,
Taichung 404, Taiwan.

Wnts are secreted glycolipoproteins that play important roles in the regulation
of embryonic development and tissue homeostasis. Binding of Wnt to receptors and 
co-receptors causes inactivation of the ß-catenin destruction complex, which
leads to the stabilization and nuclear translocation of ß-catenin to initiate
Wnt-responsive gene expression after associating with TCF in the nucleus. As its 
deregulation results in serious human diseases, especially cancers, the Wnt
signaling pathway serves as a promising platform for screening anti-cancer drugs.
Resveratrol was selected based on its ability to inhibit the
ß-catenin/TCF-mediated transcriptional activity. Resveratrol, a natural
phytoalexin found in a variety of plants, possesses health-promoting properties
including anti-aging, anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-cancer,
cardioprotective and neuroprotective activities. We found that resveratrol indeed
exhibited dose-dependent suppression of Wnt signaling, reduced the expression of 
Wnt target genes such as cyclin D1 and conductin, and inhibited the growth of
Wnt-stimulated cells and Wnt-driven colorectal cancer cells. Further studies
indicated that resveratrol functions downstream of GSK3ß. Treatment with
resveratrol did not alter the amount of ß-catenin and its distribution in the
cytoplasm and nucleus, suggesting that resveratrol did not affect the
accumulation and nuclear targeting of ß-catenin. In contrast,
co-immunoprecipitation and in vitro binding analyses substantiated that
resveratrol was capable of disrupting the binding between ß-catenin and TCF4,
contributing to the decreased Wnt signaling. Our discoveries not only reveal a
novel target of resveratrol in the Wnt signaling pathway but also show the
potential of therapy with harmless resveratrol in colorectal cancer and other
Wnt-related diseases.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22935447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome.

Ardinger HH, Welsh HI, Saunders CJ.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2012 Aug 30.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by
distinctive facial features which become more apparent with age (100%),
developmental delay/intellectual disability (100%), and episodic hyperventilation
and/or breath-holding while awake (55%-60%). Global developmental delays are
significant and intellectual disability is moderate to severe: mean age of
walking is four to six years; most affected individuals are nonverbal. Other
common findings are behavioral issues, hand stereotypic movements, seizures
(40%-50%), constipation, and severe myopia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is suspected on clinical findings and confirmed 
on molecular genetic testing of TCF4.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Developmental services for infants
(physical, occupational, speech therapies); special education services focused on
life skills for older children; behavioral modification as needed for
self-injurious behavior or anxiety; possible treatment of abnormal respiratory
pattern with sodium valproate. Routine management of seizures, myopia,
constipation, scoliosis, and abnormal foot positioning. Surveillance: Ongoing
developmental assessments to tailor educational services to individual needs;
regular follow up with an ophthalmologist to monitor for high myopia and
strabismus; periodic reevaluation with a medical genetics professional regarding 
current information and recommendations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PTHS is caused by haploinsufficiency of TCF4 resulting from
either a mutation in TCF4 or a deletion of the chromosomal region in which TCF4
is located (18q21.2). Most affected individuals reported to date have been
simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) resulting from a de novo
mutation or deletion. The risk to sibs of a proband is low, but higher than that 
of the general population because of the possibility of parental germline
mosaicism. Prenatal diagnosis of pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the
genetic diagnosis has been established in an affected family member.

PMID: 22934316  [PubMed]


11. Diabetes. 2012 Dec;61(12):3314-21. doi: 10.2337/db11-0550. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Contribution of common genetic variation to the risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Mexican Mestizo population.

Gamboa-Meléndez MA(1), Huerta-Chagoya A, Moreno-Macías H, Vázquez-Cárdenas P,
Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Rodríguez-Guillén R, Riba L, Rodríguez-Torres M,
Guerra-García MT, Guillén-Pineda LE, Choudhry S, Del Bosque-Plata L,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Pérez-Ortiz G, Escobedo-Aguirre F, Parra A, Lerman-Garber 
I, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México e Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

Several studies have identified nearly 40 different type 2 diabetes
susceptibility loci, mainly in European populations, but few of them have been
evaluated in the Mexican population. The aim of this study was to examine the
extent to which 24 common genetic variants previously associated with type 2
diabetes are associated in Mexican Mestizos. Twenty-four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near genes (KCNJ11, PPARG, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKN2A/2B, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, ARHGEF11, JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, FTO, TSPAN8/LGR5,
KCNQ1, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, NXPH1, RORA, UBQLNL, and RALGPS2) were genotyped
in Mexican Mestizos. A case-control association study comprising 1,027 type 2
diabetic individuals and 990 control individuals was conducted. To account for
population stratification, a panel of 104 ancestry-informative markers was
analyzed. Association to type 2 diabetes was found for rs13266634 (SLC30A8),
rs7923837 (HHEX), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs12779790
(CDC123/CAMK1D), and rs2237892 (KCNQ1). In addition, rs7754840 (CDKAL1) was
associated in the nonobese type 2 diabetic subgroup, and for rs7903146 (TCF7L2), 
association was observed for early-onset type 2 diabetes. Lack of association for
the rest of the variants may have resulted from insufficient power to detect
smaller allele effects.

PMCID: PMC3501881
PMID: 22923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043390. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Effects of rs7903146 variation in the Tcf7l2 gene in the lipid metabolism of
three different populations.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Perez-Caballero AI, Garcia-Rios A, Yubero-Serrano EM,
Camargo A, Gomez-Luna MJ, Marin C, Gomez-Luna P, Dembinska-Kiec A,
Rodriguez-Cantalejo F, Tinahones FJ, Roche HM, Perez-Jimenez F, Lopez-Miranda J, 
Delgado-Lista J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC/Hospital Universitario Reina
Sofía/Universidad de Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 rs7903146 is an important genetic factor predicting type 2
diabetes (T2DM) which has also been linked to higher cardiovascular risk. To
date, there is little information about the additional impact of this single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) beyond glucose metabolism.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied whether rs7903146 influenced
postprandial lipid metabolism in three different populations (healthy young men, 
metabolic syndrome (MetS) patients and elderly persons). Eighty-eight healthy
males were submitted to a single saturated fatty acid-rich test meal.
Additionally, 110 middle-aged MetS patients and 20 healthy elderly persons (= 65 
years) were submitted to three different dietary models followed by test meals.
Minor allele homozygotes for rs7903146 showed a worse postprandial lipemia
profile in young males, as seen by a lower HDL-cholesterol and Apo A1
concentration during the postprandial lipemia and a trend towards higher
triglycerides (TG), than the other genotypes. In healthy elderly persons,
carriers of the minor allele showed higher total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol,
Apo B and TG in the fasting state, and a higher postprandial area under the curve
for total cholesterol, Apo B, small-triglyceride rich lipoprotein (TRL)
cholesterol and small-(TRL) triglycerides. These results were accompanied by
differential changes in adipokines. We did not observe any influence of rs7903146
on the postprandium of MetS patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Healthy young males and elderly persons who are
carriers of the mutant allele for rs7903146 have an impaired postprandial lipid
metabolism that may be mediated by an alteration in adipokine regulation, and may
be related to the higher cardiovascular risk observed in these persons.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00429195.

PMCID: PMC3423356
PMID: 22916254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2677-81. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2660-8. Epub 2012 
Aug 22.

TCF7L2 rs7903146 impairs islet function and morphology in non-diabetic
individuals.

Le Bacquer O(1), Kerr-Conte J, Gargani S, Delalleau N, Huyvaert M, Gmyr V,
Froguel P, Neve B, Pattou F.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a
Wnt-signalling-associated transcription factor. Genetic studies have clearly
demonstrated that DNA polymorphisms within TCF7L2 confer the strongest known
association with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the impact of the
TCF7L2 type-2-diabetes-associated rs7903146 T allele on biological function and
morphology of human pancreatic islets is unknown.
METHODS: Paraffin sections of pancreases from 187 brain-deceased donors (HbA(1c) 
<6.5% [48 mmol/mol]) were used to genotype the TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 and
evaluate its impact on islet morphology and alpha and beta cell subpopulations
following immunostaining for glucagon and C-peptide. Following islet isolation,
we investigated the correlation between TCF7L2 genotype and in vitro islet
functional variables from our in-house pancreatic database.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T/T) was associated with reduced basal and
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in isolated human islets, and reduced islet 
density in whole pancreas. Morphological analysis demonstrated islet size was
increased in T/T carriers. Furthermore, rs7903146 was associated with an
increased glucagon/C-peptide ratio, especially in bigger islets.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 risk allele is associated
with impaired insulin secretion, reduction of total islet number and quantitative
as well as qualitative morphological changes in human islets. Understanding how
the TCF7L2 genotype modulates its activity and how TCF7L2 impacts the islet
morphology may aid the design of new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 22911383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 1;371(1):23-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.033. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Hedgehog and Wnt coordinate signaling in myogenic progenitors and regulate limb
regeneration.

Singh BN(1), Doyle MJ, Weaver CV, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street, SE.
MMC508, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Amphibians have a remarkable capacity for limb regeneration. Following a severe
injury, there is complete regeneration with restoration of the patterning and
cellular architecture of the amputated limb. While studies have focused on the
structural anatomical changes during amphibian limb regeneration, the signaling
mechanisms that govern cellular dedifferentiation and blastemal progenitors are
unknown. Here, we demonstrate the temporal and spatial requirement for hedgehog
(Hh) signaling and its hierarchical correlation with respect to Wnt signaling
during newt limb regeneration. While the dedifferentiation process of mature
lineages does not depend on Hh signaling, the proliferation and the migration of 
the dedifferentiated cells are dependent on Hh signaling. Temporally controlled
chemical inactivation of the Hh pathway indicates that Hh-mediated
antero-posterior (AP) specification occurs early during limb regeneration and
that Hh is subsequently required for expansion of the blastemal progenitors.
Inhibition of Hh signaling results in G0/G1 arrest with a concomitant reduction
in S-phase and G2/M population in myogenic progenitors. Furthermore, Hh
inhibition leads to reduced Pax7-positive cells and fewer regenerating fibers
relative to control tissue. We demonstrate that activation of Wnt signaling
rescues the inhibition of Hh pathway mainly by enhancing proliferative signals,
possibly mediated through TCF4 activity. Collectively, our results demonstrate
coordinated signaling of Hh and Wnt activities in regulating blastemal
progenitors and their hierarchical positioning during limb regeneration.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3987681
PMID: 22902898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nature. 2012 Aug 30;488(7413):660-4. doi: 10.1038/nature11282.

Recurrent R-spondin fusions in colon cancer.

Seshagiri S(1), Stawiski EW, Durinck S, Modrusan Z, Storm EE, Conboy CB,
Chaudhuri S, Guan Y, Janakiraman V, Jaiswal BS, Guillory J, Ha C, Dijkgraaf GJ,
Stinson J, Gnad F, Huntley MA, Degenhardt JD, Haverty PM, Bourgon R, Wang W,
Koeppen H, Gentleman R, Starr TK, Zhang Z, Largaespada DA, Wu TD, de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. sekar@gene.com

Identifying and understanding changes in cancer genomes is essential for the
development of targeted therapeutics. Here we analyse systematically more than 70
pairs of primary human colon tumours by applying next-generation sequencing to
characterize their exomes, transcriptomes and copy-number alterations. We have
identified 36,303 protein-altering somatic changes that include several new
recurrent mutations in the Wnt pathway gene TCF7L2, chromatin-remodelling genes
such as TET2 and TET3 and receptor tyrosine kinases including ERBB3. Our analysis
for significantly mutated cancer genes identified 23 candidates, including the
cell cycle checkpoint kinase ATM. Copy-number and RNA-seq data analysis
identified amplifications and corresponding overexpression of IGF2 in a subset of
colon tumours. Furthermore, using RNA-seq data we identified multiple fusion
transcripts including recurrent gene fusions involving R-spondin family members
RSPO2 and RSPO3 that together occur in 10% of colon tumours. The RSPO fusions
were mutually exclusive with APC mutations, indicating that they probably have a 
role in the activation of Wnt signalling and tumorigenesis. Consistent with this 
we show that the RSPO fusion proteins were capable of potentiating Wnt
signalling. The R-spondin gene fusions and several other gene mutations
identified in this study provide new potential opportunities for therapeutic
intervention in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3690621
PMID: 22895193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;36(5):473-83. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Aberrant expression of Wnt and Notch signal pathways in Barrett's esophagus.

Chen X(1), Jiang K, Fan Z, Liu Z, Zhang P, Zheng L, Peng N, Tong J, Ji G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Endoscopy and Medical Center for Digestive Diseases,
Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 121, Jing Jiayuan,
Nanjing 210011, China.

BACKGROUND: Specialized intestinal metaplasia (SIM) mucosa observed in Barrett's 
esophagus (BE) has been a hot research topic due to the close relationship with
adenocarcinoma of esophagus (ACE). Earlier studies found that SIM mucosa was
similar to normal intestinal epithelium on morphology and histology. The signal
pathway involved in conformation of intestinal epithelium may be a critical
initiator for BE.
METHODS: The expressions of key regulators (Tcf4, Cdx2, Hes1 and Math1) in Wnt
and Notch signal pathways were measured in 41 paired esophageal biopsies. Cell
morphological changes in normal esophagus were compared among groups treated by
acid, bile acid and the mixture of both media.
RESULTS: The expression levels of regulators (Tcf4, Cdx2, Hes1 and Math1) were
found significantly increased in SIM, C = 3Mn and high-grade dysplasia (HGD)
groups. Distinct ultrastructure changes and highly expressed key regulators were 
also detected at the seventh day for group treated by 400 µmol bile acid.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant expressed regulators in Wnt and Notch pathways were
observed in BE tissue and normal esophageal cells treated by acid, bile acid and 
the mixture of both media. This study provided preliminary data to understand the
mechanism of BE conformation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22889748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Rev Bras Reumatol. 2012 Aug;52(4):523-8.

Lack of association between the CC genotype of the rs7903146 polymorphism in the 
TCF7L2 gene and rheumatoid arthritis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Mota LM(1), Rabelo Fde S, Lima FA, Lima RA, Carvalho JF, Barra GB, Amato AA.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Reumatologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, DF, Brazil. liciamhmota@yahoo.com.br

INTRODUCTION: TCF7L2 is a transcription factor involved in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling and which has a variant known to be consistently associated with type 2
diabetes risk and some studies have also indicated its association with risk of
certain types of cancer.
OBJECTIVE: Since this pathway may be involved in the pathophysiology of other
chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, we aimed to
investigate the effect of TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 on rheumatoid arthritis
severity in a Brazilian population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This polymorphism was genotyped in 208 patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and in 104 healthy controls. We also analyzed the
association of this polymorphism to smoking history, functional status
classification and radiological indicators of disease severity.
RESULTS: The distribution of CC, CT and TT genotypes of SNP rs7903146 of the
TCF7L2 gene was not different between patients and controls, and no association
between the genotype and indicators of disease severity or smoking history was
found. When data were evaluated using the dominant model, in which carriers of
the CT and TT genotypes were grouped, an increase in the T allele was observed in
patients positive for rheumatoid factor and erosions, although this was not
significant. The frequency of T allele was also increased in patients with
functional class II compared to class I (P = 0.032).
CONCLUSION: It is possible that the small number of patients included in this
study may have restrained additional findings. Further studies are therefore
needed to investigate the role of TCF7L2 gene variants in the risk of rheumatoid 
arthritis and its severity.

PMID: 22885420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 15;72(8):620-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.05.035.
Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Genome-wide association study implicates HLA-C*01:02 as a risk factor at the
major histocompatibility complex locus in schizophrenia.

Irish Schizophrenia Genomics Consortium and the Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium 2.

Collaborators: Donnelly P, Barroso I, Blackwell JM, Bramon E, Brown MA, Casas JP,
Corvin A, Deloukas P, Duncanson A, Jankowski J, Markus HS, Mathew CG, Palmer CN, 
Plomin R, Rautanen A, Sawcer SJ, Trembath RC, Viswanathan AC, Wood NW, Spencer
CC, Band G, Bellenguez C, Dilthey A, Freeman C, Hellenthal G, Giannoulatou E,
McVean G, Moutsianas L, Pirinen M, Pearson R, Strange A, Su Z,
Tashakkori-Ghanbaria A, Vukcevic D, Donnelly P, Langford C, Hunt SE, Edkins S,
Gwilliam R, Blackburn H, Bumpstead SJ, Dronov S, Gillman M, Gray E, Hammond N,
Jayakumar A, McCann OT, Liddle J, Potter SC, Ravindrarajah R, Ricketts M, Waller 
M, Weston P, Widaa S, Whittaker P, Barroso I, Deloukas P, Riley BP, Morris DW,
O'Dushlaine T, Maher BS, Cormican P, Kenny EM, Wormley B, Donohoe G, Quinn E,
Judge R, Coleman K, Tropea D, Roche S, Cummings L, Kelleher E, McKeon P, Dinan T,
McDonald C, Murphy KC, O'Callaghan E, O'Neill FA, Waddington JL, Walsh D, Stone
J, Scolnick E, Purcell S, Sklar P, Ripke S, Walters J, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC,
Kendler KS, Corvin A, Gill M.

BACKGROUND: We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify
common risk variants for schizophrenia.
METHODS: The discovery scan included 1606 patients and 1794 controls from
Ireland, using 6,212,339 directly genotyped or imputed single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). A subset of this sample (270 cases and 860 controls) was
subsequently included in the Psychiatric GWAS Consortium-schizophrenia GWAS
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: One hundred eight SNPs were taken forward for replication in an
independent sample of 13,195 cases and 31,021 control subjects. The most
significant associations in discovery, corrected for genomic inflation, were
(rs204999, p combined = 1.34 × 10(-9) and in combined samples (rs2523722 p
combined = 2.88 × 10(-16)) mapped to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
region. We imputed classical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles at the locus; 
the most significant finding was with HLA-C*01:02. This association was distinct 
from the top SNP signal. The HLA alleles DRB1*03:01 and B*08:01 were protective, 
replicating a previous study.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further support for involvement of MHC class I
molecules in schizophrenia. We found evidence of association with previously
reported risk alleles at the TCF4, VRK2, and ZNF804A loci.

Copyright © 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3529467
PMID: 22883433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Schizophr Res. 2012 Oct;141(1):60-4. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.06.038. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

Experimental validation of candidate schizophrenia gene ZNF804A as target for
hsa-miR-137.

Kim AH(1), Parker EK, Williamson V, McMichael GO, Fanous AH, Vladimirov VI.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Institute for Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, Department of
Psychiatry, Medical College of Virginia of Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that mainly function as negative
regulators of gene expression (Lai, 2002) and have been shown to be involved in
schizophrenia etiology through genetic and expression studies (Burmistrova et
al., 2007; Hansen et al., 2007a; Perkins et al., 2007; Beveridge et al., 2010;
Kim et al., 2010). In a mega analysis of genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 
schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorders (BP), a polymorphism (rs1625579) located
in the primary transcript of a miRNA gene, hsa-miR-137, was reported to be
strongly associated with SZ. Four SZ loci (CACNA1C, TCF4, CSMD1, C10orf26)
achieving genome-wide significance in the same study were predicted and later
experimentally validated (Kwon et al., 2011) as hsa-miR-137 targets. Here, using 
in silico, cellular and luciferase based approaches we also provide evidence that
another well replicated candidate schizophrenia gene, ZNF804A, is also target for
hsa-miR-137.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4104606
PMID: 22883350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Physiol Genomics. 2012 Oct 2;44(19):903-14. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00030.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Using gene-network landscape to dissect genotype effects of TCF7L2 genetic
variant on diabetes and cardiovascular risk.

Vaquero AR(1), Ferreira NE, Omae SV, Rodrigues MV, Teixeira SK, Krieger JE,
Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute, University
of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the TCF7L2 gene, rs7903146, is,
to date, the most significant genetic marker associated with Type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) risk. Nonetheless, its functional role in disease pathology is
poorly understood. The aim of the present study was to investigate, in vascular
smooth muscle cells from 92 patients undergoing aortocoronary bypass surgery, the
contribution of this SNP in T2DM using expression levels and expression
correlation comparison approaches, which were visually represented as gene
interaction networks. Initially, the expression levels of 41 genes (seven TCF7L2 
splice forms and 40 other T2DM relevant genes) were compared between rs7903146
wild-type (CC) and T2DM-risk (CT + TT) genotype groups. Next, we compared the
expression correlation patterns of these 41 genes between groups to observe if
the relationships between genes were different. Five TCF7L2 splice forms and nine
genes showed significant expression differences between groups. RXRa gene was
pinpointed as showing the most different expression correlation pattern with
other genes. Therefore, T2DM risk alleles appear to be influencing TCF7L2 splice 
form's expression in vascular smooth muscle cells, and RXRa gene is pointed out
as a treatment target candidate for risk reduction in individuals with high risk 
of developing T2DM, especially individuals harboring TCF7L2 risk genotypes.

PMID: 22872755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Sep 1;176(5):423-30. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws123. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

Integrating genetic association, genetics of gene expression, and single
nucleotide polymorphism set analysis to identify susceptibility Loci for type 2
diabetes mellitus.

Greenawalt DM(1), Sieberts SK, Cornelis MC, Girman CJ, Zhong H, Yang X, Guinney
J, Qi L, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Merck Research Laboratories, Pasteur, Boston, MA
02115, USA. danielle_greenawalt@merck.com

Large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified over 40
genomic regions significantly associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. However, 
GWAS results are not always straightforward to interpret, and linking these loci 
to meaningful disease etiology is often difficult without extensive follow-up
studies. The authors expanded on previously reported type 2 diabetes mellitus
GWAS from the nested case-control studies of 2 prospective US cohorts by
incorporating expression single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) information and
applying SNP set enrichment analysis to identify sets of SNPs associated with
genes that could provide further biologic insight to traditional genome-wide
analysis. Using data collected between 1989 and 1994 in these previous studies to
form a nested case-control study, the authors found that 3 of the most
significantly associated SNPs to type 2 diabetes mellitus in their study are
expression SNPs to the lymphocyte antigen 75 gene (LY75), the ubiquitin-specific 
peptidase 36 gene (USP36), and the phosphatidylinositol transfer protein,
cytoplasmic 1 gene (PITPNC1). SNP set enrichment analysis of the GWAS results
identified enrichment for expression SNPs to the macrophage-enriched module and
the Gene Ontology (GO) biologic process fat cell differentiation human, which
includes the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), as well as other type 2
diabetes mellitus-associated genes. Integrating genome-wide association, gene
expression, and gene set analysis may provide valuable biologic support for
potential type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility loci and may be useful in
identifying new targets or pathways of interest for the treatment and prevention 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3499116
PMID: 22865700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2659-1. Epub 2012 
Aug 5.

Impact of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) on pancreatic islet function and
morphology in mice and men.

Renström E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Center, Inga-Marie Nilssons gata 53 floor 3, 205 02
Malmö, Sweden. erik.renstrom@med.lu.se

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2677-81.
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2667-76.

Common genetic variations in the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) reveal the strongest association with type 2-diabetes known to date.
These lead to impaired insulin production and output, but the mechanisms of
disease remain incompletely known. In this issue of Diabetologia, two
publications provide new insights into TCF7L2-dependent diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3433659
PMID: 22864463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013 Jan;15(1):91-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2012.01675.x. 
Epub 2012 Sep 9.

Incretin and pancreatic hormone secretion in Caucasian non-diabetic carriers of
the TCF7L2 rs7903146 risk T allele.

Færch K, Pilgaard K, Knop FK, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Jørgensen T, Holst JJ.

We characterised 62 non-diabetic, middle-aged, Caucasians with and without the T 
risk allele of rs7903146 in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) with regard to
secretion of insulin, glucagon, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) as well as insulin sensitivity and
endogenous glucose production. All participants had a 3-h oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT), an intravenous glucose tolerance test and a euglycaemic,
hyperinsulinaemic clamp. After adjustment for age and sex, risk T allele carriers
had higher haemoglobin A1c levels (p = 0.030), reduced first-phase insulin
response (p = 0.048), higher peripheral insulin sensitivity (p = 0.050) and lower
fasting GIP concentrations (p = 0.003) than CC allele carriers. The latter was
also reflected by lower total GIP secretion during the OGTT (p = 0.018). We found
no significant differences in endogenous glucose production, hepatic insulin
sensitivity or fasting concentrations of glucose, insulin, glucagon and GLP-1
between the groups. The findings suggest that the effect of TCF7L2 on diabetes
risk may include reduced secretion of GIP.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22862926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9455-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks690. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Intrinsic properties of Tcf1 and Tcf4 splice variants determine
cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

Wallmen B(1), Schrempp M, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine and Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Albertstr. 19A, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

T-cell factor (Tcf)/lymphoid-enhancer factor (Lef) proteins are a structurally
diverse family of deoxyribonucleic acid-binding proteins that have essential
nuclear functions in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. Expression of Wnt/ß-catenin target
genes is highly dependent on context, but the precise role of Tcf/Lef family
members in the generation and maintenance of cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin
responses is unknown. Herein, we show that induction of a subset of Wnt/ß-catenin
targets in embryonic stem cells depends on Tcf1 and Tcf4, whereas other
co-expressed Tcf/Lef family members cannot induce these targets. The
Tcf1/Tcf4-dependent gene responses to Wnt are primarily if not exclusively
mediated by C-clamp-containing Tcf1E and Tcf4E splice variants. A combined
knockdown of Tcf1/Tcf4 abrogates Wnt-inducible transcription but does not affect 
the active chromatin conformation of their targets. Thus, the transcriptionally
poised state of Wnt/ß-catenin targets is maintained independent of Tcf/Lef
proteins. Conversely, ectopically overexpressed Tcf1E cannot invade silent
chromatin and fails to initiate expression of inactive Wnt/ß-catenin targets even
if repressive chromatin modifications are abolished. The observed non-redundant
functions of Tcf1/Tcf4 isoforms in acute transcriptional activation demonstrated 
that the cell-type-specific complement of Tcf/Lef proteins is a critical
determinant of context-dependent Wnt/ß-catenin responses. Moreover, the apparent 
inability to cope with chromatin uncovers an intrinsic property of Tcf/Lef
proteins that prevents false ectopic induction and ensures spatiotemporal
stability of Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3479169
PMID: 22859735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32494-511. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is a novel target of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in human cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Toh L, Lau P, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 8 Medical Drive, 
National University of Singapore, 117597 Singapore.

Telomerase activation plays a critical role in human carcinogenesis through the
maintenance of telomeres, but the activation mechanism during carcinogenesis
remains unclear. The human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter has 
been shown to promote hTERT gene expression selectively in tumor cells but not in
normal cells. Deregulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is reported to 
be associated with human carcinogenesis. However, little is known about whether
the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is involved in activating hTERT transcription and
inducing telomerase activity (TA). In this study, we report that hTERT is a novel
target of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. Transient activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway either by transfection of a constitutively active form of ß-catenin or by
LiCl or Wnt-3a conditioned medium treatment induced hTERT mRNA expression and
elevated TA in different cell lines. Furthermore, we found that silencing
endogenous ß-catenin expression by ß-catenin gene-specific shRNA effectively
decreased hTERT expression, suppressed TA, and accelerated telomere shortening.
Of the four members of the lymphoid-enhancing factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF)
family, only TCF4 showed more effective stimulation on the hTERT promoter.
Ectopic expression of a dominant negative form of TCF4 inhibited hTERT expression
in cancer cells. Through promoter mapping, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we found that hTERT is a direct target
of ß-catenin·TCF4-mediated transcription and that the TCF4 binding site at the
hTERT promoter is critical for ß-catenin·TCF4-dependent expression regulation.
Given the pivotal role of telomerase in carcinogenesis, these results may offer
insight into the regulation of telomerase in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3463325
PMID: 22854964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Stem Cells. 2012 Oct;30(10):2076-87. doi: 10.1002/stem.1182.

Embryonic NANOG activity defines colorectal cancer stem cells and modulates
through AP1- and TCF-dependent mechanisms.

Ibrahim EE(1), Babaei-Jadidi R, Saadeddin A, Spencer-Dene B, Hossaini S,
Abuzinadah M, Li N, Fadhil W, Ilyas M, Bonnet D, Nateri AS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Stem Cell Group, Division of Pre-Clinical Oncology,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Embryonic NANOG (NANOG1) is considered as an important regulator of pluripotency 
while NANOGP8 (NANOG-pseudogene) plays a role in tumorigenesis. Herein, we show
NANOG is expressed from both NANOG1 and NANOGP8 in human colorectal cancers
(CRC). Enforced NANOG1-expression increases clonogenic potential and tumor
formation in xenograft models, although it is expressed only in a small
subpopulation of tumor cells and is colocalized with endogenous nuclear
ß-catenin(High) . Moreover, single NANOG1-CRCs form spherical aggregates, similar
to the embryoid body of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and express higher levels of
stem-like Wnt-associated target genes. Furthermore, we show that
NANOG1-expression is positively regulated by c-JUN and ß-catenin/TCF4. Ectopic
expression of c-Jun in murine Apc(Min/+) -ESCs results in the development of
larger xenograft tumors with higher cell density compared to controls. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that c-JUN binds to the NANOG1-promoter
via the octamer M1 DNA element. Collectively, our data suggest that
ß-Catenin/TCF4 and c-JUN together drive a subpopulation of CRC tumor cells that
adopt a stem-like phenotype via the NANOG1-promoter.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22851508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 30;12:21. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-21.

Expression of canonical WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling components in the developing
human lung.

Zhang M(1), Shi J, Huang Y, Lai L.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology, College of
Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Qishan Campus, Fuzhou 350108, People's
Republic of China. biozmf@163.com

BACKGROUND: The WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling cascade is crucial for the patterning of 
the early lung morphogenesis in mice, but its role in the developing human lung
remains to be determined. In this study, expression patterns of canonical
WNT/ß-CATENIN signaling components, including WNT ligands (WNT2, WNT7B),
receptors (FZD4, FZD7, LRP5, LRP6), transducers (DVL2, DVL3, GSK-3ß, ß-CATENIN,
APC, AXIN2), transcription factors (TCF4, LEF1) and antagonists (SOSTDC1) were
examined in human embryonic lung at 7, 12, 17 and 21<U+2009>weeks of gestation (W) by
real-time qRT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: qRT-PCR analysis showed that some of these components were gradually
upregulated, while some were significantly downregulated from the 7<U+2009>W to the
12<U+2009>W. However, most components reached a high level at 17<U+2009>W, with a subsequent
decrease at 21<U+2009>W. In situ hybridization showed that the canonical WNT ligands and
receptors were predominantly located in the peripheral epithelium, whereas the
canonical WNT signal transducers and transcription factors were not only detected
in the respiratory epithelium, but some were also scattered at low levels in the 
surrounding mesenchyme in the developing human lung. Furthermore, Western blot,
qRT-PCR and histological analysis demonstrated that the ß-CATENIN-dependent WNT
signaling in embryonic human lung was activated in vitro by CHIR 99021
stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study of the expression patterns and in vitro activity of the
canonical WNT/ß-CATENIN pathways suggests that these components play an essential
role in regulation of human lung development.

PMCID: PMC3480893
PMID: 22846383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Oct;50(5):789-99. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0418-x. Epub 2012
Jul 28.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes: association with diabetic
retinopathy and cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.

Ciccacci C(1), Di Fusco D, Cacciotti L, Morganti R, D'Amato C, Novelli G,
Sangiuolo F, Spallone V, Borgiani P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Section of Medical Genetics, School 
of Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133, Rome, Italy,
cinziaciccacci@libero.it.

Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is a complex disease resulting from the contribution of
both environmental and genetic factors. Recently, the list of genes implicated in
the susceptibility to T2DM has substantially grown, also as a consequence of the 
great development of the genome-wide association studies in the last decade.
Common polymorphisms in TCF7L2 gene have shown to have a strong effect with
respect to many other involved genes. The aims of our study were to confirm the
role of TCF7L2 in the susceptibility to T2DM in the Italian population and to
investigate whether TCF7L2 genotypes also contribute to the clinical phenotypes
variability and to diabetic complications development. Three TCF7L2 polymorphisms
(rs7903146, rs7901695 and rs12255372) have been analyzed by allelic
discrimination assays in a cohort of 154 Italian patients with T2DM and 171
healthy controls. A case-control association study and a genotype-phenotype
correlation study have been carried out. Consistent with previous studies, all
three SNPs showed a strong association with susceptibility to T2DM, both at
genotypic (P = 0.003, P = 0.004 and P = 0.012) and at allelic level (P = 0.0004, 
P = 0.0004 and P = 0.003). Moreover, we observed associations between TCF7L2
variants and the following diabetic complications: diabetic retinopathy,
cardiovascular disease and coronary artery disease. We also found a strong
correlation between the rs7903146 and the presence of cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy (P = 0.02 with a high OR = 8.28). In conclusion, our study, in
addition to confirming the involvement of TCF7L2 gene in the T2DM susceptibility,
has shown that TCF7L2 genetic variability also contributes to the development of 
diabetic complications such as retinopathy and cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy.

PMID: 22843023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Transl Psychiatry. 2012 May 8;2:e113. doi: 10.1038/tp.2012.42.

Association between SNPs and gene expression in multiple regions of the human
brain.

Kim S(1), Cho H, Lee D, Webster MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Brain Research Laboratory, Stanley Medical Research Institute,
Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Identifying the genetic cis associations between DNA variants (single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs)) and gene expression in brain tissue may be a promising
approach to find functionally relevant pathways that contribute to the etiology
of psychiatric disorders. In this study, we examined the association between
genetic variations and gene expression in prefrontal cortex, hippocampus,
temporal cortex, thalamus and cerebellum in subjects with psychiatric disorders
and in normal controls. We identified cis associations between 648 transcripts
and 6725 SNPs in the various brain regions. Several SNPs showed brain
regional-specific associations. The expression level of only one gene, PDE4DIP,
was associated with a SNP, rs12124527, in all the brain regions tested here. From
our data, we generated a list of brain cis expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTL) genes that we compared with a list of schizophrenia candidate genes
downloaded from the Schizophrenia Forum (SZgene) database
(http://www.szgene.org/). Of the SZgene candidate genes, we found that the
expression levels of four genes, HTR2A, PLXNA2, SRR and TCF4, were significantly 
associated with cis SNPs in at least one brain region tested. One gene, SRR, was 
also involved in a coexpression module that we found to be associated with
disease status. In addition, a substantial number of cis eQTL genes were also
involved in the module, suggesting eQTL analysis of brain tissue may identify
more reliable susceptibility genes for schizophrenia than case-control genetic
association analyses. In an attempt to facilitate the identification of genetic
variations that may underlie the etiology of major psychiatric disorders, we have
integrated the brain eQTL results into a public and online database, Stanley
Neuropathology Consortium Integrative Database (SNCID;
http://sncid.stanleyresearch.org).

PMCID: PMC3365261
PMID: 22832957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Transl Psychiatry. 2012 May 8;2:e112. doi: 10.1038/tp.2012.39.

TCF4 sequence variants and mRNA levels are associated with neurodevelopmental
characteristics in psychotic disorders.

Wirgenes KV(1), Sønderby IE, Haukvik UK, Mattingsdal M, Tesli M, Athanasiu L,
Sundet K, Røssberg JI, Dale AM, Brown AA, Agartz I, Melle I, Djurovic S,
Andreassen OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
k.v.wirgenes@medisin.uio.no

TCF4 is involved in neurodevelopment, and intergenic and intronic variants in or 
close to the TCF4 gene have been associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia.
However, the functional role of TCF4 at the level of gene expression and
relationship to severity of core psychotic phenotypes are not known. TCF4 mRNA
expression level in peripheral blood was determined in a large sample of patients
with psychosis spectrum disorders (n = 596) and healthy controls (n = 385). The
previously identified TCF4 risk variants (rs12966547 (G), rs9960767 (C),
rs4309482 (A), rs2958182 (T) and rs17512836 (C)) were tested for association with
characteristic psychosis phenotypes, including neurocognitive traits, psychotic
symptoms and structural magnetic resonance imaging brain morphometric measures,
using a linear regression model. Further, we explored the association of
additional 59 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering the TCF4 gene to
these phenotypes. The rs12966547 and rs4309482 risk variants were associated with
poorer verbal fluency in the total sample. There were significant associations of
other TCF4 SNPs with negative symptoms, verbal learning, executive functioning
and age at onset in psychotic patients and brain abnormalities in total sample.
The TCF4 mRNA expression level was significantly increased in psychosis patients 
compared with controls and positively correlated with positive- and
negative-symptom levels. The increase in TCF4 mRNA expression level in psychosis 
patients and the association of TCF4 SNPs with core psychotic phenotypes across
clinical, cognitive and brain morphological domains support that common TCF4
variants are involved in psychosis pathology, probably related to abnormal
neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC3365258
PMID: 22832956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):1074-83. doi: 10.1002/hep.25977. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Genome-wide association analysis in primary sclerosing cholangitis and ulcerative
colitis identifies risk loci at GPR35 and TCF4.

Ellinghaus D(1), Folseraas T, Holm K, Ellinghaus E, Melum E, Balschun T, Laerdahl
JK, Shiryaev A, Gotthardt DN, Weismüller TJ, Schramm C, Wittig M, Bergquist A,
Björnsson E, Marschall HU, Vatn M, Teufel A, Rust C, Gieger C, Wichmann HE, Runz 
H, Sterneck M, Rupp C, Braun F, Weersma RK, Wijmenga C, Ponsioen CY, Mathew CG,
Rutgeerts P, Vermeire S, Schrumpf E, Hov JR, Manns MP, Boberg KM, Schreiber S,
Franke A, Karlsen TH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel,
Germany.

Approximately 60%-80% of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) have 
concurrent ulcerative colitis (UC). Previous genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) in PSC have detected a number of susceptibility loci that also show
associations in UC and other immune-mediated diseases. We aimed to systematically
compare genetic associations in PSC with genotype data in UC patients with the
aim of detecting new susceptibility loci for PSC. We performed combined analyses 
of GWAS for PSC and UC comprising 392 PSC cases, 987 UC cases, and 2,977 controls
and followed up top association signals in an additional 1,012 PSC cases, 4,444
UC cases, and 11,659 controls. We discovered novel genome-wide significant
associations with PSC at 2q37 [rs3749171 at G-protein-coupled receptor 35
(GPR35); P = 3.0 × 10(-9) in the overall study population, combined odds ratio
[OR] and 95% confidence interval [CI] of 1.39 (1.24-1.55)] and at 18q21
[rs1452787 at transcription factor 4 (TCF4); P = 2.61 × 10(-8) , OR (95% CI) =
0.75 (0.68-0.83)]. In addition, several suggestive PSC associations were
detected. The GPR35 rs3749171 is a missense single nucleotide polymorphism
resulting in a shift from threonine to methionine. Structural modeling showed
that rs3749171 is located in the third transmembrane helix of GPR35 and could
possibly alter efficiency of signaling through the GPR35 receptor.CONCLUSION: By 
refining the analysis of a PSC GWAS by parallel assessments in a UC GWAS, we were
able to detect two novel risk loci at genome-wide significance levels. GPR35
shows associations in both UC and PSC, whereas TCF4 represents a PSC risk locus
not associated with UC. Both loci may represent previously unexplored aspects of 
PSC pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22821403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):930-9. doi: 10.4161/epi.21199. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

The TCF4/ß-catenin pathway and chromatin structure cooperate to regulate
D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase expression in breast cancer.

Mostovich LA(1), Prudnikova TY, Kondratov AG, Gubanova NV, Kharchenko OA,
Kutsenko OS, Vavilov PV, Haraldson K, Kashuba VI, Ernberg I, Zabarovsky ER,
Grigorieva EV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics SB RAMS, Novosibirsk, Russia.

D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase (GLCE) is a potential tumor-suppressor gene involved in
heparan sulfate biosynthesis. GLCE expression is significantly decreased in
breast tumors; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. This 
study examined the possible epigenetic mechanisms for GLCE inactivation in breast
cancer. Very little methylation of the GLCE promoter region was detected in
breast tumors in vivo and in breast cancer cells (MCF7 and T47D) in vitro and
GLCE expression in breast cancer cells was not altered by 5-deoxyazacytidine
(5-aza-dC) treatment, suggesting that promoter methylation is not involved in
regulating GLCE expression. Chromatin activation by Trichostatin A (TSA) or
5-aza-dC/TSA treatment increased GLCE expression by two to 3-fold due to an
increased interaction between the GLCE promoter and the TCF4/ß-catenin
transactivation complex, or H3K9ac and H3K4Me3 histone modifications. However,
ectopic expression of TCF4/ß-catenin was not sufficient to activate GLCE
expression in MCF7 cells, suggesting that chromatin structure plays a key role in
GLCE regulation. Although TSA treatment significantly repressed canonical WNT
signaling in MCF7 cells, it did not influence endogenous TCF4/ß-catenin mRNA
levels and activated TCF4/ß-catenin-driven transcription from the GLCE promoter, 
indicating GLCE as a novel target for TCF4/ß-catenin complex in breast cancer
cells. A correlation was observed between GLCE, TCF4 and ß-catenin expression in 
breast cancer cells and primary tumors, suggesting an important role for
TCF4/ß-catenin in regulating GLCE expression both in vitro and in vivo. Taken
together, the results indicate that GLCE expression in breast cancer is regulated
by a combination of chromatin structure and TCF4/ß-catenin complex activity.

PMCID: PMC3427288
PMID: 22805760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1823(10):1807-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.07.004. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Pdcd4 knockdown up-regulates MAP4K1 expression and activation of AP-1 dependent
transcription through c-Myc.

Wang Q(1), Zhang Y, Yang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Programmed cell death 4 (Pdcd4) is a novel tumor suppressor, whose expression is 
frequently down-regulated in several types of cancers. In the present study, we
demonstrated that Pdcd4 knockdown up-regulates MAP kinase kinase kinase kinase 1 
(MAP4K1) expression and increases phosphorylation of c-Jun. Over-expression of
c-Myc in HEK293 cells increases the levels of MAP4K1, MAP4K1 promoter activity,
and phospho-c-Jun. Mutation analysis showed that the c-Myc binding site at -536bp
(relative to the initiation ATG) of map4k1 promoter responds to c-Myc regulation.
In addition, chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that c-Myc directly binds
to map4k1 promoter at this site. Down-regulation of c-Myc reverses MAP4K1
expression and AP-1 activation in Pdcd4 knockdown cells. Moreover,
over-expression of dominant negative Tcf4 decreases expression of c-Myc and
MAP4K1, JNK activation, and AP-1 dependent transcription. Thus, activation of
ß-catenin/Tcf dependent transcription in Pdcd4 knockdown cells up-regulates
MAP4K1 expression and AP-1 activity via c-Myc. The study presented here further
reveals in detail the mechanism of how Pdcd4 inhibits tumor cell invasion and
provides a functional connection between ß-catenin/Tcf and AP-1 dependent
transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3725281
PMID: 22801218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Chem Neuroanat. 2012 Oct;45(1-2):1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2012.06.002.
Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Review of the neuroanatomic landscape implicated in glucose sensing and
regulation of nutrient signaling: immunophenotypic localization of diabetes gene 
Tcf7l2 in the developing murine brain.

Weaver C(1), Turner N, Hall J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Cyprian@umn.edu

Genetic variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2(Tcf7l2) gene have been
found to confer a significant risk of type 2 diabetes and attenuated insulin
secretion. Based on its genomic wide association Tcf7l2 is considered the single 
most important predictor of diabetes to date. Previous studies of Tcf7l2 mRNA
localization in the adult brain suggest a putative role of Tcf7l2 in the CNS
regulation of energy homeostasis. The present study further characterizes the
immunophenotypic distribution of peptide expression in the brains of Tcf7l2
progeny during developmental time periods between E12.5 and P1. Tcf7l2(-/-) is
lethal beyond P1. Results show that while negligible TCF7L2 expression is found
in the developing brains of Tcf7l2(-/-)mice, TCF7L2 protein is relatively
widespread and robustly expressed in the brain by E18.5 and exhibits specific
expression within neuronal populations and regions of the brain in Tcf7l2(+/-)
and Tcf7l2(+/+) progeny. Strong immunophenotypic labeling was found in the
diencephalic structure of the thalamus that suggests a role of Tcf7l2 in the
development and maintenance of thalamic activity. Strongly expressed TCF7L2 was
localized in select hypothalamic and preoptic nuclei indicative of Tcf7l2
function within neurons controlling energy balance. Definitive neuronal staining 
for TCF7L2 within nuclei of the brain stem and circumventricular organs extends
TCF7L2 localization within autonomic neurons and its potential integration with
autonomic function. In addition robust TCF7L2 expression was found in the tectal 
and tegmental structures of the superior and inferior colliculi as well as
transient expression in neuroepithelium of the cerebral and hippocampal cortices 
of E16 and E18.5. Patterns of TCF7L2 peptide localization when compared to the
adult protein synthetic chemical/anatomical landscape of glucose sensing exhibit 
a good correlational fit between its expression and regions, nuclei, and pathways
regulating energy homeostasis via integration and response to peripheral
endocrine, metabolic and neuronal signaling. TCF was also found co-localized with
peptides that regulate energy homeostasis including AgRP, POMC and NPY. TCF7l2,
some variants of which have been shown to impair GLP-1-induced insulin secretion,
was also found co-localize with GLP-1 in adult TCF wild type progeny. Impaired
Tcf7l2-mediated neural regulation may contribute to the risk and/or underlying
pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes that has found high expression in genomic
studies of Tcf7l2 variants.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3455112
PMID: 22796301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2646-54. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2634-x. Epub 2012 
Jul 11.

Role of TCF7L2 risk variant and dietary fibre intake on incident type 2 diabetes.

Hindy G(1), Sonestedt E, Ericson U, Jing XJ, Zhou Y, Hansson O, Renström E,
Wirfält E, Orho-Melander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Lund University, Clinical Research
Center, Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The T allele of transcription factor 7-like 2 gene variant,
TCF7L2 rs7903146, increases the risk of type 2 diabetes by 40-50%. As TCF7L2
rs7903146 has been associated with diminished incretin effect we investigated
whether interaction between dietary intake of carbohydrate, fat, protein or fibre
and this variant affects the risk of type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A cohort of 24,799 non-diabetic individuals from the Malmö Diet and
Cancer Study (MDCS), with dietary data obtained by a modified diet history
method, were followed up for 12 years, with 1,649 recordings of incident type 2
diabetes made. Risk of type 2 diabetes in strata of diet quintiles was analysed
prospectively adjusting for potential confounders. Cross-sectional analyses were 
performed on baseline fasting glucose and HbA(1c) levels in a subset of 5,216
randomly selected individuals from the MDCS.
RESULTS: The elevated risk of type 2 diabetes with rs7903146 (OR 1.44, 95% CI
1.33, 1.56, p = 4.6 × 10(-19)) increased with higher intake of dietary fibre (OR 
1.24, 95% CI 1.04, 1.47 to OR 1.56, 95% CI 1.31, 1.86 from the lowest to highest 
quintile; p (interaction) = 0.049). High intake of dietary fibre was inversely
associated with diabetes incidence only among CC genotype carriers (OR 0.74, 95% 
CI 0.58, 0.94 per quintile, p = 0.025). The T allele was associated with 0.027%
elevated HbA(1c) (p = 0.02) and this effect increased with higher intake of fibre
(from -0.021% to 0.079% for the lowest to the highest quintile, p (interaction) =
0.02). Each quintile of higher fibre intake was associated with lower HbA(1c)
levels among CC and CT but not among TT genotype carriers (-0.036%, p = 6.5 ×
10(-7); -0.023%, p = 0.009; and 0.012%, p = 0.52, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study suggests that dietary fibre intake may
modify the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and incidence of type 2 diabetes,
and that higher fibre intake may associate with protection from type 2 diabetes
only among non-risk allele carriers.

PMCID: PMC3433658
PMID: 22782288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hum Mutat. 2012 Dec;33(12):1676-86. doi: 10.1002/humu.22160. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Functional analysis of TCF4 missense mutations that cause Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Forrest M(1), Chapman RM, Doyle AM, Tinsley CL, Waite A, Blake DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a rare developmental disorder associated with
severe mental retardation, facial abnormalities, and intermittent
hyperventilation. Autosomal dominant PTHS is caused by mutations in the
transcription factor 4 (TCF4) gene, whereas NRXN1 and CNTNAP2 mutations are
associated with autosomal recessive PTHS. To determine the impact of missense
mutations on TCF4 function, we tested a panel of PTHS-associated mutations using 
a range of quantitative techniques. Mutations in the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) domain of TCF4 alter the subnuclear localization of the mutant protein and
can attenuate homo- and heterodimer formation in homogenous time-resolved
fluorescence (HTRF) assays. By contrast, mutations proximal to the bHLH domain do
not alter the location of TCF4 or impair heterodimer formation. In addition, we
show that TCF4 can transactivate the NRXN1ß and CNTNAP2 promoters in luciferase
assays. Here we find variable, context-specific deficits in the ability of the
different PTHS-associated TCF4 mutants to transactivate these promoters when
coexpressed with different bHLH transcription factors. These data demonstrate
that PTHS-associated missense mutations can have multiple effects on the function
of the protein, and suggest that TCF4 may modulate the expression of NRXN1 and
CNTNAP2 thereby defining a regulatory network in PTHS.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22777675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Gastroenterology. 2012 Oct;143(4):1037-47. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.06.042.
Epub 2012 Jul 3.

ß-Catenin regulates deiodinase levels and thyroid hormone signaling in colon
cancer cells.

Dentice M(1), Luongo C, Ambrosio R, Sibilio A, Casillo A, Iaccarino A, Troncone
G, Fenzi G, Larsen PR, Salvatore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology and Oncology, University of
Naples "Federico II," Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Activation of the ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) complex occurs
in most colon tumors, and its actions correlate with the neoplastic phenotype of 
intestinal epithelial cells. Type 3 deiodinase (D3), the selenoenzyme that
inactivates thyroid hormone (3,5,3' triiodothyronine [T3]), is frequently
expressed by tumor cells, but little is known about its role in the regulation of
T3 signaling in cancer cells.
METHODS: We measured D3 expression in 6 colon cancer cell lines and human tumors 
and correlated it with the activity of the ß-catenin/TCF complex. We also
determined the effects of D3 loss on local thyroid hormone signaling and colon
tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: We show that D3 is a direct transcriptional target of the ß-catenin/TCF 
complex; its expression was higher in human intestinal adenomas and carcinomas
than in healthy intestinal tissue. Experimental attenuation of ß-catenin reduced 
D3 levels and induced type 2 deiodinase (the D3 antagonist that converts
3,5,3',5' tetraiodothyronine into active T3) thereby increasing T3-dependent
transcription. In the absence of D3, excess T3 reduced cell proliferation and
promoted differentiation in cultured cells and in xenograft mouse models. This
occurred via induction of E-cadherin, which sequestered ß-catenin at the plasma
membrane and promoted cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Deiodinases are at the interface between the ß-catenin and the
thyroid hormone pathways. Their synchronized regulation of intracellular T3
concentration is a hitherto unrecognized route by which the multiple effects of
ß-catenin are generated and may be targeted to reduce the oncogenic effects of
ß-catenin in intestinal cells.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039981. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Loss of the SxxSS motif in a human T-cell factor-4 isoform confers hypoxia
resistance to liver cancer: an oncogenic switch in Wnt signaling.

Koga H(1), Tsedensodnom O, Tomimaru Y, Walker EJ, Lee HC, Kim KM, Yano H, Wands
JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and the Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, United States of America.

PURPOSE: Aberrantly activated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is important in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. Downstream gene expressions involving
the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade occur through T-cell factor (TCF) proteins. Here, we
show the oncogenic potential of human TCF-4 isoforms based on the expression of a
single conserved SxxSS motif.
METHODS: We investigated the TCF-4J and K isoform pair characterized by the
presence (K) or absence (J) of the SxxSS motif. The mRNA expression profiles were
examined in 47 pairs of human HCCs and adjacent non-cancerous liver tissues by
RT-PCR. Proliferation, sphere assays and immunoblot analysis were performed under
normoxia and hypoxia conditions. The ability of HCC cells overexpressing TCF-4J
(J cells) and K (K cells) to grow as solid tumors in nude mice was explored.
RESULTS: TCF-4J expression was significantly upregulated in HCC tumors compared
to corresponding peritumor and normal liver and was preferentially expressed in
poorly differentiated HCCs. In contrast, TCF-4K was downregulated in those same
HCC tumors. TCF-4J-overexpressing HCC cells (J cells) revealed a survival
advantage under hypoxic conditions, high proliferation rate and formation of
aggregates/spheres compared to overexpression of TCF-4K (K cells). The hypoxic J 
cells had high expression levels of HIF-2a and EGFR as possible mechanisms to
promote tumorigenesis. Increased stability of HIF-2a under hypoxia in J cells was
associated with a decreased level of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein, a known E3 
ligase for HIF-as. In a xenograft model, the J cells rapidly developed tumors
compared to K cells. Tumor tissues derived from J cells exhibited high expression
levels of HIF-2a and EGFR compared to the slow developing and small K cell
derived tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the specific TCF-4J isoform, which lacks a 
regulatory SxxSS motif, has robust tumor-initiating potential under hypoxic
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3386968
PMID: 22768190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1823(10):1666-75. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.06.027. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

KLF4 and SOX9 transcription factors antagonize ß-catenin and inhibit TCF-activity
in cancer cells.

Sellak H(1), Wu S, Lincoln TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA. 
hsellak@usouthal.edu

The transcriptional activator ß-catenin is a key mediator of the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway. ß-catenin itself does not bind DNA but functions via
interaction with T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid-enhancing factor (LEF)
transcription factors. Thus, in the case of active Wnt signaling, ß-catenin, in
cooperation with TCF/LEF proteins family, activates the expression of a wide
variety of genes. To date, the list of established ß-catenin interacting targets 
is far from complete. In this study, we aimed to establish the interaction
between ß-catenin and transcription factors that might affect TCF activity. We
took advantage of EMSA, using TCF as a probe, to screen oligonucleotides known to
bind specific transcription factors that might dislodge or antagonize
ß-catenin/TCF binding. We found that Sox9 and KLF4 antagonize ß-catenin/TCF
binding in HEK293, A549, SW480, and T47D cells. This inhibition of TCF binding
was concentration-dependent and correlated to the in vitro TCF-luciferase
functional assays. Overexpression of Sox9 and KLF4 transcription factors in
cancer cells shows a concentration-dependent reduction of TCF-luciferase as well 
as the TCF-binding activities. In addition, we demonstrated that both Sox9 and
KLF4 interact with ß-catenin in an immunoprecipitation assay and reduce its
binding to TCF4. Together, these results demonstrate that Sox9 and KLF4
transcription factors antagonize ß-catenin/TCF in cancer cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3633466
PMID: 22766303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39668. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039668. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Krüppel-like factor 8 is a new Wnt/beta-catenin signaling target gene and
regulator in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang T(1), Cai SY, Zhang J, Lu JH, Lin C, Zhai J, Wu MC, Shen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second 
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Krüppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) plays important role in cell cycle and oncogenic
transformation. Here we report the mechanisms by which KLF8 crosstalks with
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and regulates hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
cells proliferation. We show that overexpression of KLF8 and nucleus accumulation
of ß-catenin in the human HCC samples are positively correlated. More
importantly, KLF8 protein levels plus nucleus accumulation of ß-catenin levels
were significantly elevated in high-grade HCC compared to low-grade HCC. Using
HCC HepG2 cells we find that, on the one hand both protein and mRNA of KLF8 are
up-regulated under Wnt3a stimulation, on the other hand overexpression of KLF8
increases the cytoplasm and nucleus accumulation of ß-catenin, recruits p300 to
ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) transcription complex, enhances TOP flash report
gene transcription, and induces Wnt/ß-catenin signaling target genes c-Myc,
cyclin D1 and Axin1 expression. Knockdown of KLF8 using shRNA inhibits Wnt3a
induced transcription of TOP flash report gene and expression of c-Myc, cyclin D1
and Axin1. Knockdown of ß-catenin by shRNA rescues the enhanced HepG2 and Hep3B
cells proliferation ability induced by overexpression of KLF8.

PMCID: PMC3384617
PMID: 22761862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Nov;38(5):444-9. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.05.002. Epub
2012 Jun 27.

Contribution of common variants of ENPP1, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, MLXIPL, PPAR<U+03B3>, SLC30A8
and TCF7L2 to the risk of type 2 diabetes in Lebanese and Tunisian Arabs.

Mtiraoui N(1), Turki A, Nemr R, Echtay A, Izzidi I, Al-Zaben GS, Irani-Hakime N, 
Keleshian SH, Mahjoub T, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Biology and Genetics of Hematological and Autoimmune
diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: While several type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) susceptibility loci
identified through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been replicated in
many populations, their association in Arabs has not been reported. For this
reason, the present study looked at the contribution of ENNP1 (rs1044498),
IGF2BP2 (rs1470579), KCNJ11 (rs5219), MLXIPL (rs7800944), PPAR<U+03B3> (rs1801282),
SLC30A8 (rs13266634) and TCF7L2 (rs7903146) SNPs to the risk of T2DM in Lebanese 
and Tunisian Arabs.
METHODS: Study subjects (case/controls) were Lebanese (751/918) and Tunisians
(1470/838). Genotyping was carried out by the allelic discrimination method.
RESULTS: In Lebanese and Tunisians, neither ENNP1 nor MLXIPL was associated with 
T2DM, whereas TCF7L2 was significantly associated with an increased risk of T2DM 
in both the Lebanese [P < 0.001; OR (95% CI): 1.38 (1.20-1.59)] and Tunisians [P 
< 0.001; OR (95% CI): 1.36 (1.18-1.56)]. Differential associations of IGF2BP2,
KCNJ11, PPAR<U+03B3> and SLC30A8 with T2DM were noted in the two populations. IGF2BP2 [P
= 1.3 × 10(-5); OR (95% CI): 1.66 (1.42-1.94)] and PPAR<U+03B3> [P = 0.005; OR (95% CI):
1.41 (1.10-1.80)] were associated with T2DM in the Lebanese, but not Tunisians,
while KCNJ11 [P = 8.0 × 10(-4); OR (95% CI): 1.27 (1.09-1.47)] and SLC30A8 [P =
1.6 × 10(-5); OR (95% CI): 1.37 (1.15-1.62)] were associated with T2DM in the
Tunisians, but not Lebanese, after adjusting for gender and body mass index.
CONCLUSION: T2DM susceptibility loci SNPs identified through GWAS showed
differential associations with T2DM in two Arab populations, thus further
confirming the ethnic contributions of these variants to T2DM susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Electrophoresis. 2012 Jul;33(12):1804-13. doi: 10.1002/elps.201100671.

Solubilisation of the armadillo-repeat protein ß-catenin using a zwitterionic
detergent allows resolution of phosphorylated forms by 2DE.

Layton MJ(1), Church NL, Faux MC, Ji H, Goode RJ, Kapp EA, Burgess AW, Simpson
RJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville,
Australia.

ß-catenin is a member of the armadillo repeat family of proteins and has
important functions in cell-cell adhesion and Wnt signalling. Different protein
species of ß-catenin have been shown to exist in the cell and the relative
proportions of these species are altered upon stimulation of cells with Wnt-3a
(Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). In order to determine whether posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) of ß-catenin underlie these different protein species, we
have used 2DE separation and immunoblotting with an antibody specific for
ß-catenin. High-resolution separation of differentially modified species of
ß-catenin in 2DE required the addition of ASB-16, a zwitterionic detergent that
can solubilise integral membrane proteins. ASB-16 was also necessary for
focussing of other armadillo repeat proteins, such as <U+03B3>-catenin and p120-catenin.
2DE using ASB-16 allowed detection of a previously unreported phosphorylation
site in the transcriptionally active form of ß-catenin that binds to GST-Tcf in
response to Wnt signalling.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22740469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 10;109(28):11402-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205015109. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Chemical and genetic evidence for the involvement of Wnt antagonist Dickkopf2 in 
regulation of glucose metabolism.

Li X(1), Shan J, Chang W, Kim I, Bao J, Lee HJ, Zhang X, Samuel VT, Shulman GI,
Liu D, Zheng JJ, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Vascular Biology and Therapeutic Program, Yale 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):17141.

Mutations in Wnt receptor LRP5/6 and polymorphism in Wnt-regulated transcription 
factor TCF7L2 are associated with dysregulation of glucose metabolism. However,
it is not clear whether Wnt antagonist Dickkopf (Dkk) has a significant role in
the regulation of glucose metabolism. Here, we identified small-molecule
inhibitors of Wnt antagonist Dkk through molecular modeling, computation-based
virtual screens, and biological assays. One of the Dkk inhibitors reduced basal
blood-glucose concentrations and improved glucose tolerance in mice. This Dkk
inhibitor appeared to act through DKK2 because the inhibitor exerted no
additional effects on glucose metabolism in the Dkk2(-/-) mice. Our study of
Dkk2(-/-) mice showed that DKK2 deficiency was associated with increased hepatic 
glycogen accumulation and decreased hepatic glucose output. DKK2 deficiency did
not cause in increase in insulin production but resulted in increased Wnt
activity and GLP1 production in the intestines. Given that the Dkk inhibitor
improved glucose tolerance in a murine model of type 2 diabetes (db/db), we
suggest that DKK2 may be a potential therapeutic target for treating type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3396493
PMID: 22733757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(6):791-801. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4568. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Reduction in Tcf7l2 expression decreases diabetic susceptibility in mice.

Yang H(1), Li Q, Lee JH, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The WNT signaling pathway effector gene TCF7L2 has been associated
with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, it remains unclear how this
gene affects diabetic pathogenesis. The goal of this study was to investigate the
effects of Tcf7l2 haploinsufficiency on metabolic phenotypes in mice.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tcf7l2 knockout (Tcf7l<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice were generated. Because of
the early mortality of Tcf7l2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice, we characterized the metabolic phenotypes 
of heterozygous Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice in comparison to the wild-type controls. The mice 
were fed a normal chow diet or a high fat diet (HFD) for 9 weeks.
RESULTS: The Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice showed significant differences from the wild-type
mice with regards to body weight, fasting glucose and insulin levels. Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B>
mice displayed improved glucose tolerance. In the liver of Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice fed on 
the HFD, reduced lipogenesis and hepatic triglyceride levels were observed when
compared with those of wild-type mice. Furthermore, the Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice fed on the
HFD exhibited decreased peripheral fat deposition. Immunohistochemistry in mouse 
pancreatic islets showed that endogenous expression of Tcf7l2 was upregulated in 
the wild-type mice, but not in the Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice, after feeding with the HFD.
However, the haploinsufficiency of Tcf7l2 in mouse pancreatic islets resulted in 
little changes in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that decreased expression of Tcf7l2 confers
reduction of diabetic susceptibility in mice via regulation on the metabolism of 
glucose and lipid.

PMCID: PMC3372883
PMID: 22719219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2667-76. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2600-7. Epub 2012 
Jun 21.

Abnormal glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in pancreas-specific Tcf7l2-null
mice.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Mondragon A, Sun G, Chen L, McGinty JA, French PM, Rutter
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. g.dasilva-xavier@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Individuals carrying type 2 diabetes risk alleles in TCF7L2
display decreased beta cell levels of T cell factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2)
immunoreactivity, and impaired insulin secretion and beta cell sensitivity to
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). Here, we sought to determine whether selective
deletion of Tcf7l2 in mouse pancreas impairs insulin release and glucose
homeostasis.
METHODS: Pancreas-specific Tcf7l2-null (pTcf7l2) mice were generated by crossing 
mice carrying conditional knockout alleles of Tcf7l2 (Tcf7l2-flox) with mice
expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the Pdx1 promoter (Pdx1.Cre).
Gene expression was assessed by real-time quantitative PCR and beta cell mass by 
optical projection tomography. Glucose tolerance, insulin secretion from isolated
islets, and plasma insulin, glucagon and GLP-1 content were assessed by standard 
protocols.
RESULTS: From 12 weeks of age, pTcf7l2 mice displayed decreased oral glucose
tolerance vs control littermates; from 20 weeks they had glucose intolerance upon
administration of glucose by the intraperitoneal route. pTcf7l2 islets displayed 
impaired insulin secretion in response to 17 (vs 3.0) mmol/l glucose (54.6 ±
4.6%, p < 0.01) or to 17 mmol/l glucose plus 100 nmol/l GLP-1 (44.3 ± 4.9%, p <
0.01) compared with control islets. Glp1r (42 ± 0.08%, p < 0.01) and Ins2 (15.4 ±
4.6%, p < 0.01) expression was significantly lower in pTcf7l2 islets than in
controls. Maintained on a high-fat (but not on a normal) diet, pTcf7l2 mice
displayed decreased expansion of pancreatic beta cell volume vs control
littermates. No differences were observed in plasma insulin, proinsulin, glucagon
or GLP-1 concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Selective deletion of Tcf7l2 in the pancreas
replicates key aspects of the altered glucose homeostasis in human carriers of
TCF7L2 risk alleles, indicating the direct role of this factor in controlling
beta cell function.

PMID: 22717537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012 Oct;54(10):925-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04339.x. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Development, cognition, and behaviour in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Van Balkom ID(1), Vuijk PJ, Franssens M, Hoek HW, Hennekam RC.

Author information: 
(1)Jonx Department of Youth Mental Health, Lentis Psychiatric Institute,
Zuidlaren, the Netherlands. idc.vanbalkom@lentis.nl

AIM: The aim of the study was to collect detailed data on behavioural, adaptive, 
and psychological functioning in 10 individuals with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
(PTHS), with specific attention to manifestations of autism spectrum disorder
(ASD).
METHOD: The participants (four females, six males), residing in the Netherlands
and Belgium, were ascertained through the Dutch national PTHS support group.
Median age of participants was 10 years, the age range was between 32 and 289
months. They underwent psychiatric examinations and neuropsychological
measurements using a comprehensive assessment battery. Additionally, parental
information was gathered through standardized interviews and questionnaires.
Findings were compared with those from the literature.
RESULTS: All participants showed profound intellectual disability, amiable
demeanour with minimal maladaptive behaviours, severe impairments of
communication and language, and intense, frequent motor stereotypies. Impairments
in all participants were beyond what would be expected for cognitive abilities,
fitting a classification of ASD.
INTERPRETATION: Patients with PTHS are characterized not only by specific
physical and genetic manifestations but also by specific behavioural and
cognitive characteristics. Studying behaviour and cognition may improve diagnosis
and prognosis, allows recognition of comorbidities, and contributes to adequate
counselling of families.

© The Authors. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology © 2012 Mac Keith Press.

PMID: 22712893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Psychogeriatrics. 2012 Jun;12(2):93-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00398.x.

TCF7L2 polymorphism and cognitive test performance in cardiovascular disease.

Keary TA(1), Gunstad J, Benitez A, Spitznagel MB, McCaffery J, McGeary JE, Poppas
A, Paul RH, Sweet LH, Cohen RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA.

AIMS: The present study examines cognitive function among transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) genotype groups in a sample of older adults with cardiovascular
disease.
METHODS: We recruited 111 older adults with diagnosed cardiovascular disease from
outpatient cardiology clinics. Neuropsychological tests assessed the following
domains of cognitive functioning: global function,
attention/executive/psychomotor speed, learning and memory,
visuospatial/construction, motor, and language. Genotyping of TCF7L2 single
nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 was conducted to determine membership in the
TT, CT, or CC genotype groups.
RESULTS: Controlling for diabetes status, participants with the TT genotype of
TCF7L2 (n= 12) performed worse on tests of attention/executive
function/processing speed than those with the CC (n= 46) and CT (n= 53)
genotypes, despite no between-group differences in demographic or medical
variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Older cardiovascular disease patients with the TCF7L2 TT genotype
performed worse on tests of attention/executive/ psychomotor speed than CC and CT
genotype carriers. Further work using neuroimaging and glucose tolerance indices 
is needed to clarify underlying mechanisms.

© 2012 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2012 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

PMCID: PMC4289601
PMID: 22712642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. EMBO Rep. 2012 Aug;13(8):750-8. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.88. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Kindlin 2 forms a transcriptional complex with ß-catenin and TCF4 to enhance Wnt 
signalling.

Yu Y(1), Wu J, Wang Y, Zhao T, Ma B, Liu Y, Fang W, Zhu WG, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China.

Kindlin 2, as a focal adhesion protein, controls integrin activation. However,
the association of Kindlin 2 with cancer-related signalling pathways is unknown. 
Here we identified a new direct interaction between Kindlin 2 and the active
ß-catenin. Importantly, Kindlin 2 forms a tripartite complex with ß-catenin and
TCF4. Mechanistically, Kindlin 2 selectively strengthens the occupancy of
ß-catenin on the Wnt target gene Axin2 and enhances Axin2 gene expression.
Functionally, the ß-catenin-Axin2-Snail cascade is required for Kindlin 2-induced
tumour cell invasion. Our data indicate that Kindlin 2 is a new regulator of Wnt 
signalling, providing a mechanistic insight into the role of Kindlin 2 in cancer 
progression.

PMCID: PMC3410388
PMID: 22699938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Diabetes Care. 2012 Aug;35(8):1763-70. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2006. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Genetic risk score constructed using 14 susceptibility alleles for type 2
diabetes is associated with the early onset of diabetes and may predict the
future requirement of insulin injections among Japanese individuals.

Iwata M(1), Maeda S, Kamura Y, Takano A, Kato H, Murakami S, Higuchi K, Takahashi
A, Fujita H, Hara K, Kadowaki T, Tobe K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama University,
Toyama, Japan. iwamino-tym@umin.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the clinical usefulness of a genetic risk score (GRS)
based on 14 well-established variants for type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 14 SNPs at HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2B,
SLC30A8, KCNJ11, IGF2BP2, PPARG, TCF7L2, FTO, KCNQ1, IRS-1, GCKR, UBE2E2, and
C2CD4A/B in 1,487 Japanese individuals (724 patients with type 2 diabetes and 763
control subjects). A GRS was calculated according to the number of risk alleles
by counting all 14 SNPs (T-GRS) as well as 11 SNPs related to ß-cell function
(ß-GRS) and then assessing the association between each GRS and the clinical
features.
RESULTS: Among the 14 SNPs, 4 SNPs were significantly associated with type 2
diabetes in the present Japanese sample (P < 0.0036). The T-GRS was significantly
associated with type 2 diabetes (P = 5.9 × 10(-21)). Among the subjects with type
2 diabetes, the ß-GRS was associated with individuals receiving insulin therapy
(ß = 0.0131, SE = 0.006, P = 0.0431), age at diagnosis (ß = -0.608, SE = 0.204, P
= 0.0029), fasting serum C-peptide level (ß = -0.032, SE = 0.0140, P = 0.022),
and C-peptide index (ß = -0.031, SE = 0.012, P = 0.0125).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the ß-GRS is associated with reduced ß-cell
functions and may be useful for selecting patients who should receive more
aggressive ß-cell-preserving therapy.

PMCID: PMC3402252
PMID: 22688542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jul;158A(7):1604-11. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35419. Epub 2012 
Jun 7.

Proposal of a clinical score for the molecular test for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Marangi G(1), Ricciardi S, Orteschi D, Tenconi R, Monica MD, Scarano G, Battaglia
D, Lettori D, Vasco G, Zollino M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma,
Italy.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is an emerging condition characterized by severe
intellectual disability (ID), typical facial gestalt, and additional features,
such as breathing abnormalities. Because of the overlapping phenotype of severe
ID with absent speech, epilepsy, microcephaly, large mouth, and constipation,
differential diagnosis of PTHS with respect to Angelman, Rett, and Mowat-Wilson
syndromes represents a relevant clinical issue, and many patients are currently
undergoing genetic tests for different conditions that are assumed to fall within
the PTHS clinical spectrum. During a search for TCF4 mutations in 78 patients
with a suspected PTHS, haploinsufficiency of TCF4 was identified in 18. By
evaluating clinical features of patients with a proven TCF4 mutation with those
of patients without, we noticed that, in addition to the typical facial gestalt, 
the PTHS phenotype results from the various combination of the following
characteristics: ID with severe speech impairment, normal growth parameters at
birth, postnatal microcephaly, breathing abnormalities, motor incoordination,
ocular anomalies, constipation, seizures, typical behavior, and subtle brain
abnormalities. On the basis of these observations, here we propose a clinically
based score system as useful tool for driving a first choice molecular test for
PTHS. This scoring system is also proposed for a clinically based diagnosis of
PTHS in absence of a proven TCF4 mutation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22678594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Genet. 2013 Feb;83(2):198-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01890.x. Epub
2012 Jun 4.

Parent-child exome sequencing identifies a de novo truncating mutation in TCF4 in
non-syndromic intellectual disability.

Hamdan FF, Daoud H, Patry L, Dionne-Laporte A, Spiegelman D, Dobrzeniecka S,
Rouleau GA, Michaud JL.

PMID: 22670824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(3-5):217-234. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Adult Phenotypes in Angelman- and Rett-Like Syndromes.

Willemsen MH(1), Rensen JH, van Schrojenstein-Lantman de Valk HM, Hamel BC,
Kleefstra T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Angelman- and Rett-like syndromes share a range of clinical
characteristics, including intellectual disability (ID) with or without
regression, epilepsy, infantile encephalopathy, postnatal microcephaly, features 
of autism spectrum disorder, and variable other neurological symptoms. The
phenotypic spectrum generally has been well studied in children; however,
evolution of the phenotypic spectrum into adulthood has been documented less
extensively. To obtain more insight into natural course and prognosis of these
syndromes with respect to developmental, medical, and socio-behavioral outcomes, 
we studied the phenotypes of 9 adult patients who were recently diagnosed with 6 
different Angelman- and Rett-like syndromes. METHODS: All these patients were
ascertained during an ongoing cohort study involving a systematic clinical
genetic diagnostic evaluation of over 250, mainly adult patients with ID of
unknown etiology. RESULTS: We describe the evolution of the phenotype in adults
with EHMT1, TCF4, MECP2, CDKL5, and SCN1A mutations and 22qter deletions and also
provide an overview of previously published adult cases with similar diagnoses.
CONCLUSION: These data are highly valuable in adequate management and follow-up
of patients with Angelman- and Rett-like syndromes and accurate counseling of
their family members. Furthermore, they will contribute to recognition of these
syndromes in previously undiagnosed adult patients.

PMCID: PMC3366698
PMID: 22670143  [PubMed]


53. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(3-5):171-180. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome.

Peippo M(1), Ignatius J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki,
Finland.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS, MIM #610954) is characterized by severe intellectual
disability, typical facial features and tendency to epilepsy, panting-and-holding
breathing anomaly, stereotypic movements, constipation, and high myopia. Growth
is normal or only mildly retarded, but half of the patients have postnatal
microcephaly. Remarkably, congenital malformations are practically nonexistent.
The cause of PTHS is de novo haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 gene (MIM *602272) at
18q21.2. Altogether 78 PTHS patients with abnormalities of the TCF4 gene have
been published since 2007 when the etiology of PTHS was revealed. In addition, 27
patients with 18q deletion encompassing the TCF4 gene but without given PTHS
diagnosis have been published, and thus, the number of reported patients with a
TCF4 abnormality exceeds 100. The mutational spectrum includes large chromosomal 
deletions encompassing the whole TCF4 gene, partial gene deletions, frameshift
(including premature stop codon), nonsense, splice site, and missense mutations. 
So far, almost all patients have a private mutation and only 2 recurrent
mutations are known. There is no evident genotype-phenotype correlation. No
familial cases have been reported. Diagnosis of PTHS is based on the molecular
confirmation of the characteristic clinical features. Recently, a
Pitt-Hopkins-like phenotype has been assigned to autosomal recessive mutations of
the CNTNAP2 gene at 7q33q36 and the NRXN1 gene at 2p16.3.

PMCID: PMC3366706
PMID: 22670138  [PubMed]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;32(15):3140-52. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00006-12. Epub 2012 Jun 
4.

mrhl RNA, a long noncoding RNA, negatively regulates Wnt signaling through its
protein partner Ddx5/p68 in mouse spermatogonial cells.

Arun G(1), Akhade VS, Donakonda S, Rao MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Bangalore, India.

Meiotic recombination hot spot locus (mrhl) RNA is a nuclear enriched long
noncoding RNA encoded in the mouse genome and expressed in testis, liver, spleen,
and kidney. mrhl RNA silencing in Gc1-Spg cells, derived from mouse
spermatogonial cells, resulted in perturbation of expression of genes belonging
to cell adhesion, cell signaling and development, and differentiation, among
which many were of the Wnt signaling pathway. A weighted gene coexpression
network generated nine coexpression modules, which included TCF4, a key
transcription factor involved in Wnt signaling. Activation of Wnt signaling upon 
mrhl RNA downregulation was demonstrated by beta-catenin nuclear localization,
beta-catenin-TCF4 interaction, occupancy of beta-catenin at the promoters of Wnt 
target genes, and TOP/FOP-luciferase assay. Northwestern blot and RNA pulldown
experiments identified Ddx5/p68 as one of the interacting proteins of mrhl RNA.
Downregulation of mrhl RNA resulted in the cytoplasmic translocation of
tyrosine-phosphorylated p68. Concomitant downregulation of both mrhl RNA and p68 
prevented the nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. mrhl RNA was downregulated
on Wnt3a treatment in Gc1-Spg cells. This study shows that mrhl RNA plays a
negative role in Wnt signaling in mouse spermatogonial cells through its
interaction with p68.

PMCID: PMC3434522
PMID: 22665494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neuro Oncol. 2012 Aug;14(8):1026-36. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nos122. Epub 2012 May
30.

VHL regulates the effects of miR-23b on glioma survival and invasion via
suppression of HIF-1a/VEGF and ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling.

Chen L(1), Han L, Zhang K, Shi Z, Zhang J, Zhang A, Wang Y, Song Y, Li Y, Jiang
T, Pu P, Jiang C, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin, China.

Aberrant microRNA expression has been implicated in the development of human
cancers. Here, we investigated the oncogenic significance and function of miR-23b
in glioma. We identified that the expression of miR-23b was elevated in both
glioma samples and glioma cells, indicated by real-time polymerase chain reaction
analyses. Down-regulation of miR-23b triggered growth inhibition, induced
apoptosis, and suppressed invasion of glioma in vitro. Luciferase assay and
Western blot analysis revealed that VHL is a direct target of miR-23b. Restoring 
expression of VHL inhibited glioma proliferation and invasion. Mechanistic
investigation revealed that miR-23b deletion decreased HIF-1a/VEGF expression and
suppressed ß-catenin/Tcf-4 transcription activity by targeting VHL. Furthermore, 
expression of VHL was inversely correlated with miR-23b in glioma samples and was
predictive of patient survival in a retrospective analysis. Therefore, we
demonstrated that downregulation of miR-23b suppressed tumor survival through
targeting VHL, leading to the inhibition of ß-catenin/Tcf-4 and HIF-1a/VEGF
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3408255
PMID: 22649212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;72(14):3607-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0006. Epub 
2012 May 25.

Wnt/Snail signaling regulates cytochrome C oxidase and glucose metabolism.

Lee SY(1), Jeon HM, Ju MK, Kim CH, Yoon G, Han SI, Park HG, Kang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan, Korea.

Wnt signaling plays a critical role in embryonic development, and its
deregulation is closely linked to the occurrence of a number of malignant tumors,
including breast and colon cancer. The pathway also induces Snail-dependent
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is responsible for tumor
invasion and metastasis. In this study, we show that Wnt suppresses mitochondrial
respiration and cytochrome C oxidase (COX) activity by inhibiting the expression 
of 3 COX subunits, namely, COXVIc, COXVIIa, and COXVIIc. We found that Wnt
induced a glycolytic switch via increased glucose consumption and lactate
production, with induction of pyruvate carboxylase (PC), a key enzyme of
anaplerosis. In addition, Wnt-induced mitochondrial repression and glycolytic
switching occurred through the canonical ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4/Snail pathway.
Short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of E-cadherin, a regulator of EMT, repressed
mitochondrial respiration and induced a glycolytic switch via Snail activation,
indicating that EMT may contribute to Wnt/Snail regulation of mitochondrial
respiration and glucose metabolism. Together, our findings provide a new function
for Wnt/Snail signaling in the regulation of mitochondrial respiration (via COX
gene expression) and glucose metabolism (via PC gene expression) in tumor growth 
and progression.

PMID: 22637725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 2012 Jun 13;31(12):2685-96. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.149. Epub 2012 May
22.

Adult mammalian stem cells: the role of Wnt, Lgr5 and R-spondins.

Schuijers J(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands.

After its discovery as oncogen and morphogen, studies on Wnt focused initially on
its role in animal development. With the finding that the colorectal tumour
suppressor gene APC is a negative regulator of the Wnt pathway in (colorectal)
cancer, attention gradually shifted to the study of the role of Wnt signalling in
the adult. The first indication that adult Wnt signalling controls stem cells
came from a Tcf4 knockout experiment: mutant mice failed to build crypt stem cell
compartments. This observation was followed by similar findings in multiple other
tissues. Recent studies have indicated that Wnt agonists of the R-spondin family 
provide potent growth stimuli for crypts in vivo and in vitro. Independently,
Lgr5 was found as an exquisite marker for these crypt stem cells. The story has
come full circle with the finding that the stem cell marker Lgr5 constitutes the 
receptor for R-spondins and occurs in complex with Frizzled/Lrp.

PMCID: PMC3380219
PMID: 22617424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037013. Epub 2012 May 17.

MENA is a transcriptional target of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.

Najafov A(1), Seker T, Even I, Hoxhaj G, Selvi O, Ozel DE, Koman A, Birgül-Iyison
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici University, Istanbul,
Turkey. a.najafov@dundee.ac.uk

Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway plays important roles in embryonic development
and carcinogenesis. Overactivation of the pathway is one of the most common
driving forces in major cancers such as colorectal and breast cancers. The
downstream effectors of the pathway and its regulation of carcinogenesis and
metastasis are still not very well understood. In this study, which was based on 
two genome-wide transcriptomics screens, we identify MENA (ENAH, Mammalian
enabled homologue) as a novel transcriptional target of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling pathway. We show that the expression of MENA is upregulated upon
overexpression of degradation-resistant ß-catenin. Promoters of all mammalian
MENA homologues contain putative binding sites for Tcf4 transcription factor--the
primary effector of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and we demonstrate functionality of
these Tcf4-binding sites using luciferase reporter assays and overexpression of
ß-catenin, Tcf4 and dominant-negative Tcf4. In addition, lithium
chloride-mediated inhibition of GSK3ß also resulted in increase in MENA mRNA
levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed direct interaction between ß-catenin
and MENA promoter in Huh7 and HEK293 cells and also in mouse brain and liver
tissues. Moreover, overexpression of Wnt1 and Wnt3a ligands increased MENA mRNA
levels. Additionally, knock-down of MENA ortholog in D. melanogaster eyeful and
sensitized eye cancer fly models resulted in increased tumor and metastasis
formations. In summary, our study identifies MENA as novel nexus for the
Wnt/ß-catenin and the Notch signalling cascades.

PMCID: PMC3355175
PMID: 22615875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Sep;97(3):394-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 May 14.

Genetic prediction of postpartum diabetes in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Ekelund M(1), Shaat N, Almgren P, Anderberg E, Landin-Olsson M, Lyssenko V, Groop
L, Berntorp K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Helsingborg, Helsingborg, Sweden.
magnus.ekelund@med.lu.se

AIMS: To examine whether genetic variants that predispose individuals to type 2
diabetes (T2D) could predict the development of diabetes after gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: 13 SNPs (FTO rs8050136, CDKAL1 rs7754840 and rs7756992, CDKN2A/2B
rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875, IGF2BP2 rs1470579 and rs4402960, SLC30A8 rs13266634, 
TCF7L2 rs7903146, PPARG rs1801282, GCK rs1799884, HNF1A rs1169288, and KCNJ11
rs5219) were genotyped in 793 women with GDM after a median follow-up of 57
months.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age and ethnicity, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and the FTO
rs8050136 variants significantly predicted postpartum diabetes; hazard ratio (95%
confidence interval 1.29 (1.01-1.66) and 1.36 (1.06-1.74), respectively (additive
model) versus 1.45 (1.01-2.08) and 1.56 (1.06-2.29) (dominant model)). Adjusting 
for BMI attenuated the effect of the FTO variant, suggesting that the effect was 
mediated through its effect on BMI. Combining all risk alleles to a weighted risk
score was significantly associated with the risk of postpartum diabetes (hazard
ratio 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.05-1.18, p=0.00016 after adjustment for age
and ethnicity).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 and FTO rs8050136 polymorphisms, and
particularly a weighted risk score of T2D risk alleles, predict diabetes after
GDM. Further studies in other populations are needed to confirm our results.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22591707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77(5):305-8. doi: 10.1159/000338665. Epub 2012 May 15.

The effect of type 2 diabetes risk loci on insulin requirements in type 1
diabetes.

Moosavi M(1), Séguin J, Li Q, Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Paediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Que., Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the correlation between insulin requirements of type 1
diabetic (T1D) patients and genotype at type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk loci, obtained
in our genome-wide association study.
METHODS: From a database of detailed insulin dosing of 567 patients, we selected 
177 for whom we also had genome-wide genotyping data. Using PLINK software, we
examined the association between insulin requirement as a quantitative trait and 
nineteen T2D risk loci.
RESULTS: Out of 19 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs13266634 on
chromosome 8 and rs7901695 on chromosome 10 showed nominal significance of
association (p < 0.05). The first SNP is nonsynonymous (325 Arg>Trp) and maps to 
the SLC30A8 gene encoding the ß-cell-specific ZnT8 zinc transporter, while the
second is an intronic SNP in TCF7L2, the strongest known T2D association. Both
loci exert their effect on ß-cells and, in both, the T2D risk allele is
associated with lower insulin requirements.
CONCLUSION: We identified two T2D susceptibility loci that modulate insulin
requirements in T1D patients. Our results are consistent with the association of 
lower insulin secretion with higher insulin sensitivity. To explain the
continuation of this correlation after ß-cell destruction, we hypothesize an
epigenetic mechanism that alters insulin responsiveness in T1D patients based on 
ß-cell function in early life. Such knowledge may allow a more precise approach
to treatment.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22584884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Sep;17(9):887-905. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.37. Epub 2012 May
15.

Convergent functional genomics of schizophrenia: from comprehensive understanding
to genetic risk prediction.

Ayalew M(1), Le-Niculescu H, Levey DF, Jain N, Changala B, Patel SD, Winiger E,
Breier A, Shekhar A, Amdur R, Koller D, Nurnberger JI, Corvin A, Geyer M, Tsuang 
MT, Salomon D, Schork NJ, Fanous AH, O'Donovan MC, Niculescu AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA.

We have used a translational convergent functional genomics (CFG) approach to
identify and prioritize genes involved in schizophrenia, by gene-level
integration of genome-wide association study data with other genetic and gene
expression studies in humans and animal models. Using this polyevidence scoring
and pathway analyses, we identify top genes (DISC1, TCF4, MBP, MOBP, NCAM1,
NRCAM, NDUFV2, RAB18, as well as ADCYAP1, BDNF, CNR1, COMT, DRD2, DTNBP1, GAD1,
GRIA1, GRIN2B, HTR2A, NRG1, RELN, SNAP-25, TNIK), brain development, myelination,
cell adhesion, glutamate receptor signaling, G-protein-coupled receptor signaling
and cAMP-mediated signaling as key to pathophysiology and as targets for
therapeutic intervention. Overall, the data are consistent with a model of
disrupted connectivity in schizophrenia, resulting from the effects of
neurodevelopmental environmental stress on a background of genetic vulnerability.
In addition, we show how the top candidate genes identified by CFG can be used to
generate a genetic risk prediction score (GRPS) to aid schizophrenia diagnostics,
with predictive ability in independent cohorts. The GRPS also differentiates
classic age of onset schizophrenia from early onset and late-onset disease. We
also show, in three independent cohorts, two European American and one African
American, increasing overlap, reproducibility and consistency of findings from
single-nucleotide polymorphisms to genes, then genes prioritized by CFG, and
ultimately at the level of biological pathways and mechanisms. Finally, we
compared our top candidate genes for schizophrenia from this analysis with top
candidate genes for bipolar disorder and anxiety disorders from previous CFG
analyses conducted by us, as well as findings from the fields of autism and
Alzheimer. Overall, our work maps the genomic and biological landscape for
schizophrenia, providing leads towards a better understanding of illness,
diagnostics and therapeutics. It also reveals the significant genetic overlap
with other major psychiatric disorder domains, suggesting the need for improved
nosology.

PMCID: PMC3427857
PMID: 22584867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Aug;16(8):948-51. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2012.0051.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Association of TCF7L2 and ADIPOQ with body mass index, waist-hip ratio, and
systolic blood pressure in an endogamous ethnic group of India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Walia GK, Kalla L, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Despite the increasing burden of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and its established
association with anthropometric and physiological traits as a risk factor,
genetic studies focusing on the association of T2D-related genes with
quantitative traits like body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR), and
systolic blood pressure (SBP) are only a few for western populations and rare for
Indian populations. The present study tested the association of TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ with BMI, SBP, and WHR in men and women of the Aggarwal
population of India and found a differential association of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs4506565, and rs12256372) and ADIPOQ (rs2241766 and rs1501299) genes with
increasing BMI, SBP, and WHR between the two sexes. We conclude that TCF7L2 and
ADIPOQ together might play an important role in explaining these traits and to
understand the biological and genetic mechanisms underlying T2D, and the role of 
other T2D genes must also be evaluated with these continuous traits.

PMCID: PMC3710444
PMID: 22583123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Med Genet. 2012 Jun;49(6):353-61. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100819. Epub 2012
May 11.

Clinical application of exome sequencing in undiagnosed genetic conditions.

Need AC(1), Shashi V, Hitomi Y, Schoch K, Shianna KV, McDonald MT, Meisler MH,
Goldstein DB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genome Variation, Duke University School of Medicine, Box
91009, Durham, NC 27708, USA. d.goldstein@duke.edu

BACKGROUND: There is considerable interest in the use of next-generation
sequencing to help diagnose unidentified genetic conditions, but it is difficult 
to predict the success rate in a clinical setting that includes patients with a
broad range of phenotypic presentations.
METHODS: The authors present a pilot programme of whole-exome sequencing on 12
patients with unexplained and apparent genetic conditions, along with their
unaffected parents. Unlike many previous studies, the authors did not seek
patients with similar phenotypes, but rather enrolled any undiagnosed proband
with an apparent genetic condition when predetermined criteria were met.
RESULTS: This undertaking resulted in a likely genetic diagnosis in 6 of the 12
probands, including the identification of apparently causal mutations in four
genes known to cause Mendelian disease (TCF4, EFTUD2, SCN2A and SMAD4) and one
gene related to known Mendelian disease genes (NGLY1). Of particular interest is 
that at the time of this study, EFTUD2 was not yet known as a Mendelian disease
gene but was nominated as a likely cause based on the observation of de novo
mutations in two unrelated probands. In a seventh case with multiple disparate
clinical features, the authors were able to identify homozygous mutations in
EFEMP1 as a likely cause for macular degeneration (though likely not for other
features).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that next-generation sequencing can
have high success rates in a clinical setting, but also highlights key
challenges. It further suggests that the presentation of known Mendelian
conditions may be considerably broader than currently recognised.

PMCID: PMC3375064
PMID: 22581936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2012 Jun;139(12):2118-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.076067. Epub 2012 May 9.

Function of Wnt/ß-catenin in counteracting Tcf3 repression through the
Tcf3-ß-catenin interaction.

Wu CI(1), Hoffman JA, Shy BR, Ford EM, Fuchs E, Nguyen H, Merrill BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway classically functions through the
activation of target genes by Tcf/Lef-ß-catenin complexes. In contrast to
ß-catenin-dependent functions described for Tcf1, Tcf4 and Lef1, the known
embryonic functions for Tcf3 in mice, frogs and fish are consistent with
ß-catenin-independent repressor activity. In this study, we genetically define
Tcf3-ß-catenin functions in mice by generating a Tcf3<U+0394>N knock-in mutation that
specifically ablates Tcf3-ß-catenin. Mouse embryos homozygous for the knock-in
mutation (Tcf3(<U+0394>N/<U+0394>N)) progress through gastrulation without apparent defects,
thus genetically proving that Tcf3 function during gastrulation is independent of
ß-catenin interaction. Tcf3(<U+0394>N/<U+0394>N) mice were not viable, and several
post-gastrulation defects revealed the first in vivo functions of Tcf3-ß-catenin 
interaction affecting limb development, vascular integrity, neural tube closure
and eyelid closure. Interestingly, the etiology of defects indicated an indirect 
role for Tcf3-ß-catenin in the activation of target genes. Tcf3 directly
represses transcription of Lef1, which is stimulated by Wnt/ß-catenin activity.
These genetic data indicate that Tcf3-ß-catenin is not necessary to activate
target genes directly. Instead, our findings support the existence of a
regulatory circuit whereby Wnt/ß-catenin counteracts Tcf3 repression of Lef1,
which subsequently activates target gene expression via Lef1-ß-catenin complexes.
We propose that the Tcf/Lef circuit model provides a mechanism downstream of
ß-catenin stability for controlling the strength of Wnt signaling activity during
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC3357906
PMID: 22573616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035410. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Lack of association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genotypes and body weight
on the development of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes.

Winkler C(1), Raab J, Grallert H, Ziegler AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany.

AIM: To investigate whether type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and body weight 
influence the development of islet autoantibodies and the rate of progression to 
type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: Genotyping for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of the type 2
diabetes susceptibility genes CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO, HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2,
KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 was obtained in 1350 children
from parents with type 1 diabetes participating in the BABYDIAB study. Children
were prospectively followed from birth for islet autoantibodies and type 1
diabetes. Data on weight and height were obtained at 9 months, 2, 5, 8, 11, and
14 years of age.
RESULTS: None of type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO,
HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG and SLC30A8 loci were
associated with the development of islet autoantibodies or diabetes. The type 2
diabetes susceptible genotype of TCF7L2 was associated with a lower risk of islet
autoantibodies (7% vs. 12% by age of 10 years, P = 0.015, P(corrected) = 0.18).
Overweight children at seroconversion did not progress to diabetes faster than
non-overweight children (HR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.48-2.45, P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings do not support an association of type 2 diabetes risk
factors with islet autoimmunity or acceleration of diabetes in children with a
family history of type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3338842
PMID: 22558147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 Jun;95(6):1468-76. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.014670. Epub 2012
May 2.

Influence of dietary protein intake and glycemic index on the association between
TCF7L2 HapA and weight gain.

Fisher E(1), Meidtner K, Angquist L, Holst C, Hansen RD, Halkjær J, Masala G,
Ostergaard JN, Overvad K, Palli D, Vimaleswaran KS, Tjønneland A, van der A DL,
Wareham NJ, Sørensen TIa, Loos RJ, Boeing H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Nuthetal, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have 
been associated with type 2 diabetes and BMI.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to investigate whether TCF7L2 HapA is associated
with weight development and whether such an association is modulated by protein
intake or by the glycemic index (GI).
DESIGN: The investigation was based on prospective data from 5 cohort studies
nested within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.
Weight change was followed up for a mean (±SD) of 6.8 ± 2.5 y. TCF7L2 rs7903146
and rs10885406 were successfully genotyped in 11,069 individuals and used to
derive HapA. Multiple logistic and linear regression analysis was applied to test
for the main effect of HapA and its interaction with dietary protein or GI.
Analyses from the cohorts were combined by random-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: HapA was associated neither with baseline BMI (0.03 ± 0.07 BMI units per
allele; P = 0.6) nor with annual weight change (8.8 ± 11.7 g/y per allele; P =
0.5). However, a previously shown positive association between intake of protein,
particularly of animal origin, and subsequent weight change in this population
proved to be attenuated by TCF7L2 HapA (P-interaction = 0.01). We showed that
weight gain becomes independent of protein intake with an increasing number of
HapA alleles. Substitution of protein with either fat or carbohydrates showed the
same effects. No interaction with GI was observed.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 HapA attenuates the positive association between animal
protein intake and long-term body weight change in middle-aged Europeans but does
not interact with the GI of the diet.

PMID: 22552033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035754. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Cyr61/CCN1 is regulated by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and plays an important role in
the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li ZQ(1), Ding W, Sun SJ, Li J, Pan J, Zhao C, Wu WR, Si WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Abnormal activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway has been implicated in
carcinogenesis. Transcription of Wnt target genes is regulated by nuclear
ß-catenin, whose over-expression is observed in Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC)
tissue. Cyr61, a member of the CCN complex family of multifunctional proteins, is
also found over-expressed in many types of tumor and plays dramatically different
roles in tumorigenesis. In this study, we investigated the relationship between
Cyr61 and ß-catenin in HCC. We found that while Cyr61 protein was not expressed
at a detectable level in the liver tissue of healthy individuals, its expression 
level was elevated in the HCC and HCC adjacent tissues and was markedly increased
in cancer-adjacent hepatic cirrhosis tissue. Over-expression of Cyr61 was
positively correlated with increased levels of ß-catenin in human HCC samples.
Activation of ß-catenin signaling elevated the mRNA level of Cyr61 in HepG2
cells, while inhibition of ß-catenin signaling reduced both mRNA and protein
levels of Cyr61. We identified two TCF4-binding elements in the promoter region
of human Cyr61 gene and demonstrated that ß-catenin/TCF4 complex specifically
bound to the Cyr61 promoter in vivo and directly regulated its promoter activity.
Furthermore, we found that over-expression of Cyr61 in HepG2 cells promoted the
progression of HCC xenografts in SCID mice. These findings indicate that Cyr61 is
a direct target of ß-catenin signaling in HCC and may play an important role in
the progression of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3335098
PMID: 22540002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Sep;25(9):1783-6. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.663831. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene polymorphisms and gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Klein K(1), Haslinger P, Bancher-Todesca D, Leipold H, Knöfler M, Handisurya A,
Kautzky-Willer A, Worda C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Feto-maternal Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria. katharina.klein@meduniwien.ac.at

OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms were shown
to be associated with insulin resistance. We examined two single nucleotide
exchanges in this gene in women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and in
women with normal glucose tolerance.
METHODS: A total of 1800 unselected women were prospectively screened for GDM by 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation. Two
hundred and fifty Caucasian women of this collective, 125 patients with
pathological OGTT and 125 patients with normal glucose tolerance were randomly
selected. DNA samples were isolated and TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(TCF7L2rs12255372 and TCF7L2rs7903146) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Women with GDM were significantly older (30.1 ± 3.4 years vs. 28.2 ± 4.8
years, p = 0.01), had a significantly higher body mass index (26.4 kg/m(2);
interquartile range: 23.33-31.19 vs. 24.6 kg/m(2); interquartile range:
21.05-27.28, p = 0.02) and were significantly more often homozygous for the T
allele of TCF7L2rs12255372 (17.2% vs. 2.6%, p = 0.002) than patients with normal 
glucose tolerance. Binary logistic regression analysis showed that the homozygous
variant of TCF7L2rs12255372 (T/T) is an independent risk factor for GDM (OR 7.7, 
95% CI: 1.71-34.60), but not the homozygous variant of TCF7L2rs7903146 (T/T).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2rs12255372 variant (T/T) is associated with increased risk of 
GDM in Caucasian women.

PMID: 22524208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell. 2012 Apr 27;149(3):525-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.028. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Sequencing chromosomal abnormalities reveals neurodevelopmental loci that confer 
risk across diagnostic boundaries.

Talkowski ME(1), Rosenfeld JA, Blumenthal I, Pillalamarri V, Chiang C, Heilbut A,
Ernst C, Hanscom C, Rossin E, Lindgren AM, Pereira S, Ruderfer D, Kirby A, Ripke 
S, Harris DJ, Lee JH, Ha K, Kim HG, Solomon BD, Gropman AL, Lucente D, Sims K,
Ohsumi TK, Borowsky ML, Loranger S, Quade B, Lage K, Miles J, Wu BL, Shen Y,
Neale B, Shaffer LG, Daly MJ, Morton CC, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

Balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCAs) represent a relatively untapped
reservoir of single-gene disruptions in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). We
sequenced BCAs in patients with autism or related NDDs, revealing disruption of
33 loci in four general categories: (1) genes previously associated with abnormal
neurodevelopment (e.g., AUTS2, FOXP1, and CDKL5), (2) single-gene contributors to
microdeletion syndromes (MBD5, SATB2, EHMT1, and SNURF-SNRPN), (3) novel risk
loci (e.g., CHD8, KIRREL3, and ZNF507), and (4) genes associated with later-onset
psychiatric disorders (e.g., TCF4, ZNF804A, PDE10A, GRIN2B, and ANK3). We also
discovered among neurodevelopmental cases a profoundly increased burden of
copy-number variants from these 33 loci and a significant enrichment of polygenic
risk alleles from genome-wide association studies of autism and schizophrenia.
Our findings suggest a polygenic risk model of autism and reveal that some
neurodevelopmental genes are sensitive to perturbation by multiple mutational
mechanisms, leading to variable phenotypic outcomes that manifest at different
life stages.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3340505
PMID: 22521361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2011 Dec;33(6):654-8.

[Effects of sodium selenite on the expressions of beta-catenin and its target
cyclin D1 in colorectal cancer cells HCT 116 and SW480].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo H(1), Yang Y, Xu CM.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of sodium selenite on the expressions of
beta-catenin and cyclin D1 in colorectal cancer cells HCT 116 and SW480.
METHODS: HCT 116 and SW480 cells were treated by 10 micromol/L sodium selenite at
different time points. The expressions and transcription of beta-catenin and
cyclin D1 were detected by Western blot analysis and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), respectively. Meanwhile, the impact of MG132 
(a proteasome inhibitor) pretreatment on the expressions of beta-catenin and
cyclin D1 was observed through Western blot analysis. The interaction between
beta-catenin and T cell factor 4 (TCF4) after selenite treatment was evaluated
using co-immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULTS: Sodium selenite inhibited the expression of beta-catenin and
transcription of its target such as cyclin D1. MG132 pretreatment prevented the
inhibition of beta-catenin signaling triggered by selenite in HCT 116 and SW480
cells. Furthermore, selenite treatment disrupted the interaction between
beta-catenin and TCF4 in HCT 116 and SW480 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Sodium selenite can lower the expression levels of beta-catenin and 
its target cyclin D1, during which the proteasome-mediated degradative pathway
may be involved. The decreased interaction between beta-catenin and TCF4 due to
sodium selenite may be also involved in the regulation of beta-catenin signaling.

PMID: 22509550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034162. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Multi-level interactions between the nuclear receptor TRa1 and the WNT effectors 
ß-catenin/Tcf4 in the intestinal epithelium.

Sirakov M(1), Skah S, Lone IN, Nadjar J, Angelov D, Plateroti M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e93418.

Intestinal homeostasis results from complex cross-regulation of signaling
pathways; their alteration induces intestinal tumorigenesis. Previously, we found
that the thyroid hormone nuclear receptor TRa1 activates and synergizes with the 
WNT pathway, inducing crypt cell proliferation and promoting tumorigenesis. Here,
we investigated the mechanisms and implications of the cross-regulation between
these two pathways in gut tumorigenesis in vivo and in vitro. We analyzed TRa1
and WNT target gene expression in healthy mucosae and tumors from mice
overexpressing TRa1 in the intestinal epithelium in a WNT-activated genetic
background (vil-TRa1/Apc mice). Interestingly, increased levels of ß-catenin/Tcf4
complex in tumors from vil-TRa1/Apc mice blocked TRa1 transcriptional activity.
This observation was confirmed in Caco2 cells, in which TRa1 functionality on a
luciferase reporter-assay was reduced by the overexpression of ß-catenin/Tcf4.
Moreover, TRa1 physically interacted with ß-catenin/Tcf4 in the nuclei of these
cells. Using molecular approaches, we demonstrated that the binding of TRa1 to
its DNA target sequences within the tumors was impaired, while it was newly
recruited to WNT target genes. In conclusion, our observations strongly suggest
that increased ß-catenin/Tcf4 levels i) correlated with reduced TRa1
transcriptional activity on its target genes and, ii) were likely responsible for
the shift of TRa1 binding on WNT targets. Together, these data suggest a novel
mechanism for the tumor-promoting activity of the TRa1 nuclear receptor.

PMCID: PMC3317923
PMID: 22509275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Schizophr Bull. 2013 May;39(3):518-26. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbs056. Epub 2012 Apr 
12.

Brain vs behavior: an effect size comparison of neuroimaging and cognitive
studies of genetic risk for schizophrenia.

Rose EJ(1), Donohoe G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College Dublin, Trinity Centre for Health
Sciences, St. James' Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland. rosee@tcd.ie

Comment in
    Schizophr Bull. 2013 May;39(3):501-3.

Genetic variants associated with increased risk for schizophrenia (SZ) are
hypothesized to be more penetrant at the level of brain structure and function
than at the level of behavior. However, to date the relative sensitivity of
imaging vs cognitive measures of these variants has not been quantified. We
considered effect sizes associated with cognitive and imaging studies of 9 robust
SZ risk genes (DAOA, DISC1, DTNBP1, NRG1, RGS4, NRGN, CACNA1C, TCF4, and ZNF804A)
published between January 2005-November 2011. Summary data was used to calculate 
estimates of effect size for each significant finding. The mean effect size for
each study was categorized as small, medium, or large and the relative frequency 
of each category was compared between modalities and across genes. Random effects
meta-analysis was used to consider the impact of experimental methodology on
effect size. Imaging studies reported mostly medium or large effects, whereas
cognitive investigations commonly reported small effects. Meta-analysis confirmed
that imaging studies were associated with larger effects. Effect size estimates
were negatively correlated with sample size but did not differ as a function of
gene nor imaging modality. These observations support the notion that SZ risk
variants show larger effects, and hence greater penetrance, when characterized
using indices of brain structure and function than when indexed by cognitive
measures. However, it remains to be established whether this holds true for
individual risk variants, imaging modalities, or cognitive functions, and how
such effects may be mediated by a relationship with sample size and other aspects
of experimental variability.

PMCID: PMC3627766
PMID: 22499782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;26(2):189-201. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.002.

Is genetic testing useful to predict type 2 diabetes?

Vassy JL(1), Meigs JB.

Author information: 
(1)General Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 02114, USA.
jvassy@partners.org

The early identification of individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D) enables
prevention. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have added at least 40 
genetic variants to the list of already well characterized T2D risk predictors,
including family history, obesity, and elevated fasting plasma glucose levels.
Although these variants can significantly predict T2D alone and as a part of
genotype risk scores, they do not yet offer clinical discrimination beyond that
achieved with common clinical measurements. Future progress on at least two
research fronts may improve the predictive performance of genotype information.
First, expanded GWAS efforts in non-European populations will allow targeted
sequencing of risk loci and the identification of true causal variants. Second,
studies with longer prediction time horizons may demonstrate that genotype
information performs better than clinical risk predictors over a longer period of
the life course. At present, however, genetic testing cannot be recommended for
clinical T2D risk prediction in adults.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4070012
PMID: 22498248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):5915-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203675109. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Transcription factor 4 as an important determinant of gating function in
schizophrenia.

Roussos P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):6271-6.

PMCID: PMC3341038
PMID: 22492968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes. 2012 Jul;61(7):1726-33. doi: 10.2337/db11-1516. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Reduced insulin exocytosis in human pancreatic ß-cells with gene variants linked 
to type 2 diabetes.

Rosengren AH(1), Braun M, Mahdi T, Andersson SA, Travers ME, Shigeto M, Zhang E, 
Almgren P, Ladenvall C, Axelsson AS, Edlund A, Pedersen MG, Jonsson A, Ramracheya
R, Tang Y, Walker JN, Barrett A, Johnson PR, Lyssenko V, McCarthy MI, Groop L,
Salehi A, Gloyn AL, Renström E, Rorsman P, Eliasson L.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmo, Lund
University, Malmo, Sweden. anders.rosengren@med.lu.se

The majority of genetic risk variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D) affect insulin
secretion, but the mechanisms through which they influence pancreatic islet
function remain largely unknown. We functionally characterized human islets to
determine secretory, biophysical, and ultrastructural features in relation to
genetic risk profiles in diabetic and nondiabetic donors. Islets from donors with
T2D exhibited impaired insulin secretion, which was more pronounced in lean than 
obese diabetic donors. We assessed the impact of 14 disease susceptibility
variants on measures of glucose sensing, exocytosis, and structure. Variants near
TCF7L2 and ADRA2A were associated with reduced glucose-induced insulin secretion,
whereas susceptibility variants near ADRA2A, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, and TCF7L2 were
associated with reduced depolarization-evoked insulin exocytosis. KCNQ1, ADRA2A, 
KCNJ11, HHEX/IDE, and SLC2A2 variants affected granule docking. We combined our
results to create a novel genetic risk score for ß-cell dysfunction that includes
aberrant granule docking, decreased Ca(2+) sensitivity of exocytosis, and reduced
insulin release. Individuals with a high risk score displayed an impaired
response to intravenous glucose and deteriorating insulin secretion over time.
Our results underscore the importance of defects in ß-cell exocytosis in T2D and 
demonstrate the potential of cellular phenotypic characterization in the
elucidation of complex genetic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3379663
PMID: 22492527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;29(2):194-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.02.017.

[Association analysis of genetic polymorphisms of TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX
genes and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu LL(1), Lin Y, Yang ZL, Yin YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX with diabetic retinopathy (DR) and nephropathy (DN)
in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: A total of 479 subjects with DR,248 with DN and 650 without DR or DN
were recruited to assess the associations between SNPs of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs6585205, rs11196218), CDKAL1 (rs10946398,rs4712527), SLC30A8 (rs13266634,
rs3802177, rs11558471) and HHEX (rs1111875, rs7923837) and the development of DR 
and DN.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in genotypic and allele frequencies
of rs11558471 (SLC30A8) between DR and control groups (P< 0.05), the odds ratio
(OR) values of A and AA were 1.27 and 1.68. The distributions of genotype and
allele frequency for rs11196218 (TCF7L2) were significantly different between DN 
and control group (P=0.0051,OR=1.37). However, the P value after Bonferroni
correction showed no significant difference. No significant differences were
found in the distributions of rs13266634 and rs3802177 (SLC30A8), rs10946398
(CDKAL1), rs6585205, rs7903146 and rs11196218 (TCF7L2) and rs7923837 (HHEX)
between DR and control groups, and nor significant differences were found in
distributions of rs6585205 (TCF7L2), rs4712527 (CDKAL1), rs13266634, rs3802177
and rs11558471 (SLC30A8), and 7923837 (HHEX) between DN and control groups,
though for all comparison the OR values were greater than 1.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 genes may be associated with the 
development of DR and DN, respectively. Association between the polymorphisms of 
CKDAL1, TCF7L2 and HHEX genes and DR, and between the polymorphisms of SLC30A8,
HHEX and CDKAL1 genes and DN, cannot be excluded.

PMID: 22487833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Physiol Res. 2012;61(3):229-40. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

T2D risk haplotypes of the TCF7L2 gene in the Czech population sample: the
association with free fatty acids composition.

Vcelák J(1), Vejraková D, Vanková M, Lukáová P, Bradnová O, Hálková T, Beták
J, Andelová K, Kvasnicková H, Hoskovcová P, Vondra K, Vrbíková J, Bendlová B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Institute of Endocrinology, Prague,
Czech Republic. jvcelak@endo.cz

The association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene variants with the 
pathogenesis of T2D, gestational diabetes and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
was examined. The study involved 1460 individuals: 347 T2D patients (D); 261
gestational diabetics (G); 147 offspring of T2D (O); 329 women with PCOS, and 376
controls (C). The SNPs: rs7901695; rs7903146; rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
genotyped. Anthropometric and biochemical parameters, oGTT derived indices were
assessed. In addition, free fatty acids (FFAs) were evaluated in 183 non-diabetic
women. The CTT haplotype showed the strongest association with T2D with OR 1.57, 
p=0.0003. The frequency of the CTT/CTT haplotype was decreasing in following
order: D 10.6, O 9.5, G 6.1, C 5.3 and PCOS 4.9 [%]. Among CTT carriers,
significantly decreased levels of oGTT-stimulated insulin and C-peptide as well
as proportions of fasting PUFAs were observed. The carriership of CTG/TCG was
associated with gestational diabetes, OR 2.59, p=0.036. The association of TCF7L2
haplotypes with T2D and gestational diabetes but not with PCOS was confirmed.
Novel association of TCF7L2 with FFAs composition was found.

PMID: 22480428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013 Jan-Feb;22(1):54-7. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in epicardial fibrosis of failed pediatric
heart allografts with diastolic dysfunction.

Ye B(1), Ge Y, Perens G, Hong L, Xu H, Fishbein MC, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Failed pediatric heart allografts with diastolic dysfunction exhibit 
severe epicardial fibrosis. The molecular mechanism underlying this process is
poorly understood. Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays an important role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is implicated in fibrosing diseases. In
this study, we tested the hypothesis that canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is
activated in epicardial fibrosis of end-stage dysfunctional pediatric allografts.
METHODS: Fourteen explanted heart grafts of 12 patients who had undergone 14
heart transplantations were used for immunohistochemical staining of ß-catenin
and its nuclear binding partners, T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor family
transcriptional factors. Fourteen age-matched native hearts from patients who had
undergone first heart transplantation without evidence of epicardial fibrosis
were used as controls.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Epicardial fibroblasts from explanted allografts
demonstrated nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin. These cells also showed nuclear
positivity for T-cell factor 4. No T-cell factor 3 expression was present in the 
epicardium. T-cell factor 1 and lymphoid enhancer factor 1 were observed in
lymphocytes, but not in other cell types of the epicardium. These findings
suggest an association between canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
epicardial fibrosis of failed pediatric heart allografts. Should activation of
this pathway be shown to be causal to epicardial fibrosis in this setting, then
inhibition of this pathway may help to prevent this devastating process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3427707
PMID: 22475572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 May 15;261(1):31-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Preclinical evaluation of destruxin B as a novel Wnt signaling target suppressing
proliferation and metastasis of colorectal cancer using non-invasive
bioluminescence imaging.

Yeh CT(1), Rao YK, Ye M, Wu WS, Chang TC, Wang LS, Wu CH, Wu AT, Tzeng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

In continuation to our studies toward the identification of direct anti-cancer
targets, here we showed that destruxin B (DB) from Metarhizium anisopliae
suppressed the proliferation and induced cell cycle arrest in human colorectal
cancer (CRC) HT29, SW480 and HCT116 cells. Additionally, DB induced apoptosis in 
HT29 cells by decreased expression level of anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL while increased pro-apoptotic Bax. On the other hand, DB attenuated
Wnt-signaling by downregulation of ß-catenin, Tcf4 and ß-catenin/Tcf4
transcriptional activity, concomitantly with decreased expression of ß-catenin
target genes cyclin D1, c-myc and survivin. Furthermore, DB affected the
migratory and invasive ability of HT29 cells through suppressed MMPs-2 and -9
enzymatic activities. We also found that DB targeted the MAPK and/or PI3K/Akt
pathway by reduced expression of Akt, IKK-a, JNK, NF-<U+03BA>B, c-Jun and c-Fos while
increased that of I<U+03BA>Ba. Finally, we demonstrated that DB inhibited tumorigenesis 
in HT29 xenograft mice using non-invasive bioluminescence technique.
Consistently, tumor samples from DB-treated mice demonstrated suppressed
expression of ß-catenin, cyclin D1, survivin, and endothelial marker CD31 while
increased caspase-3 expression. Collectively, our data supports DB as an
inhibitor of Wnt/ß-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway that may be beneficial in the
CRC management.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Oct;38(4):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

European genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes in North African Arabs.

Cauchi S(1), Ezzidi I, El Achhab Y, Mtiraoui N, Chaieb L, Salah D, Nejjari C,
Labrune Y, Yengo L, Beury D, Vaxillaire M, Mahjoub T, Chikri M, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Genomics and Metabolic Diseases, Lille, France.

AIMS: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and previous approaches have 
identified many genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of European descent, but their contribution in Arab populations from 
North Africa is unknown. Our study aimed to validate these markers and to assess 
their combined effects, using large case-control studies of Moroccan and Tunisian
individuals.
METHODS: Overall, 44 polymorphisms, located at 37 validated European loci, were
first analyzed in 1055 normoglycaemic controls and 1193 T2D cases from Morocco.
Associations and trends were then assessed in 942 normoglycaemic controls and
1446 T2D cases from Tunisia. Finally, their ability to discriminate cases from
controls was evaluated.
RESULTS: Carrying a genetic variant in BCL11A, ADAMTS9, IGF2BP2, WFS1, CDKAL1,
TP53INP1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HNF1A, FTO, MC4R and GCK increased the risk of
T2D when assessing the Moroccan and Tunisian samples together. Each additional
risk allele increased the susceptibility for developing the disease by 12% (P =
9.0 × 10(-9)). Genotype information for 13 polymorphisms slightly improved the
classification of North Africans with and without T2D, as assessed by clinical
parameters, with an increase in the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve from 0.64 to 0.67 (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: In addition to TCF7L2, 12 additional loci were found to be shared
between Europeans and North African Arabs. As for Europeans, the reliability of
genetic testing based on these markers to determine the risk for T2D is low. More
genome-wide studies, including next-generation sequencing, in North African
populations are needed to identify the genetic variants responsible for ethnic
disparities in T2D susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22463974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Diabetes. 2012 May;61(5):1082-9. doi: 10.2337/db11-1732. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Diabetes-associated common genetic variation and its association with GLP-1
concentrations and response to exogenous GLP-1.

Smushkin G(1), Sathananthan M, Sathananthan A, Dalla Man C, Micheletto F,
Zinsmeister AR, Cobelli C, Vella A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The mechanisms by which common genetic variation predisposes to type 2 diabetes
remain unclear. The disease-associated variants in TCF7L2 (rs7903146) and WFS1
(rs10010131) have been shown to affect response to exogenous glucagon-like
peptide 1 (GLP-1), while variants in KCNQ1 (rs151290, rs2237892, and rs2237895)
alter endogenous GLP-1 secretion. We set out to validate these observations using
a model of GLP-1-induced insulin secretion. We studied healthy individuals using 
a hyperglycemic clamp and GLP-1 infusion. In addition, we measured active and
total GLP-1 in response to an oral challenge in nondiabetic subjects. After
genotyping the relevant single nucleotide polymorphisms, generalized linear
regression models and repeated-measures ANCOVA models incorporating potential
confounders, such as age and BMI, were used to assess the associations, if any,
of response with genotype. These variants did not alter GLP-1 concentrations in
response to oral intake. No effects on ß-cell responsiveness to hyperglycemia and
GLP-1 infusion were apparent. Diabetes-associated variation (T allele at
rs7903146) in TCF7L2 may impair the ability of hyperglycemia to suppress glucagon
(45 ± 2 vs. 47 ± 2 vs. 60 ± 5 ng/L for CC, CT, and TT, respectively, P = 0.02).
In nondiabetic subjects, diabetes-associated genetic variation does not alter
GLP-1 concentrations after an oral challenge or its effect on insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3331759
PMID: 22461567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):2873-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds112. Epub 2012 Mar 
28.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-associated mutations in TCF4 lead to variable impairment of
the transcription factor function ranging from hypomorphic to dominant-negative
effects.

Sepp M(1), Pruunsild P, Timmusk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, Tallinn, Estonia.

Transcription factor TCF4 (alias ITF2, SEF2 or E2-2) is a broadly expressed basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that functions as a homo- or heterodimer.
Missense, nonsense, frame-shift and splice-site mutations as well as
translocations and large deletions encompassing TCF4 gene cause Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome (PTHS), a rare developmental disorder characterized by severe motor and 
mental retardation, typical facial features and breathing anomalies. Irrespective
of the mutation, TCF4 haploinsufficiency has been proposed as an underlying
mechanism for PTHS. We have recently demonstrated that human TCF4 gene is
transcribed using numerous 5' exons. Here, we re-evaluated the impact of all the 
published PTHS-associated mutations, taking into account the diversity of TCF4
isoforms, and assessed how the reading frame elongating and missense mutations
affect TCF4 functions. Our analysis revealed that not all deletions and
truncating mutations in TCF4 result in complete loss-of-function and the impact
of reading frame elongating and missense mutations ranges from subtle
deficiencies to dominant-negative effects. We show that (i) missense mutations in
TCF4 bHLH domain and the reading frame elongating mutation damage DNA-binding and
transactivation ability in a manner dependent on dimer context (homodimer versus 
heterodimer with ASCL1 or NEUROD2); (ii) the elongating mutation and the missense
mutation at the dimer interface of the HLH domain destabilize the protein; and
(iii) missense mutations outside of the bHLH domain cause no major functional
deficiencies. We conclude that different PTHS-associated mutations impair the
functions of TCF4 by diverse mechanisms and to a varying extent, possibly
contributing to the phenotypic variability of PTHS patients.

PMID: 22460224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):6271-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118051109. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Schizophrenia risk polymorphisms in the TCF4 gene interact with smoking in the
modulation of auditory sensory gating.

Quednow BB(1), Brinkmeyer J, Mobascher A, Nothnagel M, Musso F, Gründer G, Savary
N, Petrovsky N, Frommann I, Lennertz L, Spreckelmeyer KN, Wienker TF, Dahmen N,
Thuerauf N, Clepce M, Kiefer F, Majic T, Mössner R, Maier W, Gallinat J,
Diaz-Lacava A, Toliat MR, Thiele H, Nürnberg P, Wagner M, Winterer G.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Pharmacopsychology, Clinic for Affective Disorders
and General Psychiatry, University Hospital of Psychiatry Zurich, 8032 Zurich,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):5915-6.

Several polymorphisms of the transcription factor 4 (TCF4) have been shown to
increase the risk for schizophrenia, particularly TCF4 rs9960767. This
polymorphism is associated with impaired sensorimotor gating measured by prepulse
inhibition--an established endophenotype of schizophrenia. We therefore
investigated whether TCF4 polymorphisms also affect another proposed
endophenotype of schizophrenia, namely sensory gating assessed by P50 suppression
of the auditory evoked potential. Although sensorimotor gating and sensory gating
are not identical, recent data suggest that they share genetic fundamentals. In a
multicenter study at six academic institutions throughout Germany, we applied an 
auditory P50 suppression paradigm to 1,821 subjects (1,023 never-smokers, 798
smokers) randomly selected from the general population. Samples were genotyped
for 21 TCF4 polymorphisms. Given that smoking is highly prevalent in
schizophrenia and affects sensory gating, we also assessed smoking behavior,
cotinine plasma concentrations, exhaled carbon monoxide, and the Fagerström Test 
(FTND). P50 suppression was significantly decreased in carriers of schizophrenia 
risk alleles of the TCF4 polymorphisms rs9960767, rs10401120rs, rs17597926, and
17512836 (P < 0.0002-0.00005). These gene effects were modulated by smoking
behavior as indicated by significant interactions of TCF4 genotype and smoking
status; heavy smokers (FTND score = 4) showed stronger gene effects on P50
suppression than light smokers and never-smokers. Our finding suggests that
sensory gating is modulated by an interaction of TCF4 genotype with smoking, and 
both factors may play a role in early information processing deficits also in
schizophrenia. Consequently, considering smoking behavior may facilitate the
search for genetic risk factors for schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3341057
PMID: 22451930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Sep;77(3):439-45. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2012.04389.x.

Polycystic ovary syndrome is not associated with polymorphisms of the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, KCNJ11, FTO and SLC30A8 genes.

Kim JJ(1), Choi YM, Cho YM, Hong MA, Chae SJ, Hwang KR, Hwang SS, Yoon SH, Moon
SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance is a core feature of polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). Recently, genome-wide association studies have reported a number of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with reproducible associations and
susceptibilities to type 2 diabetes. We examined the potential association
between the diabetogenic genes uncovered in the genome-wide association studies
and PCOS in Korean women.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
PATIENTS: Women with or without PCOS.
MEASUREMENTS: DNA samples from 377 patients with PCOS and 386 age-matched
controls were genotyped.
RESULTS: None of the 12 SNPs in the six genes (KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, FTO
and CDKAL1) uncovered in the genome-wide association studies were associated with
PCOS. For further analysis, the patients with PCOS were divided into two or three
subgroups according to genotype, and the associations between the genotypes and
insulin resistance or insulin secretory capacity were assessed. No SNPs were
significantly associated with HOMA-IR, HOMA (ßcell) (%), or 2-h 75-g oral glucose
tolerance test insulin levels in the patients with PCOS; there were no
significant associations with other serum hormonal and metabolic markers, such as
androgen or glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the six type 2 diabetes-associated genes
identified in genome-wide association studies are not associated with PCOS.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22443257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Sep;120(8):466-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1306298.
Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Stronger association of common variants in TCF7L2 gene with nonobese type 2
diabetes in the Latvian population.

Kalnina I(1), Geldnere K, Tarasova L, Nikitina-Zake L, Peculis R, Fridmanis D,
Pirags V, Klovins J.

Author information: 
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia.

Polymorphisms in the gene coding for transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) are
recognized as the strongest common genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D)
across multiple ethnicities. This study was conducted to evaluate an association 
between TCF7L2 variants and diabetes susceptibility in the population of Latvia. 
We genotyped 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) rs7901695, rs7903146,
rs11196205 and rs12255372 in 1<U+2009>093 controls and 1<U+2009>043 diabetic subjects.
Association with T2D was found for 3 SNPs rs7901695, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in 
the whole sample (under an additive genetic model, the adjusted odds ratios (OR) 
were 1.26, 95% CI [1.08-1.48], P=0.003; OR=1.32, 95% CI [1.12-1.55], P=0.001 and 
OR=1.35, 95% CI [1.15-1.60], P=0.0004 respectively). In addition observed effects
on T2D susceptibility for analysed SNPs were higher among subjects with BMI under
30<U+2009>kg/m². The impact of TCF7L2 variation on T2D risk in Latvian population is
compatible with that demonstrated by a range of studies conducted in various
ethnic groups.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22441719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.005.

Characterization of the colorectal cancer-associated enhancer MYC-335 at 8q24:
the role of rs67491583.

Tuupanen S(1), Yan J, Turunen M, Gylfe AE, Kaasinen E, Li L, Eng C, Culver DA,
Kalady MF, Pennison MJ, Pasche B, Manne U, de la Chapelle A, Hampel H, Henderson 
BE, Le Marchand L, Hautaniemi S, Askhtorab H, Smoot D, Sandler RS, Keku T, Kupfer
SS, Ellis NA, Haiman CA, Taipale J, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified multiple regions at 8q24
that confer susceptibility to many cancers. In our previous work, we showed that 
the colorectal cancer (CRC) risk variant rs6983267 at 8q24 resides within a TCF4 
binding site at the MYC-335 enhancer, with the risk allele G having a stronger
binding capacity and Wnt responsiveness. Here, we searched for other potential
functional variants within MYC-335. Genetic variation within MYC-335 was
determined in samples from individuals of European, African, and Asian descent,
with emphasis on variants in putative transcription factor binding sites. A 2-bp 
GA deletion rs67491583 was found to affect a growth factor independent (GFI)
binding site and was present only in individuals with African ancestry. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation performed in heterozygous cells showed that the GA deletion
had an ability to reduce binding of the transcriptional repressors GFI1 and
GFI1b. Screening of 1,027 African American colorectal cancer cases and 1,773
healthy controls did not reveal evidence for association (odds ratio: 1.17, 95%
confidence interval: 0.97-1.41, P = 0.095). In this study, rs67491583 was
identified as another functional variant in the CRC-associated enhancer MYC-335, 
but further studies are needed to establish the role of rs67491583 in the
colorectal cancer predisposition of African Americans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3770308
PMID: 22429595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;7(4):892-903. doi: 10.1007/s11481-012-9354-3.
Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Nuclear translocation of ß-catenin is essential for glioma cell survival.

Shi Z(1), Qian X, Li L, Zhang J, Zhu S, Zhu J, Chen L, Zhang K, Han L, Yu S, Pu
P, Jiang T, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Key Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central
Nervous System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries,
Variations and Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, 152, Anshan Road, Heping, Tianjin, 300052, People's Republic of China.

Identification of molecular pathways that are essential for cancer cell survival 
is vital for understanding the underlying biology, as well as to design effective
cancer therapeutics. ß-catenin, a multifunctional oncogenic protein, participates
in cell development. Its multifaceted functions primarily lie to the subcellular 
distribution. The present study demonstrated that ß-catenin accumulated in the
nucleus to a greater extent in high-grade gliomas compared with low-grade
gliomas. In addition, nuclear localization correlated with a worse prognosis for 
patients, as determined by immunohistochemical analysis of 74 glioma samples.
Nuclear expression of ß-catenin was down-regulated in LN229 and U87 glioma cells 
by a small molecule inhibitor of ß-catenin/TCF4 signaling, demonstrating strongly
inhibited ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity and STAT3 luciferase activity, 
as well as decreased mRNA and protein levels of nuclear ß-catenin, TCF4, EGFR,
AKT1, AKT2 and STAT3. Furthermore, repressed nuclear translocation of ß-catenin
resulted in inhibition of proliferation and invasiveness, and also induced
apoptosis of glioma cells. Similar results were also observed in vivo;
intratumoral injection of such small molecule inhibitor downregulated expression 
of nuclear ß-catenin, TCF4, and components of the EGFR pathway, and also delayed 
tumor growth in nude mice harboring subcutaneous U87 xenografts. Results from the
present study provided evidence that nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin
participated in malignant progression of gliomas and implicated poor prognosis,
highlighting it as a potential therapeutic target for gliomas.

PMID: 22415719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2012 May;15(3):258-64. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e328351f543.

Genetic origins of low birth weight.

Yaghootkar H(1), Freathy RM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Smaller size at birth is associated with a higher risk of type
2 diabetes in later life, but the mechanisms behind this association are poorly
understood. Genetic variants which influence susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
via effects on insulin secretion or action are good candidates for association
with birth weight because foetal insulin is a key foetal growth factor. This
review will focus on recent progress in identifying associations between common
genetic variants and birth weight.
RECENT FINDINGS: Foetal genetic variants at two loci (near CCNL1 and in ADCY5)
were robustly associated with birth weight via the foetal genotype in the first
genome-wide association study of birth weight. The birth weight-lowering allele
at ADCY5 also predisposes to type 2 diabetes. In addition, evidence from studies 
of other type 2 diabetes loci is accumulating for association between the foetal 
risk alleles at CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE and lower birth weight, and the maternal risk
alleles at GCK and TCF7L2 and higher birth weight.
SUMMARY: The associations with birth weight at ADCY5, CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE support
the foetal insulin hypothesis, which proposed that type 2 diabetes and lower
birth weight could be two phenotypes of the same genotype. The associations at
GCK and TCF7L2 illustrate that maternal genes are also important determinants of 
birth weight.

PMID: 22406741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Jun;23(6):550-6. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2011.12.012. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Functional analysis of TCF7L2 genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes.

Pang DX(1), Smith AJ, Humphries SE.

Author information: 
(1)BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, University
College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Common non-coding variations within the TCF7L2 locus have a 
strong influence on type 2 diabetes (T2D) susceptibility through uncharacterised 
mechanisms. An islet-specific functional polymorphism has been identified,
although this does not explain the association between genotype and gene
expression in other cell types. This study sought to identify these other
functional TCF7L2 variants.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Alternative splicing and gene expression from TCF7L2 was
examined from peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 100 healthy Caucasians
using two T2D-associated SNPs, rs7903146 and rs12255372. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays and luciferase reporter assays were performed with these SNPs and
those in strong LD to determine potential SNP functionality. Individuals
homozygous for rs7903146 and rs12255372 T2D risk alleles (TT/TT) expressed
2.6-fold greater levels of TCF7L2 mRNA compared to individuals homozygous for the
non-risk alleles (CC/GG, p = 0.006), although differentially spliced TCF7L2
transcripts did not differ by T2D risk-associated genotype. From SNPs identified 
to be in strong LD with the T2D-associated SNPs, rs7903146 and rs12255372, five
(rs4132670, rs4506565, rs7903146, rs7901695, rs17747324) demonstrated
allele-specific binding in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). In
luciferase reporter assays, rs4132670 exhibited 1.3-fold higher levels of
enhancer activity in the Huh7 cell line (p = 3.8 × 10(-5)) and 2-fold higher
levels in a WiDr colon carcinoma cell line (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rs4132670, located in a region of
chromatin accessibility, is a non-tissue-specific candidate functional SNP that
has the potential to play a role in TCF7L2 gene expression and T2D risk.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3778915
PMID: 22402060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002523. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Association of a functional variant in the Wnt co-receptor LRP6 with early onset 
ileal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Teltschik Z, Beisner J, Schaeffeler E, Wang G, Kübler I,
Gersemann M, Cooney R, Jewell D, Reinisch W, Vermeire S, Rutgeerts P, Schwab M,
Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete-Fischer-Bosch Institute for Clinical Pharmacology and University
of Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany.

Ileal Crohn's Disease (CD), a chronic small intestinal inflammatory disorder, is 
characterized by reduced levels of the antimicrobial peptides DEFA5 (HD-5) and
DEFA6 (HD-6). Both of these a-defensins are exclusively produced in Paneth cells 
(PCs) at small intestinal crypt bases. Different ileal CD-associated genes
including NOD2, ATG16L1, and recently the ß-catenin-dependant Wnt transcription
factor TCF7L2 have been linked to impaired PC antimicrobial function. The Wnt
pathway influences gut mucosal homeostasis and PC maturation, besides directly
controlling HD-5/6 gene expression. The herein reported candidate gene study
focuses on another crucial Wnt factor, the co-receptor low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6). We analysed exonic single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in a large cohort (Oxford: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,893) and prospectively
tested 2 additional European sample sets (Leuven: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>688, Vienna: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,628). We
revealed an association of a non-synonymous SNP (rs2302685; Ile1062Val) with
early onset ileal CD (OR 1.8; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00034; for homozygous carriers: OR 4.1;
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00004) and additionally with penetrating ileal CD behaviour (OR 1.3;
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00917). In contrast, it was not linked to adult onset ileal CD, colonic CD,
or ulcerative colitis. Since the rare variant is known to impair LRP6 activity,
we investigated its role in patient mucosa. Overall, LRP6 mRNA was diminished in 
patients independently from the genotype. Analysing the mRNA levels of PC product
in biopsies from genotyped individuals (15 controls, 32 ileal, and 12 exclusively
colonic CD), we found particularly low defensin levels in ileal CD patients who
were carrying the variant. In addition, we confirmed a direct relationship
between LRP6 activity and the transcriptional expression of HD-5 using transient 
transfection. Taken together, we identified LRP6 as a new candidate gene in ileal
CD. Impairments in Wnt signalling and Paneth cell biology seem to represent
pathophysiological hallmarks in small intestinal inflammation and should
therefore be considered as interesting targets for new therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3285585
PMID: 22393312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(10):1918-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06288-11. Epub 2012 Mar 
5.

A critical role for the Wnt effector Tcf4 in adult intestinal homeostatic
self-renewal.

van Es JH(1), Haegebarth A, Kujala P, Itzkovitz S, Koo BK, Boj SF, Korving J, van
den Born M, van Oudenaarden A, Robine S, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research &
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Throughout life, intestinal Lgr5+ stem cells give rise to proliferating transient
amplifying cells in crypts, which subsequently differentiate into one of the five
main cell types and migrate along the crypt-villus axis. These dynamic processes 
are coordinated by a relatively small number of evolutionarily conserved
signaling pathways, which includes the Wnt signaling pathway. The DNA-binding
proteins of the T-cell factor family, Tcf1/Tcf7, Lef, Tcf3/Tcf7l1, and
Tcf4/Tcf7l2, constitute the downstream effectors of the Wnt signaling pathway.
While Tcf4 is the major member active during embryogenesis, the role of these Wnt
effectors in the homeostasis of the adult mouse intestinal epithelium is
unresolved. Using Tcf1-/-, Tcf3(flox), and novel Tcf4(flox) mice, we demonstrate 
an essential role for Tcf4 during homeostasis of the adult mouse intestine.

PMCID: PMC3347420
PMID: 22393260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Apr;158A(4):713-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34206. Epub 2012
Mar 1.

Transcription factor 4 and myocyte enhancer factor 2C mutations are not common
causes of Rett syndrome.

Armani R(1), Archer H, Clarke A, Vasudevan P, Zweier C, Ho G, Williamson S,
Cloosterman D, Yang N, Christodoulou J.

Author information: 
(1)NSW Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Kids Research Institute, The Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The systematic screening of Rett syndrome (RTT) patients for pathogenetic
sequence variations has focused on three genes that have been associated with RTT
or related clinical phenotypes, namely MECP2, CDKL5, and FOXG1. More recently, it
has been suggested that phenotypes associated with TCF4 and MEF2C mutations may
represent a form of RTT. Here we report on the screening of the TCF4 and MEF2C
genes in a cohort of 81 classical, atypical, and incomplete atypical RTT patients
harboring no known mutations in MECP2, CDKL5, and FOXG1 genes. No pathogenetic
sequence variations were identified in the MEF2C gene in our cohort. However, a
frameshift mutation in TCF4 was identified in a patient with a clinical diagnosis
of "variant" RTT, in whom the clinical evolution later raised the possibility of 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. Although our results suggest that these genes are not
commonly associated with RTT, we note the clinical similarity between RTT and
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and suggest that RTT patients with no mutation identified 
in MECP2 be considered for molecular screening of the TCF4 gene.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22383159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Child Neurol. 2012 Dec;27(12):1602-6. doi: 10.1177/0883073812437242. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome in a boy with Charcot Marie Tooth disease type 1A: a rare
co-occurrence of 2 genetic disorders.

Ghosh PS(1), Friedman NR, Ghosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
ghoshp3@ccf.org

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is characterized by marked intellectual impairment,
hyperventilation episodes, and dysmorphic facial features. This article reports a
boy who presented with developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly,
hypotonia, and areflexia. He was initially diagnosed with Charcot Marie Tooth
disease type 1A based on family history and genetic testing. However, severe
mental impairment was atypical of Charcot Marie Tooth disease type 1A. Over the
next few years he developed characteristic breathing abnormality, hand
stereotypies, seizures, and marked constipation. The evolution of these
manifestations coupled with the characteristic facial appearance suggested the
additional diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, which was confirmed by the genetic
defect of the transcription factor 4 on chromosome 18. This case demonstrates the
rare co-occurrence of 2 genetic disorders in the same individual.

PMID: 22378661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;57(4):265-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.16. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Impact of common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants on future type 2 diabetes in 
the non-diabetic population in Korea.

Park SE(1), Lee WY, Oh KW, Baek KH, Yoon KH, Kang MI, Son HY, Lee WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We prospectively examined the association between type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
progression and common T2DM-risk gene variants in 870 non-diabetic participants
in a Chungju Metabolic Disease Cohort Study in Korea. We genotyped the following 
six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): KCNQ1 (potassium voltage-gated
channel, KQT-like subfamily member 1) rs2237892, CDKAL1 (regulatory
subunit-associated protein 1-like 1) rs7554840, CDKN2A/B (cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A/B) rs1081161, SCL30A8 (solute carrier family 30 member 8 gene)
rs13266634, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2) rs7903146, and PPARG
(peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma) rs1801282. Anthropometric data
and metabolic parameters were obtained at baseline and year 4. Pancreatic ß cell 
function was assessed by the homeostasis model assessment index of ß cells
(HOMA-ß). After 4 years, 137 subjects developed T2DM (15.7%). A significant
association was found in the variant of KCNQ1 rs2237892, whereas the SNPs of
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, SCL30A8, TCF7L2 and PPARG were not associated. The C-allele
carriers of KCNQ1 conferred a significantly increased risk for T2DM compared with
the T/T genotype, independently of clinical risk factors (odds ratio=2.61, 95%
confidence intervals=1.02-6.69, P=0.04). Although no differences were observed at
baseline among the KCNQ1 variants, HOMA-ß levels by year 4 were significantly
lower in the C-allele carriers after controlling for metabolic parameters. The
genetic variations in KCNQ1 are associated with future development of T2DM in
Koreans, which might be mediated by differences in insulin secretory function.

PMID: 22377714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 17;32(3):375-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.40. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

WNT6 is a novel target gene of caveolin-1 promoting chemoresistance to epirubicin
in human gastric cancer cells.

Yuan G(1), Regel I, Lian F, Friedrich T, Hitkova I, Hofheinz RD, Ströbel P,
Langer R, Keller G, Röcken C, Zimmermann W, Schmid RM, Ebert MP, Burgermeister E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany.

Resistance to chemotherapy is a major obstacle for curative treatment of human
gastric cancer (GC). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely
unknown. Wingless-type MMTV integration site family members (WNTs) are secreted
glycoproteins involved in embryogenesis and, on inappropriate expression in the
adult, in cancer. Here, we show expression of WNT6 in GC patient specimens, human
GC cell lines and in a mouse model of GC. In human GC cells, WNT6 expression was 
enhanced by caveolin-1 (Cav1), a scaffold protein of plasma membrane caveolae.
WNT6 knock-down and overexpression experiments demonstrated that WNT6 increased
the resistance to apoptotic cell death induced by the anthracycline
chemotherapeutics epirubicin (Epi) and doxorubicin (Dox). Epi increased the
activity of the human WNT6 promoter through Cav1-dependent binding of ß-catenin
to the proximal WNT6 promoter. Epi increased both WNT6/Wnt6 and Cav1 expression
in human GC cells and within the tumor area of a murine model of GC (CEA424-SV40 
TAg). In GC patients, WNT6 expression was positively associated with the tumor
stage and the nodal status, and inversely correlated with the response to ECF
(Epi, cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil) chemotherapy. These results showed that WNT6 and
Cav1 are upregulated by chemotherapeutics and enhance the resistance of GC cells 
to anthracycline drugs. Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving
WNT6/Cav1-induced drug resistance will provide benefits in developing new
therapies for GC.

PMID: 22370641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Atherosclerosis. 2012 May;222(1):138-47. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.01.039. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Genetic determinants of the ankle-brachial index: a meta-analysis of a
cardiovascular candidate gene 50K SNP panel in the candidate gene association
resource (CARe) consortium.

Wassel CL(1), Lamina C, Nambi V, Coassin S, Mukamal KJ, Ganesh SK, Jacobs DR Jr, 
Franceschini N, Papanicolaou GJ, Gibson Q, Yanek LR, van der Harst P, Ferguson
JF, Crawford DC, Waite LL, Allison MA, Criqui MH, McDermott MM, Mehra R, Cupples 
LA, Hwang SJ, Redline S, Kaplan RC, Heiss G, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, Taylor HA, 
Eraso LH, Haun M, Li M, Meisinger C, O'Connell JR, Shuldiner AR, Tybjærg-Hansen
A, Frikke-Schmidt R, Kollerits B, Rantner B, Dieplinger B, Stadler M, Mueller T, 
Haltmayer M, Klein-Weigel P, Summerer M, Wichmann HE, Asselbergs FW, Navis G,
Mateo Leach I, Brown-Gentry K, Goodloe R, Assimes TL, Becker DM, Cooke JP, Absher
DM, Olin JW, Mitchell BD, Reilly MP, Mohler ER 3rd, North KE, Reiner AP,
Kronenberg F, Murabito JM.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Department of Family and Preventive
Medicine, Division of Preventive Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Candidate gene association studies for peripheral artery disease
(PAD), including subclinical disease assessed with the ankle-brachial index
(ABI), have been limited by the modest number of genes examined. We conducted a
two stage meta-analysis of ~50,000 SNPs across ~2100 candidate genes to identify 
genetic variants for ABI.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied subjects of European ancestry from 8 studies
(n=21,547, 55% women, mean age 44-73 years) and African American ancestry from 5 
studies (n=7267, 60% women, mean age 41-73 years) involved in the candidate gene 
association resource (CARe) consortium. In each ethnic group, additive genetic
models were used (with each additional copy of the minor allele corresponding to 
the given beta) to test each SNP for association with continuous ABI (excluding
ABI>1.40) and PAD (defined as ABI<0.90) using linear or logistic regression with 
adjustment for known PAD risk factors and population stratification. We then
conducted a fixed-effects inverse-variance weighted meta-analyses considering a
p<2×10(-6) to denote statistical significance.
RESULTS: In the European ancestry discovery meta-analyses, rs2171209 in SYTL3
(ß=-0.007, p=6.02×10(-7)) and rs290481 in TCF7L2 (ß=-0.008, p=7.01×10(-7)) were
significantly associated with ABI. None of the SNP associations for PAD were
significant, though a SNP in CYP2B6 (p=4.99×10(-5)) was among the strongest
associations. These 3 genes are linked to key PAD risk factors (lipoprotein(a),
type 2 diabetes, and smoking behavior, respectively). We sought replication in 6 
population-based and 3 clinical samples (n=15,440) for rs290481 and rs2171209.
However, in the replication stage (rs2171209, p=0.75; rs290481, p=0.19) and in
the combined discovery and replication analysis the SNP-ABI associations were no 
longer significant (rs2171209, p=1.14×10(-3); rs290481, p=8.88×10(-5)). In
African Americans, none of the SNP associations for ABI or PAD achieved an
experiment-wide level of significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic determinants of ABI and PAD remain elusive. Follow-up of
these preliminary findings may uncover important biology given the known
gene-risk factor associations. New and more powerful approaches to PAD gene
discovery are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3596171
PMID: 22361517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Bioinformation. 2011;7(7):339-46. Epub 2011 Dec 10.

Integrative analyses of conserved WNT clusters and their co-operative behaviour
in human breast cancer.

Qurrat-Ul-Ain, Seemab U, Nawaz S, Rashid S.

In human, WNT gene clusters are highly conserved at specie level and associated
with carcinogenesis. Among them, WNT-10A and WNT-6 genes clustered in chromosome 
2q35 are homologous to WNT-10B and WNT-1 located in chromosome 12q13,
respectively. In an attempt to study co-regulation, the coordinated expression of
these genes was monitored in human breast cancer tissues. As compared to normal
tissue, both WNT-10A and WNT-10B genes exhibited lower expression while WNT-6 and
WNT-1 showed increased expression in breast cancer tissues. The co-expression
pattern was elaborated by detailed phylogenetic and syntenic analyses. Moreover, 
the intergenic and intragenic regions for these gene clusters were analyzed for
studying the transcriptional regulation. In this context, adequate conserved
binding sites for SOX and TCF family of transcriptional factors were observed. We
propose that SOX9 and TCF4 may compete for binding at the promoters of WNT family
genes thus regulating the disease phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3280488
PMID: 22355234  [PubMed]


98. Diabetes Care. 2012 Mar;35(3):e24. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2012.

Dietary fiber intake modulates the association between variants in TCF7L2 and
weight loss during a lifestyle intervention.

Heni M, Herzberg-Schäfer S, Machicao F, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

PMCID: PMC3322689
PMID: 22355027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Front Behav Neurosci. 2011 Dec 21;5:85. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00085.
eCollection 2011.

Adenomatous polyposis coli heterozygous knockout mice display hypoactivity and
age-dependent working memory deficits.

Koshimizu H(1), Fukui Y, Takao K, Ohira K, Tanda K, Nakanishi K, Toyama K, Oshima
M, Taketo MM, Miyakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Systems Medical Science, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University Toyoake, Japan.

A tumor suppressor gene, Adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc), is expressed in the
nervous system from embryonic to adulthood stages, and transmits the Wnt
signaling pathway in which schizophrenia susceptibility genes, including T-cell
factor 4 (TCF4) and calcineurin (CN), are involved. However, the functions of Apc
in the nervous system are largely unknown. In this study, as the first evaluation
of Apc function in the nervous system, we have investigated the behavioral
significance of the Apc gene, applying a battery of behavioral tests to Apc
heterozygous knockout (Apc(+/-)) mice. Apc(+/-) mice showed no significant
impairment in neurological reflexes or sensory and motor abilities. In various
tests, including light/dark transition, open-field, social interaction, eight-arm
radial maze, and fear conditioning tests, Apc(+/-) mice exhibited hypoactivity.
In the eight-arm radial maze, Apc(+/-) mice 6-7 weeks of age displayed almost
normal performance, whereas those 11-12 weeks of age showed a severe performance 
deficit in working memory, suggesting that Apc is involved in working memory
performance in an age-dependent manner. The possibility that anemia, which
Apc(+/-) mice develop by 17 weeks of age, impairs working memory performance,
however, cannot be excluded. Our results suggest that Apc plays a role in the
regulation of locomotor activity and presumably working memory performance.

PMCID: PMC3276361
PMID: 22347851  [PubMed]


100. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):11730-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.327767. Epub 2012 
Feb 15.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling regulates Yes-associated protein (YAP) gene expression in
colorectal carcinoma cells.

Konsavage WM Jr(1), Kyler SL, Rennoll SA, Jin G, Yochum GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Mutations in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway occur in most colorectal cancers (CRCs),
and these mutations lead to increased nuclear accumulation of the ß-catenin
transcriptional co-activator. In the nucleus, ß-catenin associates with TCF/LEF
sequence specific transcription factors to activate target gene expression. The
Hippo pathway restricts cellular growth by preventing nuclear accumulation of the
Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional co-activator. YAP expression is
elevated in CRCs suggesting that, like Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, the Hippo pathway
may contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis. Regulation of YAP at the
post-translational level has been well studied but the transcription factors that
control YAP gene expression are unknown. Here we demonstrate that ß-catenin/TCF4 
complexes bind a DNA enhancer element within the first intron of the YAP gene to 
drive YAP expression in CRC cells. As such, reducing ß-catenin expression in CRC 
cells using shRNAs leads to decreased YAP mRNA and protein levels. YAP is
abundantly expressed in the cytoplasm and nuclei of several established human
colon cancer cell lines and this localization pattern is insensitive to plating
density. Finally, we show that YAP expression is elevated in the majority of a
panel of primary human colorectal tumors compared with its expression in
uninvolved colonic mucosa, and that YAP and ß-catenin localize to the nuclear
compartment of tumor cells. Together, these results implicate YAP as an oncogene 
whose expression is driven by aberrant Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in human CRC
cells.

PMCID: PMC3320921
PMID: 22337891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Clin Genet. 2013 Jan;83(1):73-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01857.x. Epub 2012
Mar 15.

Somatic mosaicism in a mother of two children with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Steinbusch CV(1), van Roozendaal KE, Tserpelis D, Smeets EE, Kranenburg-de Koning
TJ, de Waal KH, Zweier C, Rauch A, Hennekam RC, Blok MJ, Schrander-Stumpel CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
intellectual disability, unusual face and breathing abnormalities and can be
caused by haploinsufficiency of TCF4. The majority of cases are sporadic. Somatic
mosaicism was reported infrequently. We report on a proband with typical
manifestations of PTHS and his younger brother with a less striking phenotype. In
both, a heterozygous frameshift mutation (c.1901_1909delinsA, p.Ala634AspfsX67)
was found in exon 19 of TCF4. The same mutation was found at low levels in DNA
extracted from the mother's blood, urine and saliva. This report of familial
recurrence with somatic mosaicism in a healthy mother has important consequences 
for genetic counseling. We suggest careful studies in parents of other patients
with PTHS to determine the frequency of germline and somatic mosaicism for TCF4
mutations.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22335494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012 Jun;153(6):1067-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2011.11.033. Epub
2012 Feb 8.

Prevalence and severity of fuchs corneal dystrophy in Tangier Island.

Eghrari AO(1), McGlumphy EJ, Iliff BW, Wang J, Emmert D, Riazuddin SA, Katsanis
N, Gottsch JD.

Author information: 
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the clinical and genetic features of late-onset Fuchs
corneal dystrophy (FCD) on Tangier, an island in the Chesapeake Bay with an
isolated population of approximately 500 individuals.
DESIGN: Observational, cross-sectional study.
METHODS: A total of 156 individuals born to inhabitants of Tangier Island
volunteered to undergo ophthalmic evaluation. Medical history was ascertained
prior to examination. All participants underwent anterior segment examination
with slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Retroillumination photographs were acquired from
affected individuals and the disease severity was compared with individuals from 
large families ascertained previously. Genomic DNA samples were investigated for 
the presence of the recently identified risk allele rs613872, an intronic variant
of TCF4.
RESULTS: Of the 148 examined individuals who were at least 30 years of age, 32
showed the classical symptoms of late-onset FCD (21.6%), providing a minimum
prevalence of 11% among individuals over the age of 50 years. Severity was
significantly lower compared to 51 cases from unlinked families, among
individuals either 50 to 70 or above 70 years of age (P = .05 and P = .01,
respectively). Retroillumination photography analyses were suggestive of mild
severity when compared with the disease phenotype associated with FCD1- and
FCD2-linked families. The rs613872 variant was associated with a higher
affectation rate (P = .01), while the wild-type allele was correlated with a
higher proportion of subclinical disease (P = .01).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study population in Tangier, late-onset FCD manifests
clinically with a mild phenotype and increased prevalence. The rs613872 variant
correlates with increased affectation and a clinical disease phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4154491
PMID: 22321803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10703-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.323311. Epub
2012 Feb 8.

MUC1-C oncoprotein induces TCF7L2 transcription factor activation and promotes
cyclin D1 expression in human breast cancer cells.

Rajabi H(1), Ahmad R, Jin C, Kosugi M, Alam M, Joshi MD, Kufe D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

MUC1 is a heterodimeric glycoprotein that is overexpressed in breast cancers. The
present studies demonstrate that the oncogenic MUC1 C-terminal subunit (MUC1-C)
associates with the TCF7L2 transcription factor. The MUC1-C cytoplasmic domain
(MUC1-CD) binds directly to the TCF7L2 C-terminal region. MUC1-C blocks the
interaction between TCF7L2 and the C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP), a
suppressor of TCF7L2-mediated transcription. TCF7L2 and MUC1-C form a complex on 
the cyclin D1 gene promoter and MUC1-C promotes TCF7L2-mediated transcription by 
the recruitment of ß-catenin and p300. Silencing MUC1-C in human breast cancer
cells down-regulated activation of the cyclin D1 promoter and decreased cyclin D1
expression. In addition, a MUC1-C inhibitor blocked the interaction with TCF7L2
and suppressed cyclin D1 levels. These findings indicate that the MUC1-C
oncoprotein contributes to TCF7L2 activation and thereby promotes cyclin D1
expression in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3322974
PMID: 22318732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):3012-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1117359109. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells control T-cell response to chronic viral infection.

Cervantes-Barragan L(1), Lewis KL, Firner S, Thiel V, Hugues S, Reith W, Ludewig 
B, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunobiology, Kantonal Hospital St Gallen, CH-9007 St Gallen,
Switzerland.

Infections with persistent viruses are a frequent cause of immunosuppression,
autoimmune sequelae, and/or neoplastic disease. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs) are innate immune cells that produce type I interferon (IFN-I) and other
cytokines in response to virus-derived nucleic acids. Persistent viruses often
cause depletion or functional impairment of pDCs, but the role of pDCs in the
control of these viruses remains unclear. We used conditional targeting of
pDC-specific transcription factor E2-2 to generate mice that constitutively lack 
pDCs in peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues. The profound impact of pDC
deficiency on innate antiviral responses was revealed by the failure to control
acute infection with the cytopathic mouse hepatitis virus. Furthermore,
pDC-deficient animals failed to clear lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV)
from hematopoietic organs during persistent LCMV infection. This failure was
associated with reduced numbers and functionality of LCMV-specific CD4(+) helper 
T cells and impaired antiviral CD8(+) T-cell responses. Adoptive transfer of
LCMV-specific T cells revealed that both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells required IFN-I
for expansion, but only CD4(+) T cells required the presence of pDCs. In
contrast, mice with pDC-specific loss of MHC class II expression supported normal
CD4(+) T-cell response to LCMV. These data suggest that pDCs facilitate CD4(+)
helper T-cell responses to persistent viruses independently of direct antigen
presentation. Thus pDCs provide an essential link between innate and adaptive
immunity to chronic viral infection, likely through the secretion of IFN-I and
other cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3286988
PMID: 22315415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):3047-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109457109. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Essential requirement for ß-arrestin2 in mouse intestinal tumors with elevated
Wnt signaling.

Bonnans C(1), Flacelière M, Grillet F, Dantec C, Desvignes JP, Pannequin J,
Severac D, Dubois E, Bibeau F, Escriou V, Crespy P, Journot L, Hollande F,
Joubert D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 5203,
Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, F-34000 Montpellier, France.

ß-Arrestins (Arrb) participate in the regulation of multiple signaling pathways, 
including Wnt/ß-catenin, the major actor in human colorectal cancer initiation.
To better understand the roles of Arrb in intestinal tumorigenesis, a reverse
genetic approach (Arrb(-/-)) and in vivo siRNA treatment were used in Apc(<U+0394>14/+) 
mice. Mice with Arrb2 depletion (knockout and siRNA) developed only 33% of the
tumors detected in their Arrb2-WT littermates, whereas Arrb1 depletion remained
without significant effect. These remaining tumors grow normally and are
essentially Arrb2-independent. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis
showed that they clustered with 25% of Apc(<U+0394>14/+);Arrb2(+/+) tumors. Genes
overexpressed in this subset reflect a high interaction with the immune system,
whereas those overexpressed in Arrb2-dependent tumors are predominantly involved 
in Wnt signaling, cell adhesion, migration, and extracellular matrix remodeling. 
The involvement of Arrb2 in intestinal tumor development via the regulation of
the Wnt pathway is supported by ex vivo and in vitro experiments using either
tumors from Apc(<U+0394>14/+) mice or murine Apc(Min/+) cells. Indeed, Arrb2 siRNAs
decreased the expression of Wnt target genes in cells isolated from 12 of 18
tumors from Apc(<U+0394>14/+) mice. In Apc(Min/+) cells, Arrb2 siRNAs completely
reversed the increased Wnt activity and colony formation in soft agar induced by 
Apc siRNA treatment, whereas they did not affect these parameters in basal
conditions or in cells expressing constitutively active ß-catenin. We demonstrate
that Arrb2 is essential for the initiation and growth of intestinal tumors
displaying elevated Wnt pathway activity and identify a previously unsuspected
molecular heterogeneity among tumors induced by truncating Apc mutations.

PMCID: PMC3286958
PMID: 22315403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Aug;20(8):1675-82. doi: 10.1038/oby.2012.11. Epub
2012 Feb 6.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci with one-year weight loss in
the look AHEAD clinical trial.

Peter I(1), McCaffery JM, Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Hakonarson H, Reis S, Wagenknecht
LE, Kopin AS, Huggins GS; Genetics Subgroup of the Look AHEAD Study.

Collaborators: Brancati FL, Honas J, Cheskin L, Clark JM, Stewart K, Rubin R,
Charleston J, Horak K, Bray GA, Rau K, Strate A, Armand B, Greenway FL, Ryan DH, 
Williamson D, Bachand A, Begnaud M, Berhard B, Caderette E, Cerniauskas B, Creel 
D, Crow D, Guay H, Kora N, LaFleur K, Landry K, Lingle M, Perault J, Shipp M,
Smith M, Tucker E, Lewis CE, Thomas S, Safford M, DiLillo V, Bragg C, Dobelstein 
A, Gilbert S, Glasser S, Hannum S, Hubbell A, Jones J, Lee D, Luketic R, Marshall
K, Oden L, Raines J, Roche C, Truman J, Webb N, Wrenn A, Nathan DM, Turgeon H,
Schumann K, Cagliero E, Delahanty L, Hayward K, Anderson E, Bissett L, Ginsburg
R, Goldman V, Harlan V, McKitrick C, McNamara A, Michel T, Poulos A, Steiner B,
Tosch J, Horton ES, Jackson SD, Hamdy O, Caballero A, Bain S, Bovaird E,
Goebel-Fabbri A, Lambert L, Ledbury S, Malloy M, Ovalle K, Blackburn G, Mantzoros
C, Day K, McNamara A, Hill JO, Miller M, Phillipp J, Schwartz R, Dorsten BV,
Regensteiner J, Benchekroun S, Coelho L, Cohrs P, Daeninck E, Fields A, Green S, 
Hamilton A, Hamilton J, Leshchinskiy E, McDermott M, Munkwitz L, Rome L, Wallace 
K, Worley T, Foreyt JP, Reeves RS, Pownall H, Balasubramanyam A, Jones P,
Burrington M, Chen CH, Clark A, Gee M, Griggs S, Hamilton M, Holley V, Joseph J, 
Pace P, Palencia J, Satterwhite O, Schmidt J, Volding D, White C, Johnson KC,
Gresham C, Connelly S, Brewer A, Coday M, Jones L, Lichtermann L, Vosburg S,
Taylor J, Kitabchi AE, Lambeth H, Clark D, Crisler A, Cunningham G, Green D,
Force D, Kores R, Rosenthal R, Smith E, Sun M, Soberman J, Jeffery RW, Thorson C,
Bantle JP, Redmon J, Crow RS, Crow S, Raatz SK, Brelje K, Campbell C, Carls J,
Carmean-Mihm T, Finch E, Fox A, Hoelscher E, James LD, Maddy VA, Ockenden T, Rice
BI, Skarphol T, Tucker AD, Voeller MS, Walcheck C, Pi-Sunyer X, Patricio J,
Heshka S, Pal C, Allen L, Hirsch D, Holowaty MA, Wadden TA, Maschak- Carey BJ,
Schwartz S, Foster GD, Berkowitz RI, Glick H, Kumanyika SK, Brock J, Chomentowski
H, Clark V, Crerand C, Davenport R, Diamond A, Fabricatore A, Hesson L,
Krauthamer-Ewing S, Kuehnel R, Lipschutz P, Mullen M, Womble L, Iqbal N, Kelley
DE, Wesche-Thobaben J, Kuller L, Kriska A, Bonk J, Danchenko R, Edmundowicz D,
Klem ML, Yamamoto ME, Elnyczky B, Grove GA, Harper P, Krulia J, Mancino J,
Mathews A, Murray TY, Ritchea JR, Rush J, Vujevich K, Wolf D, Wing RR, Bright R, 
Pera V, Jakicic J, Tate D, Gorin A, Gallagher K, Bach A, Bancroft B, Bertorelli
A, Carey R, Charron T, Chenot H, Chula-Maguire K, Coward P, Cronkite L, Currin J,
Daly M, Egan C, Ferguson E, Foss L, Gauvin J, Kieffer D, Lessard L, Maier D,
Massaro JP, Monk T, Nicholson R, Patterson E, Phelan S, Raynor H, Raynor D,
Robinson N, Robles D, Tavares J, Haffner SM, Montez MG, Lorenzo C, Kahn S,
Montgomery B, Knopp R, Lipkin E, Maciejewski ML, Trence D, Barrett T, Bartell J, 
Greenberg D, Murillo A, Richmond BA, Thomas A, Espeland MA, Bahnson JL,
Wagenknecht L, Reboussin D, Rejeski W, Bertoni A, Lang W, Miller G, Lefkowitz D, 
Reynolds PS, Ribisl P, Vitolins M, Booth M, Dotson KM, Hodges A, Williams CC,
Barnes JM, Feeney PA, Griffin J, Harvin L, Herman W, Hogan P, Jaramillo S, King
M, Lane K, Neiberg R, Ruggiero A, Speas C, Walkup MP, Wall K, Ward M, West DS,
Windham T, Marcovina SM, Strylewicz G.

The importance of lifestyle intervention for the prevention and treatment of type
2 diabetes (T2D) has been underscored by the limited benefit of pharmacologic
therapies. We sought to determine whether genetic variants that contribute to T2D
risk modify the response of weight and waist circumference to an intensive
lifestyle intervention (ILI) in patients with obesity and T2D. Look AHEAD (Action
for Health in Diabetes) is a randomized clinical trial comparing an ILI with a
control condition on the risk of cardiovascular disease in overweight adults with
T2D. We analyzed 28 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at/near 17
T2D-susceptibility genes in 3,903 consented participants. We genetically
characterized the cohort by assessing whether T2D-susceptibility loci were
overrepresented compared with a nondiabetic community-based cohort (N = 1,016).
We evaluated the association of individual variants and a composite genetic risk 
score (GRS) with anthropometric traits at baseline and after 1-year of
intervention. Look AHEAD subjects carried more T2D-susceptibility alleles than
the control population. At baseline, TCF7L2 risk alleles and the highest GRS were
associated with lower BMI and waist circumference. Nominally significant
genotype-by-intervention interactions were detected for 1-year change in waist
circumference with JAZF1, MTNR1B, and IRS1, and BMI with JAZF1. Highest GRS was
associated with a greater reduction in waist circumference at year 1, although
the variance in change attributable to the GRS was small. This study shows that
the genetic burden associated with T2D risk does not undermine the effect of
lifestyle intervention and suggests the existence of additional genomic regions, 
distinct from the T2D-susceptibility loci, which may enhance or mitigate weight
loss.

PMCID: PMC3406235
PMID: 22307069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Jun;20(6):1273-8. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.400. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Association of fibrillin-3 and transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants with
metabolic phenotypes in PCOS.

Yalamanchi SK(1), Sam S, Cardenas MO, Holaday LW, Urbanek M, Dunaif A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex genetic disease characterized by
heritable reproductive and metabolic abnormalities. Genetic variants associated
with the reproductive phenotype have been mapped to the fibrillin-3 (FBN3) gene
and to a novel transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus (rs11196236 G). The
association of these genetic variants with metabolic phenotypes was investigated 
in 31 PCOS and 18 control women of European ancestry. The insulinogenic index
during an oral glucose tolerance test (<U+0394>I30/<U+0394>G30) and insulin secretion rates at 
the maximal dose during a graded-glucose infusion (ISRmax) were used as indexes
of insulin secretion. Endogenous glucose production (EGP) and insulin sensitivity
(M/I) were determined during a euglycemic clamp. The disposition index (DI) was
calculated using M/I and <U+0394>I30/<U+0394>G30 or ISRmax. Compared with noncarriers (n = 10) 
and control (n = 10), M/I was decreased (P = 1.1 × 10(-5)) in heterozygous and
homozygous PCOS carriers (n = 14) of rs11196236 G and this variant predicted M/I 
(partial r(2) = 0.34, P = 0.005) in a regression analysis. Postabsorptive EGP
tended to be higher (P = 0.040) in heterozygous and homozygous PCOS carriers of
the FBN3-associated allele (n = 12), allele 8 of D19S884 (FBN3(+)), compared to
PCOS noncarriers (n = 19). PCOS carriers of the rs12255372 T (TCF7L2 Caucasian
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) locus) had no significant associated metabolic
phenotypes. We conclude that rs11196236 G TCF7L2 variant is associated with
peripheral insulin resistance in PCOS but this effect is not seen in control
women. The FBN3 risk allele may be associated with changes in basal glucose
homeostasis in PCOS. These findings require replication in additional PCOS
cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3346885
PMID: 22301903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Apr;8(4):1230-42. doi: 10.1039/c2mb05277f. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Analysis of cell adhesion during early stages of colon cancer based on an
extended multi-valued logic approach.

Guebel DV(1), Schmitz U, Wolkenhauer O, Vera J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock, 18051
Rostock, Germany. daniel.guebel@uni-rostock.de

Cell adhesion in the normal colon is typically associated with differentiated
cells, whereas in cancerous colon it is associated with advanced tumors. For
advanced tumors growing evidence supports the existence of stem-like cells that
have originated from transdifferentiation. Because stem cells can also be
transformed in their own niche, at the base of the Lieberkühn's crypts, we
conjectured that cell adhesion can also be critical in early tumorigenesis. To
assess this hypothesis we built an annotated, multi-valued logic model addressing
cell adhesion of normal and tumorigenic stem cells in the human colon. The model 
accounts for (i) events involving intercellular adhesion structures, (ii)
interactions involving cytoskeleton-related structures, (iii) compartmental
distribution of a/ß/<U+03B3>/d-catenins, and (iv) variations in critical cell adhesion
regulators (e.g., ILK, FAK, IQGAP, SNAIL, Caveolin). We developed a method that
can deal with graded multiple inhibitions, something which is not possible with
conventional logical approaches. The model comprises 315 species (including 26
genes), interconnected by 269 reactions. Simulations of the model covered six
scenarios, which considered two types of colonic cells (stem vs. differentiated
cells), under three conditions (normal, stressed and tumor). Each condition
results from the combination of 92 inputs. We compared our multi-valued logic
approach with the conventional Boolean approach for one specific example and
validated the predictions against published data. Our analysis suggests that stem
cells in their niche synthesize high levels of cytoplasmatic E-cadherin and
CdhEP(Ser684,686,692), even under normal-mitogenic stimulus or tumorigenic
conditions. Under these conditions, E-cadherin would be incorporated into the
plasmatic membrane, but only as a non-adhesive CdhE_ß-catenin_IQGAP complex.
Under stress conditions, however, this complex could be displaced, yielding
adhesive CdhE_ß-catenin((cis/trans)) complexes. In the three scenarios tested
with stem cells, desmosomes or tight junctions were not assembled. Other model
predictions include expected levels of the nuclear complex ß-catenin_TCF4 and the
anti-apoptotic protein Survivin for both normal and tumorigenic colonic stem
cells.

PMID: 22298312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;28(8):594-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.650755. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Common variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with
reduced insulin secretion in women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Liu B(1), Lv HM, Li LN, Xia L, Zhang HX, Zhang YJ, Lei L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China.

Common variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene were
identified as one of the few genetic polymorphisms with powerful effects on the
risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Given the genetic overlap between polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS) and T2D, the present study was undertaken to investigate whether 
the TCF7L2 variants are also associated with PCOS. We analyzed single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) rs11196218 and rs290487 of the TCF7L2 gene, which showed
robust associations with T2D in Chinese population, in 430 PCOS patients and 360 
control subjects by pyrosequencing, and also assessed the effect of genotype on
clinical and biochemical traits in the PCOS group. We found no evidence for
association between SNP rs11196218 and PCOS. The SNP rs290487 showed marginal
differences in genotype frequencies between the PCOS and control group, with the 
minor C allele being the at-risk allele for PCOS. In PCOS women, the C allele
carriers of rs290487 had higher levels of 2h blood glucose but lower
insulinogenic index than noncarriers, suggesting impaired insulin secretion. Our 
data suggested that the TCF7L2 variants may confer an increased risk for early
impairment of glucose homeostasis in PCOS.

PMID: 22296403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Control Release. 2012 Apr 30;159(2):240-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.01.014.
Epub 2012 Jan 21.

Cationic polyurethanes-short branch PEI-mediated delivery of Mir145 inhibited
epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation and cancer stem-like properties and
in lung adenocarcinoma.

Chiou GY(1), Cherng JY, Hsu HS, Wang ML, Tsai CM, Lu KH, Chien Y, Hung SC, Chen
YW, Wong CI, Tseng LM, Huang PI, Yu CC, Hsu WH, Chiou SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan.

The high invasiveness and frequent recurrence of lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) are
major reasons for treatment failures and poor prognoses. Alterations in microRNAs
(miRNAs) expression have been shown in lung cancers. Recent reports have
demonstrated that tumors contain a small subpopulation of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) that possesses self-renewing capacity and is responsible for tumor
malignancy including metastasis, relapse, and chemoradioresistance. However, a
miRNAs-based therapeutic approach in LAC-associated CSCs (LAC-CSCs) is still
blurred. Using miRNA/mRNA-microarray and Quantitative RT-PCR, we found that the
expression of miR145 is negatively correlated with the levels of
Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1 in LAC patient specimens, and an
Oct4(high)Sox2(high)Fascin1(high)miR145(low) phenotype predicted poor prognosis. 
We enriched LAC-CSCs by side population sorting or identification of CD133
markers and found that LAC-CSCs exhibited low miR145 and high Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1
expression, CSC-like properties, and chemoradioresistance. To clarify the role of
miR145, we used a polyurethane-short branch-polyethylenimine (PU-PEI) as the
vehicle to deliver miR145 into LAC-CSCs. PU-PEI-mediated miR145 delivery reduced 
CSC-like properties, and improved chemoradioresistance in LAC-CSCs by directly
targeting Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1. Importantly, the repressive effect of miR145 on
tumor metastasis was mediated by inhibiting the epithelial-mesenchymal
transdifferentiation (EMT) and metastastic ability, partially by regulating
Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1, Tcf4, and Wnt5a. Finally, in vivo study showed that
PU-PEI-mediated miR145 delivery to xenograft tumors reduced tumor growth and
metastasis, sensitized tumors to chemoradiotherapies, and prolonged the survival 
times of tumor-bearing mice. Our results demonstrated that miR145 acts as a
switch regulating lung CSC-like and EMT properties, and provide insights into the
clinical prospect of miR145-based therapies for malignant lung cancers.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Diabetes Care. 2012 Feb;35(2):287-92. doi: 10.2337/dc11-0957.

Genetic risk assessment of type 2 diabetes-associated polymorphisms in African
Americans.

Cooke JN(1), Ng MC, Palmer ND, An SS, Hester JM, Freedman BI, Langefeld CD,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine and Translational Science, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2012 Feb;35(2):193-5.

OBJECTIVE: Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2
diabetes (T2D) susceptibility have been identified in predominantly
European-derived populations. These SNPs have not been extensively investigated
for individual and cumulative effects on T2D risk in African Americans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Seventeen index T2D risk variants were genotyped in 
2,652 African American case subjects with T2D and 1,393 nondiabetic control
subjects. Individual SNPs and cumulative risk allele loads were assessed for
association with risk for T2D. Cumulative risk was assessed by counting risk
alleles and evaluating the difference in cumulative risk scores between case
subjects and control subjects. A second analysis weighted risk scores (ln [OR])
based on previously reported European-derived effect sizes.
RESULTS: Frequencies of risk alleles ranged from 8.6 to 99.9%. Eleven SNPs had
ORs >1, and 5 from ADAMTS9, WFS1, CDKAL1, JAZF1, and TCF7L2 trended or had
nominally significant evidence of T2D association (P < 0.05). Individuals carried
between 13 and 29 risk alleles. Association was observed between T2D and increase
in risk allele load (unweighted OR 1.04 [95% CI 1.01-1.08], P = 0.010; weighted
1.06 [1.03-1.10], P = 8.10 × 10(-5)). When TCF7L2 SNP rs7903146 was included as a
covariate, the risk score was no longer associated with T2D in either model
(unweighted 1.02 [0.98-1.05], P = 0.33; weighted 1.02 [0.98-1.06], P = 0.40).
CONCLUSIONS: The trend of increase in risk for T2D with increasing risk allele
load is similar to observations in European-derived populations; however, these
analyses indicate that T2D genetic risk is primarily mediated through the effect 
of TCF7L2 in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC3263882
PMID: 22275441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Mar;10(3):326-35. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0440. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

SPINDLIN1 promotes cancer cell proliferation through activation of WNT/TCF-4
signaling.

Wang JX(1), Zeng Q, Chen L, Du JC, Yan XL, Yuan HF, Zhai C, Zhou JN, Jia YL, Yue 
W, Pei XT.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Beijing Institute of
Transfusion Medicine, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing 100850, China.

SPINDLIN1, a new member of the SPIN/SSTY gene family, was first identified as a
gene highly expressed in ovarian cancer cells. We have previously shown that it
is involved in the process of spindle organization and chromosomal stability and 
plays a role in the development of cancer. Nevertheless, the mechanisms
underlying its oncogenic role are still largely unknown. Here, we first showed
that expression of SPINDLIN1 is upregulated in clinical tumors. Ectopic
expression of SPINDLIN1 promoted cancer cell proliferation and activated
WNT/T-cell factor (TCF)-4 signaling. The Ser84 and Ser99 amino acids within
SPINDLIN1 were further identified as the key functional sites in WNT/TCF-4
signaling activation. Mutation of these two sites of SPINDLIN1 abolished its
effects on promoting WNT/TCF-4 signaling and cancer cell proliferation. We
further found that Aurora-A could interact with and phosphorylate SPINDLIN1 at
its key functional sites, Ser84 and Ser99, suggesting that phosphorylation of
SPINDLIN1 is involved in its oncogenic function. Collectively, these results
suggest that SPINDLIN1, which may be a novel substrate of the Aurora-A kinase,
promotes cancer cell growth through WNT/TCF-4 signaling activation.

PMID: 22258766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029228. Epub 2012 Jan 11.

Association of the type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility gene, TCF7L2, with
schizophrenia in an Arab-Israeli family sample.

Alkelai A(1), Greenbaum L, Lupoli S, Kohn Y, Sarner-Kanyas K, Ben-Asher E, Lancet
D, Macciardi F, Lerer B.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Dept. of Psychiatry, Hadassah - Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Many reports in different populations have demonstrated linkage of the 10q24-q26 
region to schizophrenia, thus encouraging further analysis of this locus for
detection of specific schizophrenia genes. Our group previously reported linkage 
of the 10q24-q26 region to schizophrenia in a unique, homogeneous sample of
Arab-Israeli families with multiple schizophrenia-affected individuals, under a
dominant model of inheritance. To further explore this candidate region and
identify specific susceptibility variants within it, we performed re-analysis of 
the 10q24-26 genotype data, taken from our previous genome-wide association study
(GWAS) (Alkelai et al, 2011). We analyzed 2089 SNPs in an extended sample of 57
Arab Israeli families (189 genotyped individuals), under the dominant model of
inheritance, which best fits this locus according to previously performed MOD
score analysis. We found significant association with schizophrenia of the TCF7L2
gene intronic SNP, rs12573128, (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.01×10<U+207B>6) and of the nearby intergenic SNP, 
rs1033772, (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.59×10<U+207B>6) which is positioned between TCF7L2 and HABP2. TCF7L2
is one of the best confirmed susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes (T2D) among
different ethnic groups, has a role in pancreatic beta cell function and may
contribute to the comorbidity of schizophrenia and T2D. These preliminary results
independently support previous findings regarding a possible role of TCF7L2 in
susceptibility to schizophrenia, and strengthen the importance of integrating
linkage analysis models of inheritance while performing association analyses in
regions of interest. Further validation studies in additional populations are
required.

PMCID: PMC3256145
PMID: 22247771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Gene. 2012 Mar 10;495(2):115-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.12.055. Epub 2012 Jan 8.

Genetic variants of TCF7L2 are associated with type 2 diabetes in a northeastern 
Chinese population.

Qiao H(1), Zhang X, Zhao X, Zhao Y, Xu L, Sun H, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150081, China. qiaoh0823@sina.com

Variants in the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) in several ethnic groups. Two
intronic variants, rs290487 and rs11196218, were originally identified as T2D
modifiers in Hong Kong Chinese and Taiwan Chinese populations, respectively.
However, discrepancies were noted in subsequent replicated studies. In this
study, an association of these two loci with T2D was investigated in a Harbin
Chinese population. Whereas the two populations in the initial studies were
southern Han Chinese, Harbin Chinese are from northeastern China. The SNPs
rs290487 and rs11196218 were genotyped by ligase detection reactions in 700 T2D
patients and 570 unrelated non-diabetic controls. Association analyses, which
were carried out using the case-control sample set, yielded a significant
association between rs290487 and T2D, with a trend opposite to that described in 
a previous report. Specifically, rs290487T was found to be significantly
associated with disease susceptibility (p=0.039), and the allelic OR of rs290487T
carriers was 1.184 (95% CI 1.008-1.391). There was no significant association
between rs11196218 and T2D. Taken together, TCF7L2 may be an important
susceptibility gene for T2D in some Chinese populations. The discrepancies in the
allelic associations determined for northern vs. southern Chinese allude to the
presence of genetic variation among the Han Chinese.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):632-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.248. Epub 2012 Jan 
11.

Association of TCF4 and CLU polymorphisms with Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy and
implication of CLU and TGFBI proteins in the disease process.

Kuot A(1), Hewitt AW, Griggs K, Klebe S, Mills R, Jhanji V, Craig JE, Sharma S,
Burdon KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South
Australia, Australia.

Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy (FED) is a disease affecting the corneal
endothelium. Recent studies reported significant association of polymorphisms in 
the TCF4 (transcription factor 4) gene, and a borderline association of PTPRG
(protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, G) variants with late-onset FED in 
Caucasians from the United States. Association of TCF4 has also been reported in 
the Chinese population. We aimed to determine association of the reported
polymorphisms in TCF4 and PTPRG, and association of polymorphisms in the
candidate genes ZEB1 (zinc-finger E-box binding homoebox 1), COL8A2 (collagen,
type VIII, alpha 2), TGFBI (transforming growth factor, ß-induced) and CLU
(clusterin) in Australian cases. We also compared the expression of TGFBI and CLU
proteins between FED and normal whole corneas. In all, 30 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from the candidate genes were genotyped in 103 cases and 275
controls. Each SNP and haplotype was assessed for association with the disease.
SNP analysis identified an association of TCF4 (rs613872 (P=5.25 × 10(-15),
OR=4.05), rs9954153 (P=3.37 × 10(-7), OR=2.58), rs2286812 (P=4.23 × 10(-6),
OR=2.55) and rs17595731 (P=3.57 × 10(-5), OR=3.79)), CLU (rs17466684; P=0.003,
OR=1.85) and one haplotype of TGFBI SNPs (P=0.011, OR=2.29) with FED in Caucasian
Australians. No evidence for genetic association of PTPRG, ZEB1 and COL8A2 was
found. Immunohistochemistry showed differential expression of CLU and TGFBI
proteins in FED-affected compared with normal corneas. In conclusion, variation
in TCF4, CLU and TGFBI, but not PTPRG, ZEB1 and COL8A2 genes are associated with 
FED in Caucasian Australian cases. Differential expression of CLU and TGFBI
proteins in FED-affected corneas provides novel insights into the disease
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3355250
PMID: 22234156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Mar;10(3):469-82. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0177. Epub
2012 Jan 9.

WNT7A regulates tumor growth and progression in ovarian cancer through the
WNT/ß-catenin pathway.

Yoshioka S(1), King ML, Ran S, Okuda H, MacLean JA 2nd, McAsey ME, Sugino N,
Brard L, Watabe K, Hayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
1135 Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.

Abnormal activation the WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway has been associated with 
ovarian carcinomas, but a specific WNT ligand and pertinent downstream mechanisms
are not fully understood. In this study, we found abundant WNT7A in the
epithelium of serous ovarian carcinomas, but not detected in borderline and
benign tumors, normal ovary, or endometrioid carcinomas. To characterize the role
of WNT7A in ovarian tumor growth and progression, nude mice were injected either 
intraperitoneally or subcutaneously with WNT7A knocked down SKOV3.ip1 and
overexpressed SKOV3 cells. In the intraperitoneal group, mice receiving SKOV3.ip1
cells with reduced WNT7A expression developed significantly fewer tumor lesions. 
Gross and histologic examination revealed greatly reduced invasion of WNT7A
knockdown cells into intestinal mesentery and serosa compared with the control
cells. Tumor growth was regulated by loss or overexpression of WNT7A in mice
receiving subcutaneous injection as well. In vitro analysis of cell function
revealed that cell proliferation, adhesion, and invasion were regulated by WNT7A.
The activity of the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) reporter was
stimulated by overexpression of WNT7A in ovarian cancer cells. Cotransfection
with WNT7A and FZD5 receptor further increased activity, and this effect was
inhibited by cotransfection with SFRP2 or dominant negative TCF4. Overexpression 
of WNT7A stimulated matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7) promoter, and mutation of
TCF-binding sites in MMP7 promoter confirmed that activation of MMP7 promoter by 
WNT7A was mediated by ß-catenin/TCF signaling. Collectively, these results
suggest that reexpression of WNT7A during malignant transformation of ovarian
epithelial cells plays a critical role in ovarian cancer progression mediated by 
WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3307825
PMID: 22232518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):753-61. doi: 10.1002/stem.1032.

Transcription factor TCF4 maintains the properties of human corneal epithelial
stem cells.

Lu R(1), Qu Y, Ge J, Zhang L, Su Z, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

TCF4, a key transcription factor of Wnt signaling system, has been recently found
to be essential for maintaining stem cells. However, its signaling pathway is not
well elucidated. This study was to explore the functional roles and signaling
pathway of TCF4 in maintaining adult stem cell properties using human corneal
epithelial stem cells as a model. With immunofluorescent staining and real-time
polymerase chain reaction, we observed that TCF4 was exclusively expressed in the
basal layer of human limbal epithelium where corneal epithelial stem cells
reside. TCF4 was found to be well colocalized with ABCG2 and p63, two recognized 
epithelial stem/progenitor cell markers. Using in vitro culture models of primary
human corneal epithelial cells, we revealed that TCF4 mRNA and protein were
upregulated by cells in exponential growth stage, and RNA interference by small
interfering RNA-TCF4 (10-50 nM) transfection blocked TCF4 signaling and
suppressed cell proliferation as measured by WST-1 assay. TCF4 silence was found 
to be accompanied by downregulated proliferation-associated factors p63 and
survivin, as well as upregulated cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (p57). By
creating a wound healing model in vitro, we identified upregulation and
activation of ß-catenin/TCF4 with their protein translocation from cytoplasm to
nuclei, as evaluated by reverse transcription-quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction, immunostaining, and Western blotting. Upregulated p63/survivin
and downregulated p57 were further identified to be TCF4 downstream molecules
that promote cell migration and proliferation in wound healing process. These
findings demonstrate that transcription factor TCF4 plays an important role in
determining or maintaining the phenotype and functional properties of human
corneal epithelial stem cells.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22232078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):741-52. doi: 10.1002/stem.1030.

Genome-wide analysis of N1ICD/RBPJ targets in vivo reveals direct transcriptional
regulation of Wnt, SHH, and hippo pathway effectors by Notch1.

Li Y(1), Hibbs MA, Gard AL, Shylo NA, Yun K.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

The Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in regulating cell fate decisions in many 
stem cell systems. However, the full repertoire of Notch target genes in vivo and
the mechanisms through which this pathway activity is integrated with other
signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we report a transgenic mouse in
which the activation of the Notch pathway massively expands the neural stem cell 
(NSC) pool in a cell context-dependent manner. Using this in vivo system, we
identify direct targets of RBPJ/N1ICD in cortical NSCs at a genome-wide level
through combined ChIP-Seq and transcriptome analyses. Through a highly
conservative analysis of these datasets, we identified 98 genes that are directly
regulated by N1ICD/RPBJ in vivo. These include many transcription factors that
are known to be critical for NSC self-renewal (Sox2, Pax6, Tlx, and Id4) and the 
transcriptional effectors of the Wnt, SHH, and Hippo pathways, TCF4, Gli2, Gli3, 
Yap1, and Tead2. Since little is known about the function of the Hippo-Yap
pathway in NSCs, we analyzed Yap1 expression and function in NSCs. We show that
Yap1 expression is restricted to the stem cell compartment in the developing
forebrain and that its expression is sufficient to rescue Notch pathway
inhibition in NSC self-renewal assays. Together, results of this study reveal a
previously underappreciated complexity and breadth of Notch1 targets in vivo and 
show direct interaction between Notch and Hippo-Yap pathways in NSCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3734558
PMID: 22232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Lab Invest. 2012 Apr;92(4):511-21. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.196. Epub 2012 Jan
9.

Sox4 functions as a positive regulator of ß-catenin signaling through
upregulation of TCF4 during morular differentiation of endometrial carcinomas.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Sox factors function as either activators or repressors of ß-catenin/TCF
transcription depending on the cellular context and associated interacting
proteins. Our previous study provided evidence that alteration in ß-catenin
signaling is an essential event during transdifferentiation toward the morular
phenotype of endometrial carcinomas (Em Cas). Here, we focused on related
functional roles of Sox factors. Of eight Sox factors investigated, Sox4 could
enhance ß-catenin/TCF4 transcription, through upregulation of TCF4 at the
transcription level, without any direct ß-catenin association. Cells stably
overexpressing Sox4 showed significant decreases in proliferation rate, along
with increases in expression of p21(WAF1), as well as TCF4, in contrast to
increased cell growth observed with knockdown. Of these factors, only Sox7 could 
transcriptionally upregulate Sox4 expression, but it also resulted in not only
inhibition of Sox4-meditated activation of ß-catenin/TCF4-driven transcription,
but also repression of its own promoter activity, indicating the existence of
very complex feedback loop for Sox-mediated signal cascades. Finally, Sox4
immunoreactivity was frequently pronounced in morular lesions of Em Cas, the
expression being positively correlated with status of ß-catenin, TCF4, and Sox7, 
and inversely with cell proliferation. These data therefore suggest that Sox4 may
serve as a positive regulator of ß-catenin signaling through alteration in TCF4
expression during morular differentiation of Em Ca cells, leading to inhibition
of cell proliferation. In addition, Sox7 may also participate in the process,
having complex roles in modulation of signaling.

PMID: 22231735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Med Chem. 2012 Feb 9;55(3):1346-59. doi: 10.1021/jm201494a. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of new diaminoquinazolines as
ß-catenin/Tcf4 pathway inhibitors.

Mao Y(1), Lin N, Tian W, Han X, Han X, Huang Z, An J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, United States.

More than 50 new diaminoquinazoline derivatives have been synthesized and
evaluated in a colon carcinoma cell growth inhibition assay using HCT116 and
SW480 cells. Twenty compounds with good cell growth inhibitory activities (<4 µM)
were tested as inhibitors of the ß-catenin/T cell transcription factor 4 (Tcf4)
signaling pathway using a HCT116 cell-based luciferase reporter assay. Results
from the biological activities as well as the comparative molecular field
analysis (CoMFA) of the properties of the molecules yielded a preliminary
structure-activity relationship (SAR). Three potent compounds, 74, 78, and 86,
showed IC(50) values <1 µM for growth inhibition of HCT116 cells and ~1 µM for
SW480 cells, as well as IC(50) values of 1.5-2.5 µM for HCT116 cells with the
luciferase reporter assay.

PMID: 22229647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Rejuvenation Res. 2012 Feb;15(1):3-21. doi: 10.1089/rej.2011.1203. Epub 2012 Jan 
9.

Phenolic secoiridoids in extra virgin olive oil impede fibrogenic and oncogenic
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition: extra virgin olive oil as a source of novel
antiaging phytochemicals.

Vazquez-Martin A(1), Fernández-Arroyo S, Cufí S, Oliveras-Ferraros C,
Lozano-Sánchez J, Vellón L, Micol V, Joven J, Segura-Carretero A, Menendez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Oncology , Girona, Catalonia, Spain.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genetic program is a molecular
convergence point in the life-threatening progression of organ fibrosis and
cancer toward organ failure and metastasis, respectively. Here, we employed the
EMT process as a functional screen for testing crude natural extracts for
accelerated drug development in fibrosis and cancer. Because extra virgin olive
oil (EVOO) (i.e., the juice derived from the first cold pressing of the olives
without any further refining process) naturally contains high levels of phenolic 
compounds associated with the health benefits derived from consuming an EVOO-rich
Mediterranean diet, we have tested the ability of an EVOO-derived crude phenolic 
extract to regulate fibrogenic and oncogenic EMT in vitro. High-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled to time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry
assays revealed that the EVOO phenolic extract was mainly composed (~70%) of two 
members of the secoiridoid family of complex polyphenols, namely oleuropein
aglycone-the bitter principle of olives-and its derivative decarboxymethyl
oleuropein aglycone. EVOO secoiridoids efficiently prevented loss of proteins
associated with polarized epithelial phenotype (i.e., E-cadherin) as well as de
novo synthesis of proteins associated with mesenchymal migratory morphology of
transitioning cells (i.e., vimentin). The ability of EVOO to impede transforming 
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-induced disintegration of E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell
contacts apparently occurred as a consequence of the ability of EVOO phenolics to
prevent the upregulation of SMAD4-a critical mediator of TGF-ß signaling-and of
the SMAD transcriptional cofactor SNAIL2 (Slug)-a well-recognized epithelial
repressor. Indeed, EVOO phenolics efficiently prevented crucial TGF-ß-induced EMT
transcriptional events, including upregulation of SNAI2, TCF4, VIM (Vimentin), FN
(fibronectin), and SERPINE1 genes. While awaiting a better mechanistic
understanding of how EVOO phenolics molecularly shut down the EMT differentiation
process, it seems reasonable to suggest that nontoxic Oleaceae secoiridoids
certainly merit to be considered for aging studies and, perhaps, for ulterior
design of more pharmacologically active second-generation anti-EMT molecules.

PMCID: PMC3283896
PMID: 22229524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Biochemistry. 2012 Jan 17;51(2):724-31. doi: 10.1021/bi201428h. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Structure-based discovery of a novel inhibitor targeting the ß-catenin/Tcf4
interaction.

Tian W(1), Han X, Yan M, Xu Y, Duggineni S, Lin N, Luo G, Li YM, Han X, Huang Z, 
An J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, New York 13210, United States.

Overactivation or overexpression of ß-catenin in the Wnt (wingless) signaling
pathway plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Interaction of ß-catenin with
T-cell factor (Tcf) DNA binding proteins is a key step in the activation of the
proliferative genes in response to upstream signals of this Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway. Recently, we identified a new small molecule inhibitor, named BC21
(C(32)H(36)Cl(2)Cu(2)N(2)O(2)), which effectively inhibits the binding of
ß-catenin with Tcf4-derived peptide and suppresses ß-catenin/Tcf4 driven reporter
gene activity. This inhibitor decreases the viability of ß-catenin overexpressing
HCT116 colon cancer cells that harbor the ß-catenin mutation, and more
significantly, it inhibits the clonogenic activity of these cells.
Down-regulation of c-Myc and cyclin D1 expression, the two important effectors of
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, is confirmed by treating HCT116 cells with BC21.
This compound represents a new and modifiable potential anticancer candidate that
targets ß-catenin/Tcf-4 interaction.

PMID: 22224445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neuroreport. 2012 Feb 15;23(3):189-94. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32834fab06.

Expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor is regulated by the Wnt signaling
pathway.

Yi H(1), Hu J, Qian J, Hackam AS.

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
1638 NW 10th Ave., Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a well characterized neurotrophin
that mediates a wide variety of activities in the central nervous system,
including neuronal differentiation, neuroprotection, and synaptic plasticity. The
canonical Wnt signaling pathway is a critical regulator of embryonic development 
and homeostasis in adult tissues. Our group and others recently demonstrated that
Wnt signaling induces BDNF expression in neurons and glia. However, the precise
relationship between BDNF and Wnt signaling pathways is not understood. Here, we 
investigated Wnt signaling regulation of BDNF at the transcriptional level using 
a combination of bioinformatics and molecular analyses. Analysis of the BDNF gene
promoter identified seven binding motifs for Wnt-dependent TCF/LEF transcription 
factors. Furthermore, specific BDNF promoters were induced by the Wnt3a ligand
using chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter assays and a dominant-negative 
TCF4 gene reduced Wnt3a-mediated induction. Finally, Wnt3a induced expression of 
BDNF and other members of the BDNF signaling pathway in glia cells. Therefore,
these data indicate that BDNF is a direct target of Wnt signaling, which provides
a new insight into the interaction between two essential signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3265333
PMID: 22198686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Rev Diabet Stud. 2011 Summer;8(2):230-44. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2011.8.230. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

Association between genetics of diabetes, coronary artery disease, and
macrovascular complications: exploring a common ground hypothesis.

Sousa AG(1), Selvatici L, Krieger JE, Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute, University
of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease (CAD) are conditions that cause a
substantial public health burden. Since both conditions often coexist in the same
individual, it has been hypothesized that they have a common effector. Insulin
and hyperglycemia are assumed to play critical roles in this scenario. In recent 
years, many genetic risk factors for both diabetes and CAD have been discovered, 
mainly through genome-wide association studies. Genetic aspects of diabetes,
diabetic macrovascular complications, and CAD are assumed to have intersections
leading to the common effector hypothesis. However, only a few genetic risk
factors could be identified that modulate the risk for both conditions.
Polymorphisms in TCF7L2 and near the CDKN2A/B genes seem to be of great
importance in this regard since they appear to modulate both conditions, and they
are not necessarily related to insulinism, or hyperglycemia, for CAD development.
Other issues related to this hypothesis, such as the problems of phenotype
heterogeneity, are also of interest. Recent studies have contributed to a better 
understanding of the complex genetics of diabetic macrovascular complications.
Much effort is still needed to clarify the associations in the genetics of
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. At present, there is little genetic
evidence to support a common effector hypothesis, other than insulin or
hyperglycemia, for the association between these conditions.

Copyright © by Lab & Life Press/SBDR

PMCID: PMC3280008
PMID: 22189546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Jan;18(1):11-2. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.170. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Validation of schizophrenia-associated genes CSMD1, C10orf26, CACNA1C and TCF4 as
miR-137 targets.

Kwon E, Wang W, Tsai LH.

PMID: 22182936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2012 Apr;32(3):345-52. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9778-y. Epub
2011 Dec 13.

Tcf7l2 is tightly controlled during myelin formation.

Fu H(1), Kesari S, Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Basic Medical College of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. hueyfu@yahoo.com

Recent, studies have shown that Tcf7l2, an important transcription factor in Wnt 
pathway, plays critical roles in oligodendrocyte development. In this article we 
report a study showing that Tcf7l2 is under tight regulation during myelin
formation. We have found that during early development, Tcf7l2 mRNA appears much 
earlier than the protein, suggesting a regulation at the translational level. We 
induced demyelination in a mouse model by a dietary toxin, where remyelination
followed after a few weeks, and found that Tcf7l2 protein was expressed
specifically during the active remyelination phase. Similarly, in human patients 
with demyelination diseases, Tcf7l2 protein expression was specifically promoted 
in regions undergoing active remyelination. During remyelination, Tcf7l2 was only
expressed in non-dividing oligodendrocyte precursors and was associated with
modest levels of nuclear beta-catenin. We also documented that Tcf7l2 could form 
protein complex with Olig2, but not with Olig1. Our data showed that during
myelin formation, Tcf7l2/beta-catenin is regulated temporally, spatially, and
also at levels of expression. These data suggest a key role for Tcf7l2 in
myelination/remyelination processes via a tightly controlled activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and the interaction with Olig2.

PMCID: PMC4026294
PMID: 22160878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 15;10(24):4199-200. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.24.18465. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

Dominant-negative isoforms of Tcf/Lef proteins in development and disease.

Vacik T, Lemke G.

PMID: 22157225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(4):1911-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06266-11. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Role of ß-catenin and TCF/LEF family members in transcriptional activity of HIV
in astrocytes.

Narasipura SD(1), Henderson LJ, Fu SW, Chen L, Kashanchi F, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is involved in diverse cell functions governing
development and disease. ß-Catenin, a central mediator of this pathway, binds to 
members of the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors to modulate hundreds of
genes. Active Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signaling plays a significant role in
repression of HIV-1 replication in multiple cell targets, including astrocytes.
To determine the mechanism by which active ß-catenin/TCF-4 leads to inhibition of
HIV replication, we knocked down ß-catenin or TCF/LEF members in primary
astrocytes and astrocytomas transiently transfected with an HIV long terminal
repeat (LTR)-luciferase reporter that contained an integrated copy of the HIV
LTR-luciferase construct. Knockdown of either ß-catenin or TCF-4 induced LTR
activity by 2- to 3-fold under both the episomal and integrated conditions. This 
knockdown also increased presence of serine 2-phosphorylated RNA polymerase II
(Pol II) on the HIV LTR as well as enhanced its processivity. Knockdown of
ß-catenin/TCF-4 also impacted tethering of other transcription factors on the HIV
promoter. Specifically, knockdown of TCF-4 enhanced binding of C/EBPß, C/EBPd,
and NF-<U+03BA>B to the HIV LTR, while ß-catenin knockdown increased binding of C/EBPß
and C/EBPd but had no effect on NF-<U+03BA>B. Approximately 150 genes in astrocytes were
impacted by ß-catenin knockdown, including genes involved in
inflammation/immunity, uptake/transport, vesicular transport/exocytosis,
apoptosis/cellular stress, and cytoskeleton/trafficking. These findings indicate 
that modulation of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 axis impacts the basal level of HIV
transcription in astrocytes, which may drive low level/persistent HIV in
astrocytes that can contribute to ongoing neuroinflammation, and this axis also
has profound effects on astrocyte biology.

PMCID: PMC3302377
PMID: 22156527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gastroenterology. 2012 Mar;142(3):572-81. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.11.041. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

ß-catenin inhibits promyelocytic leukemia protein tumor suppressor function in
colorectal cancer cells.

Satow R(1), Shitashige M, Jigami T, Fukami K, Honda K, Kitabayashi I, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemotherapy and Clinical Research, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Loss of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear body (NB)
formation has been reported in colorectal and other solid tumors. However,
genetic alteration of PML is rarely observed in these tumors; the exact
mechanisms that mediate loss of PML function are not known.
METHODS: We previously used a comprehensive shotgun mass spectrometry approach to
identify PML as 1 of 70 proteins that coimmunoprecipitate with anti-T-cell factor
4 in DLD-1 and HCT116 colorectal cancer cell lines; we investigated the effects
of altered ß-catenin expression on PML function in these cells.
RESULTS: ß-catenin specifically interacted with the product of PML transcript
variant IV (PML-IV) through the armadillo repeat domain of ß-catenin.
Overexpression of ß-catenin in colorectal cancer cells disrupted the subcellular 
compartmentalization of PML-IV, whereas knockdown of ß-catenin restored formation
of PML-NB. Modification of PML by the small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) is 
required for proper assembly of PML-NB. ß-catenin inhibited Ran-binding protein
2-mediated SUMOylation of PML-IV.
CONCLUSIONS: ß-catenin interacts with PML isoform IV and disrupts PML-IV function
and PML-NB formation by inhibiting Ran-binding protein 2-mediated SUMO
modification of PML-IV. These findings indicate the involvement of a
posttranslational mechanism in disruption of PML-NB organization in cancer cells 
and provide more information about the oncogenic functions of ß-catenin.

Copyright Â© 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cornea. 2012 Feb;31(2):162-6. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0b013e318226155f.

Role of the TCF4 gene intronic variant in normal variation of corneal
endothelium.

Mackey DA(1), Warrington NM, Hewitt AW, Oates SK, Yazar S, Soloshenko A, Crawford
GJ, Mountain JA, Pennell CE.

Author information: 
(1)Lions Eye Institute, Western Australia, Australia. david.mackey@lei.org.au

PURPOSE: To identify early features of Fuchs endothelial dystrophy (FED) in
carriers of the rs613872(G) transcription factor 4 gene (TCF4) aged 20 to 21
years.
METHODS: Prospective cohort study of people aged 20 to 21 years previously
enrolled in the Western Australia Pregnancy (Raine) Cohort. Specular microscopy
was performed using a noncontact specular microscopy (EM-3000; Tomey, Nagoya,
Japan). Individual genotype data were extracted from the genome-wide Illumina 660
Quad Array. Analysis of the association between the rs613872 risk allele in TCF4 
and specular microscopic measurements was conducted.
RESULTS: Association between the rs613872 risk allele and corneal endothelial
cell density (CD) as well as the coefficient of variation in cell shape was the
main outcome measure. Genotype and specular microscopic data were available for a
total of 445 participants (46% women). The median CD was 2851 and 2850 cells per 
square millimeter in the right and left eyes, respectively. No significant
differences between intereye variability in endothelial CD were seen (right eye
to left eye correlation = 0.64); however, a significant difference in variability
of endothelial CD between men and women was observed (male: OD, 2839 ± 124
cells/mm² and OS, 2845 ± 124 cells/mm² vs. female: OD, 2838 ± 134 cells/mm² and
OS, 2842 ± 132 cells/mm²; OD, P = 0.0013 and OS, P = 0.0016). Eleven individuals 
were homozygous for the rs613872 risk allele. We found no association between
rs613872 genotype and CD or coefficient of variation. One of 11 homozygous GG
individuals was found to have a gutta in 1 sample field on specular microscopy,
whereas 2 of 297 TT individuals also had a gutta each in 1 sample field.
CONCLUSIONS: We were unable to detect an association between TCF4 rs613872
genotype and the variation in corneal endothelial CD or variation in cell
morphology in a healthy young adult population.

PMID: 22146553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Feb;12(1):88-92. doi: 10.1007/s11892-011-0245-4.

Determining genetic risk factors for pediatric type 2 diabetes.

Morgan AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, 85 Park Road, Grafton, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.
ang.morgan@auckland.ac.nz

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing significantly in the
pediatric population. A strong family history of the disease suggests the
involvement of genetic factors for diabetes development, but defining the
molecular genetics of T2D in children is difficult due to a low number of
subjects and the lack of robust diagnostic criteria. Thus, genetic studies of T2D
have been carried out almost exclusively in adults. In this review, the genetics 
of T2D is summarized and options for discovering the missing heritability
explored. The review concludes with a discussion of future research that will be 
required for determining genetic risk factors for pediatric T2D.

PMID: 22139555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Arch Med Res. 2011 Aug;42(6):495-501. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2011.05.006.

rs12255372 variant of TCF7L2 gene is protective for obesity in Mexican children.

Klünder-Klünder M(1), Mejía-Benitez MA, Flores-Huerta S, Burguete-García AI,
García-Mena J, Cruz M.

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Research Department, Hospital Infantil de México Federico
Gómez, Ministry of Health, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene 
are consistently associated with type 2 diabetes in adults, but the association
of TCF7L2 with weight-related traits and body fat in humans is unclear. The aim
of this study was to determine the relationship between the TCF7L2 gene
(rs12255372) and obese phenotype in Mexican school-age children.
METHODS: The study was performed in schools in Mexico City; 186 obese and 194
control children were studied. Fasting insulin and glucose, total cholesterol,
LDL-C, HDL-C and triglycerides concentration were determined. The variant
rs12255372 of the TCF7L2 gene was genotyped. We used age- and sex-adjusted linear
models to test for association with metabolic measurements with this variant.
RESULTS: Genotype of the TCF7L2 rs12255372 gene was associated with lower fasting
plasma glucose (p = 0.001) and lower homeostasis model assessment of insulin
resistance (HOMA-R; p = 0.001) in nonobese children. Heterozygous carriers for
this variant were more prevalent in lean children (32.5%) than in the obese group
(23.7%), which resulted in a strong protective effect for the normal weight
condition (OR = 0.56, 0.32-0.97).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism protects Mexican children from
obesity. Further research in other large, population-based studies is needed to
replicate these findings.

Copyright © 2011 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22136959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biomol Screen. 2012 Apr;17(4):530-4. doi: 10.1177/1087057111429745. Epub 2011
Nov 29.

Development of a novel fluorescence polarization-based assay for studying the
ß-catenin/Tcf4 interaction.

Tian W(1), Xu Y, Han X, Duggineni S, Han X, Huang Z, An J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY, USA.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is associated with a
wide range of human cancers. The interaction of ß-catenin with T cell factor
(Tcf) is a key step in activation of proliferative genes in this pathway.
Interruption of this interaction would be a valuable strategy as a tumor therapy.
In this study, we developed a novel fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled
Tcf4-derived probe for identification of inhibitors of the ß-catenin/Tcf4
interaction using a fluorescence polarization assay. This assay shows high
potential for use in high-throughput screening for the discovery of inhibitors of
the ß-catenin/Tcf4 interaction.

PMID: 22127421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nat Commun. 2011 Nov 22;2:548. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1551.

Identification of a link between Wnt/ß-catenin signalling and the cell fusion
pathway.

Matsuura K(1), Jigami T, Taniue K, Morishita Y, Adachi S, Senda T, Nonaka A,
Aburatani H, Nakamura T, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

Cell fusion has a critical role in various developmental processes, immune
response, tissue homeostasis and regeneration, and possibly, in cancer. However, 
the signals that regulate cell fusion remain poorly understood. In a screen for
novel targets of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling, we identified glial cells missing 1
(GCM1), which encodes a transcription factor that is involved in epigenetic
regulation and is critical for the fusion of syncytiotrophoblast (ST) cells. Here
we show that ß-catenin/BCL9-Like (BCL9L)/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) signalling
directly targets the GCM1/syncytin pathway and thereby regulates the fusion of
human choriocarcinoma cells. Furthermore, we show that the GCM1/syncytin-B
pathway is significantly downregulated in the placenta of BCL9L-deficient mice
and that the fusion and differentiation of ST-II cells are blocked. Our results
demonstrate a signal transduction pathway that regulates cell fusion, and may
provide intriguing perspectives into the various biological and pathological
processes that involve cell fusion.

PMID: 22109522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Diabetologia. 2012 Mar;55(3):689-93. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2378-z. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

The type 2 diabetes-associated variant in TCF7L2 is associated with latent
autoimmune diabetes in adult Europeans and the gene effect is modified by
obesity: a meta-analysis and an individual study.

Lukacs K(1), Hosszufalusi N, Dinya E, Bakacs M, Madacsy L, Panczel P.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Bókay u 53-54, 1083
Budapest, Hungary. krisztinalukacs@hotmail.com

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have
been proposed to be associated with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA). 
We sought to confirm the possible association in Europeans and to examine the
interaction between one gene variant and clinical data.
METHODS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 C-to-T polymorphism was genotyped in 211 LADA,
1,297 type 2 diabetic, 545 type 1 diabetic and 1,497 control individuals from
Hungary. A meta-analysis of our and previously published studies was performed to
evaluate the size and the heterogeneity of the gene effect.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis yielded a significant effect of TCF7L2 T allele (OR
1.28; p < 0.0001) on LADA risk without heterogeneity among Europeans. The T
allele conferred equally strong susceptibility to LADA and type 2 diabetes. In
the Hungarian dataset, the T allele was associated with LADA and type 2 diabetes,
but not with type 1 diabetes. T allele carriers had significantly lower BMI than 
patients with the CC genotype in the LADA and type 2 diabetes groups (p = 0.0021 
and p = 0.0013, respectively). In both diseases, the diabetes risk was
significantly higher in the non-overweight than in the overweight BMI category (p
= 0.0013 and p < 0.0001, respectively); susceptibility to LADA was increased by
2.84-fold in non-overweight individuals compared with overweight ones.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The meta-analysis demonstrates that TCF7L2 rs7903146 
polymorphism is a population-independent susceptibility locus for LADA in
Europeans. The effect size is similar for LADA and type 2 diabetes. The gene
effect on diabetes risk may be modulated by BMI, such that the lower the BMI, the
higher the gene effect.

PMID: 22109281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan;26(1):37-51. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1109. Epub 2011 Nov
22.

VDR/RXR and TCF4/ß-catenin cistromes in colonic cells of colorectal tumor origin:
impact on c-FOS and c-MYC gene expression.

Meyer MB(1), Goetsch PD, Pike JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Many of the transcriptional and growth regulating activities of
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)] in the intestine and colon are
recapitulated in the human colorectal cancer cell LS180. We therefore used this
line together with chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq and gene expression analyses
to identify the vitamin D receptor (VDR)/retinoid X receptor (RXR) and
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2/TCF4)/ß-catenin cistromes and the genes
that they regulate. VDR and RXR colocalized to predominantly promoter distal,
vitamin D response element-containing sites in a largely ligand-dependent manner.
These regulatory sites control the expression of both known as well as novel
1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) target genes. TCF4 and ß-catenin cistromes partially overlapped,
contained TCF/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor consensus elements, and were only 
modestly influenced by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3). However, the two heterodimer complexes
colocalized at sites near a limited set of genes that included c-FOS and c-MYC;
the expression of both genes was modulated by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3). At the c-FOS
gene, both VDR/RXR and TCF4/ß-catenin bound to a single distal enhancer located
24 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site. At the c-MYC locus, however,
binding was noted at a cluster of sites between -139 and -165 kb and at a site
located -335 kb upstream. Examined as isolated enhancer fragments, these regions 
exhibited basal and 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)-inducible activities that were interlinked
to both VDR and ß-catenin activation. These data reveal additional complexity in 
the regulation of target genes by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and support a direct action of
both VDR and the TCF4/ß-catenin regulatory complex at c-FOS and c-MYC.

PMCID: PMC3248320
PMID: 22108803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Mar 10;318(5):489-99. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

The human HECA interacts with cyclins and CDKs to antagonize Wnt-mediated
proliferation and chemoresistance of head and neck cancer cells.

Dowejko A(1), Bauer R, Bauer K, Müller-Richter UD, Reichert TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
Albert.Dowejko@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

There is a growing evidence that the human homologue of the Drosophila headcase
(HECA) plays an important role in human carcinogenesis. So far specific protein
interaction partners and affected signaling pathways of HECA are still elusive.
In a recent study we showed that HECA overexpression in oral squamous-cell
carcinoma (OSCC) keratinocytes has tumor suppressive effects resulting in a
recuperation of cell cycle control concerning the entry and progression of
S-phase, G2- and M-phase. Currently, quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical 
analysis of primary tumor tissue from OSCC patients demonstrate that HECA
expression is markedly decreased compared to normal control patients with
abundant HECA expression. Additionally, there is nearly no HECA expression in
OSCC metastases. Here, we show that HECA expression is negatively controlled by
the Wnt-pathway and TCF4, a Wnt related transcription factor, binds to the HECA
promoter. Furthermore, immunocytochemistry reveals colocalization of HECA with
the cyclin dependent kinase CDK9. Immunoprecipitation experiments and proximity
ligation assays further reveal an interaction of HECA with CDK2, CDK9, Cyclin A
and Cyclin K, a direct transcriptional target of the p53 tumor suppressor.
Silencing HECA in OSCC cell lines leads to a significant increase of cell
division and a markedly increased resistance against the chemotherapeutic
cisplatin. On the contrary, HECA overexpressing OSCC cell lines show decreased
resistance of OSCC cells against cisplatin. Therefore, HECA could be considered
as future therapeutic agent against Wnt-dependent tumor progression.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Lett. 2012 Apr 1;317(1):65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.11.014. Epub
2011 Nov 15.

P-21 activated kinase 1 knockdown inhibits ß-catenin signalling and blocks
colorectal cancer growth.

He H(1), Huynh N, Liu KH, Malcontenti-Wilson C, Zhu J, Christophi C, Shulkes A,
Baldwin GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne,
Victoria 3084, Australia. hong.he@unimelb.edu.au

The p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) plays important roles in cell growth, motility,
and transformation. The aims of this study were to delineate the signalling
mechanisms downstream of PAK1, and to investigate the importance of PAK1 for
colorectal cancer (CRC) growth and metastasis in vivo. PAK1 knockdown in human
CRC cell lines inhibited ß-catenin expression, ß-catenin/TCF4 transcriptional
activity, and the expression of c-Myc. In mouse models PAK1 knockdown suppressed 
the growth and metastasis of human CRC cells by decreasing proliferation and
increasing apoptosis. Our findings demonstrate for the first time the crucial
role of PAK1 in CRC progression in vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Differentiation. 2012 Jan;83(1):47-59. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.08.003. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The GM-CSF receptor utilizes ß-catenin and Tcf4 to specify macrophage lineage
differentiation.

Brown AL(1), Salerno DG, Sadras T, Engler GA, Kok CH, Wilkinson CR, Samaraweera
SE, Sadlon TJ, Perugini M, Lewis ID, Gonda TJ, D'Andrea RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide,
Australia.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) promotes the growth,
survival, differentiation and activation of normal myeloid cells and is essential
for fully functional macrophage differentiation in vivo. To better understand the
mechanisms by which growth factors control the balance between proliferation and 
self-renewal versus growth-suppression and differentiation we have used the
bi-potent FDB1 myeloid cell line, which proliferates in IL-3 and differentiates
to granulocytes and macrophages in response to GM-CSF. This provides a
manipulable model in which to dissect the switch between growth and
differentiation. We show that, in the context of signaling from an activating
mutant of the GM-CSF receptor ß subunit, a single intracellular tyrosine residue 
(Y577) mediates the granulocyte fate decision. Loss of granulocyte
differentiation in a Y577F second-site mutant is accompanied by enhanced
macrophage differentiation and accumulation of ß-catenin together with activation
of Tcf4 and other Wnt target genes. These include the known macrophage lineage
inducer, Egr1. We show that forced expression of Tcf4 or a stabilised ß-catenin
mutant is sufficient to promote macrophage differentiation in response to GM-CSF 
and that GM-CSF can regulate ß-catenin stability, most likely via GSK3ß.
Consistent with this pathway being active in primary cells we show that
inhibition of GSK3ß activity promotes the formation of macrophage colonies at the
expense of granulocyte colonies in response to GM-CSF. This study therefore
identifies a novel pathway through which growth factor receptor signaling can
interact with transcriptional regulators to influence lineage choice during
myeloid differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3394929
PMID: 22099176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Jan;56(1):67-76. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100531. Epub 2011
Nov 17.

Metabolic syndrome: evidences for a personalized nutrition.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Garcia-Rios A, Delgado-Lista J, Perez-Jimenez F,
Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC/Reina Sofia University
Hospital/University of Cordoba, and CIBER Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutricion
(CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.

Both insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia are determined by genetic and
environmental factors. Depending on their expression and their function, gene
variants may influence either insulin action or other metabolic traits. Nutrition
also plays an important role in the development and progression of these
conditions. Genetic background may interact with habitual dietary fat
composition, affecting predisposition to insulin resistance syndrome and
individual responsiveness to changes in dietary fat intake. In this context,
nutrigenetics has emerged as a multidisciplinary field focusing on studying the
interactions between nutritional and genetic factors and health outcomes. Due to 
the complex nature of gene-environment interactions, however, dietary therapy may
require a "personalized" nutrition approach in the future. Although the results
have not always been consistent, gene variants that affect primary insulin
action, and particularly their interaction with the environment, are important
modulators of glucose metabolism. The purpose of this review is to present some
evidence of studies that have already demonstrated the significance of
gene-nutrient interactions (adiponectin gene, Calpain-10, glucokinase regulatory 
protein, transcription factor 7-like 2, leptin receptor, scavenger receptor class
B type I etc.) that influence insulin resistance in subjects with metabolic
syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22095824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Gut. 2012 Sep;61(9):1306-14. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300817. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

ß-catenin represses expression of the tumour suppressor 15-prostaglandin
dehydrogenase in the normal intestinal epithelium and colorectal tumour cells.

Smartt HJ(1), Greenhough A, Ordóñez-Morán P, Talero E, Cherry CA, Wallam CA,
Parry L, Al Kharusi M, Roberts HR, Mariadason JM, Clarke AR, Huelsken J, Williams
AC, Paraskeva C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Colorectal Tumour Biology Research Group, School of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University Walk, University of Bristol, Bristol,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) overexpression in colorectal cancer
increases levels of its pro-tumorigenic product prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)). The
recently identified colorectal tumour suppressor 15-prostaglandin dehydrogenase
(15-PGDH) catalyses prostaglandin turnover and is downregulated at a very early
stage in colorectal tumorigenesis; however, the mechanism responsible remains
unclear. As Wnt/ß-catenin signalling is also deregulated early in colorectal
neoplasia, a study was undertaken to determine whether ß-catenin represses
15-PGDH expression.
METHODS: The effect of modulating Wnt/ß-catenin signalling (using ß-catenin
siRNA, mutant TCF4, Wnt3A or GSK3 inhibition) on 15-PGDH mRNA, protein expression
and promoter activity was determined in colorectal cell lines by immunoblotting, 
qRT-PCR and reporter assays. The effect of ß-catenin deletion in vivo was
addressed by 15-PGDH immunostaining of ß-catenin(-/lox)-villin-creERT2 mouse
tissue. 15-PGDH promoter occupancy was determined using chromatin
immunoprecipitation and PGE(2) levels by ELISA.
RESULTS: The study shows for the first time that ß-catenin knockdown upregulates 
15-PGDH in colorectal adenoma and carcinoma cells without affecting COX-2 protein
levels. A dominant negative mutant form of TCF4 (dnTCF4), unable to bind
ß-catenin, also upregulated 15-PGDH; conversely, increasing ß-catenin activity
using Wnt3A or GSK3 inhibition downregulated 15-PGDH. Importantly, inducible
ß-catenin deletion in vivo also upregulated intestinal epithelial 15-PGDH.
15-PGDH regulation occurred at the protein, mRNA and promoter activity levels and
chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated ß-catenin/TCF4 binding to the 15-PGDH
promoter. ß-catenin knockdown decreased PGE(2) levels, and this was significantly
rescued by 15-PGDH siRNA.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest a novel role for ß-catenin in promoting colorectal
tumorigenesis through very early 15-PGDH suppression leading to increased PGE(2) 
levels, possibly even before COX-2 upregulation.

PMID: 22082586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 29;108(48):19204-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108977108. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

ß-catenin/TCF4 complex induces the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-activator ZEB1 to regulate tumor invasiveness.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O, Siles L, Cuatrecasas M, Castells A, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

In most carcinomas, invasion of malignant cells into surrounding tissues involves
their molecular reprogramming as part of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT). Mutation of the APC gene in most colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) contributes 
to the nuclear translocation of the oncoprotein ß-catenin that upon binding to
T-cell and lymphoid enhancer (TCF-LEF) factors triggers an EMT and a proinvasive 
gene expression profile. A key inducer of EMT is the ZEB1 transcription factor
whose expression promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis in carcinomas. As
inhibitor of the epithelial phenotype, ZEB1 is never present in the epithelium of
normal colon or the tumor center of CRCs where ß-catenin remains membranous. We
show here that ZEB1 is expressed by epithelial cells in intestinal tumors from
human patients (familial adenomatous polyposis) and mouse models (APC(Min/+))
with germline mutations of APC that result in nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin. 
However, ZEB1 is not expressed in the epithelium of hereditary forms of CRCs that
carry wild-type APC and where ß-catenin is excluded from the nucleus (Lynch
syndrome). We found that ß-catenin/TCF4 binds directly to the ZEB1 promoter and
activates its transcription. Knockdown of ß-catenin and TCF4 in APC-mutated CRC
cells inhibited endogenous ZEB1, whereas forced translocation of ß-catenin to the
nucleus in APC-wild-type CRC cells induced de novo expression of ZEB1.
Upregulation of MT1-MMP and LAMC2 by ß-catenin/TCF4 has been linked to
invasiveness in CRCs, and we show here that both proteins are activated by ZEB1
coexpressing with it in primary colorectal tumors with mutated APC. These results
set ZEB1 as an effector of ß-catenin/TCF4 signaling in EMT and tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3228467
PMID: 22080605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar;20(3):298-304. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.194. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

Copy number detection in discordant monozygotic twins of Congenital Diaphragmatic
Hernia (CDH) and Esophageal Atresia (EA) cohorts.

Veenma D(1), Brosens E, de Jong E, van de Ven C, Meeussen C, Cohen-Overbeek T,
Boter M, Eussen H, Douben H, Tibboel D, de Klein A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
d.veenma@erasmusmc.nl

The occurrence of phenotypic differences between monozygotic (MZ) twins is
commonly attributed to environmental factors, assuming that MZ twins have a
complete identical genetic make-up. Yet, recently several lines of evidence
showed that both genetic and epigenetic factors could have a role in phenotypic
discordance after all. A high occurrence of copy number variation (CNV)
differences was observed within MZ twin pairs discordant for Parkinson's disease,
thereby stressing on the importance of post-zygotic mutations as
disease-predisposing events. In this study, the prevalence of discrepant CNVs was
analyzed in discordant MZ twins of the Esophageal Atresia (EA) and Congenital
Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) cohort in the Netherlands. Blood-derived DNA from 11
pairs (7 EA and 4 CDH) was screened using high-resolution SNP arrays. Results
showed an identical copy number profile in each twin pair. Mosaic chromosome gain
or losses could not be detected either with a detection threshold of 20%. Some of
the germ-line structural events demonstrated in five out of eleven twin pairs
could function as a susceptible genetic background. For example, the 177-Kb loss 
of chromosome 10q26 in CDH pair-3 harbors the TCF7L2 gene (Tcf4 protein), which
is implicated in the regulation of muscle fiber type development and maturation. 
In conclusion, discrepant CNVs are not a common cause of twin discordancy in
these investigated congenital anomaly cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3283183
PMID: 22071887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Cancer. 2012 Sep 15;131(6):1435-44. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27344. Epub 2012 Feb
9.

Chemoprevention of familial adenomatous polyposis by bromo-noscapine (EM011) in
the Apc(Min/+) mouse model.

Li S(1), Ghaleb AM, He J, Bughani U, Bialkowska AB, Yang VW, Joshi HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. wang9377@gmail.com

Germline mutation of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC),
is responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) with nearly 100% risk for
colon cancer at an early age. Although FAP is involved in only 1% of all colon
cancer cases, over 80% of sporadic cancers harbor somatic mutations of APC. We
show here that bromo-noscapine (EM011), a rationally designed synthetic
derivative of a natural nontoxic tubulin-binding alkaloid-noscapine, that reduces
the dynamics of microtubules, causes a reversible G(2) /M arrest in wild type
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), but an aberrant exit from a brief mitotic
block, followed by apoptosis in MEFs after APC deletion with small interfering
RNA. Furthermore, both ß-catenin levels and activity fell to half the original
levels with a concomitant reduction of cell proliferation-inducing cyclin D1,
c-Myc, and induction of cytostatic protein p21 before caspase-3 activation.
Additionally, we show a statistically significant reduction in the number of
newly emerging intestinal polyps (to 35% compared with untreated mice) as well as
the mean size of polyps (to 42% compared with untreated mice) in EM011-treated
Apc(Min/+) mice as compared to their sham-treated control littermates. The
remaining polyps in the EM011 treated group of Apc(Min/+) mice showed evidence of
elevated apoptosis as revealed by immunohistochemistry. We failed to detect any
evidence of histopathological and hematological toxicities following EM011
treatment. Taken together, our data are persuasive that a clinical trial of EM011
is possible for the prevention/amelioration of polyposis in FAP patients.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3362662
PMID: 22052467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):778-87. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191742. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Phthalates induce proliferation and invasiveness of estrogen receptor-negative
breast cancer through the AhR/HDAC6/c-Myc signaling pathway.

Hsieh TH(1), Tsai CF, Hsu CY, Kuo PL, Lee JN, Chai CY, Wang SC, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The environmentally present group of chemical phthalates, or phthalate esters,
has been recognized as a rising threat to public health, including cancer. While 
most studies have addressed the estrogenic effects of phthalates in malignancies 
of the breast and the prostate, little is known about their role in the etiology 
of hormone-independent cancer. Here we show that treatments with the phthalates
n-butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) at 1 µM induced
proliferation (BBP, 3.2-fold; DBP, 3.2-fold), migration (BBP, 2.6-fold; DBP,
2.6-fold), invasion (BBP, 2.7-fold; DBP, 3.1-fold), and tumor formation (EC(50): 
BBP, 0.12 µM; DBP, 0.22 µM) in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer
cells (MDA-MB-231). We further demonstrate that phthalates stimulated the cell
surface aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and triggered the downstream cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-PKA-CREB1 signaling cascade. The pathway led to increased expression of
HDAC6, which facilitated nuclear assembly of the ß-catenin-LEF1/TCF4
transcriptional complex and transactivation of the c-Myc oncogene. This
nongenomic pathway emanated from the phthalate-induced AhR promoted tumorigenesis
of ER-negative breast cancer. Collectively, our findings revealed a novel
oncogenic mechanism of phthalates in breast cancer independent from their
estrogenic activities.

PMID: 22049059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026897. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Modulation ofTcf7l2 expression alters behavior in mice.

Savic D(1), Distler MG, Sokoloff G, Shanahan NA, Dulawa SC, Palmer AA, Nobrega
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

The comorbidity of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with several psychiatric diseases is
well established. While environmental factors may partially account for these
co-occurrences, common genetic susceptibilities could also be implicated in the
confluence of these diseases. In support of shared genetic burdens, TCF7L2, the
strongest genetic determinant for T2D risk in the human population, has been
recently implicated in schizophrenia (SCZ) risk, suggesting that this may be one 
of many loci that pleiotropically influence both diseases. To investigate whether
Tcf7l2 is involved in behavioral phenotypes in addition to its roles in glucose
metabolism, we conducted several behavioral tests in mice with null alleles of
Tcf7l2 or overexpressing Tcf7l2. We identified a role for Tcf7l2 in anxiety-like 
behavior and a dose-dependent effect of Tcf7l2 alleles on fear learning. None of 
the mutant mice showed differences in prepulse inhibition (PPI), which is a
well-established endophenotype for SCZ. These results show that Tcf7l2 alters
behavior in mice. Importantly, these differences are observed prior to the onset 
of detectable glucose metabolism abnormalities. Whether these differences are
related to human anxiety-disorders or schizophrenia remains to be determined.
These animal models have the potential to elucidate the molecular basis of
psychiatric comorbidities in diabetes and should therefore be studied further.

PMCID: PMC3203170
PMID: 22046400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jan;33(1):64-72. doi: 10.1002/humu.21639. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Novel comprehensive diagnostic strategy in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: clinical score 
and further delineation of the TCF4 mutational spectrum.

Whalen S(1), Héron D, Gaillon T, Moldovan O, Rossi M, Devillard F, Giuliano F,
Soares G, Mathieu-Dramard M, Afenjar A, Charles P, Mignot C, Burglen L, Van
Maldergem L, Piard J, Aftimos S, Mancini G, Dias P, Philip N, Goldenberg A, Le
Merrer M, Rio M, Josifova D, Van Hagen JM, Lacombe D, Edery P, Dupuis-Girod S,
Putoux A, Sanlaville D, Fischer R, Drévillon L, Briand-Suleau A, Metay C,
Goossens M, Amiel J, Jacquette A, Giurgea I.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique 
Clinique, Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Centre de Référence Maladies
Rares, Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), characterized by severe intellectual disability and
typical facial gestalt, is part of the clinical spectrum of Rett-like syndromes. 
TCF4, encoding a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, was
identified as the disease-causing gene with de novo molecular defects. While PTHS
appears to be a recognizable clinical entity, it seems to remain underdiagnosed, 
especially when facial gestalt is less typical. With the aim to facilitate the
diagnosis of PTHS and to increase its rate and specificity, we have investigated 
33 novel patients and defined a Clinical Diagnosis Score. Analysis of 112
individuals (79 previously reported and 33 novel patients) allowed us to
delineate the TCF4 mutational spectrum, with 40% point mutations, 30% small
deletions/insertions, and 30% deletions. Most of these were private mutations and
generated premature stop codons. Missense mutations were localized in the bHLH
domain, which is a mutational hotspot. No obvious difference was observed between
patients harboring truncating, missense mutations, or deletions, further
supporting TCF4 haploinsufficiency as the molecular mechanism underlying PTHS. In
this study, we have summarized the current knowledge of TCF4 molecular pathology,
reported all the mutations in the TCF4 database (http://www.LOVD.nl/TCF4), and
present a novel and comprehensive diagnostic strategy for PTHS.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22045651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Clin Genet. 2011 Dec;80(6):600-1. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01711.x.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome should be in the differential diagnosis for males
presenting with an ATR-X phenotype.

Takano K, Tan WH, Irons MB, Jones JR, Schwartz CE.

PMID: 22040220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell. 2011 Oct 28;147(3):577-89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.044.

Lineage regulators direct BMP and Wnt pathways to cell-specific programs during
differentiation and regeneration.

Trompouki E(1), Bowman TV, Lawton LN, Fan ZP, Wu DC, DiBiase A, Martin CS, Cech
JN, Sessa AK, Leblanc JL, Li P, Durand EM, Mosimann C, Heffner GC, Daley GQ,
Paulson RF, Young RA, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

BMP and Wnt signaling pathways control essential cellular responses through
activation of the transcription factors SMAD (BMP) and TCF (Wnt). Here, we show
that regeneration of hematopoietic lineages following acute injury depends on the
activation of each of these signaling pathways to induce expression of key blood 
genes. Both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 co-occupy sites with master regulators adjacent to
hematopoietic genes. In addition, both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 follow the binding of the
predominant lineage regulator during differentiation from multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells to erythroid cells. Furthermore, induction of the 
myeloid lineage regulator C/EBPa in erythroid cells shifts binding of SMAD1 to
sites newly occupied by C/EBPa, whereas expression of the erythroid regulator
GATA1 directs SMAD1 loss on nonerythroid targets. We conclude that the
regenerative response mediated by BMP and Wnt signaling pathways is coupled with 
the lineage master regulators to control the gene programs defining cellular
identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3219441
PMID: 22036566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26002. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026002. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Genome-wide screen for differential DNA methylation associated with neural cell
differentiation in mouse.

Cortese R(1), Lewin J, Bäckdahl L, Krispin M, Wasserkort R, Eckhardt F, Beck S.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Berlin, Germany. Rene_Cortese@camh.net

Cellular differentiation involves widespread epigenetic reprogramming, including 
modulation of DNA methylation patterns. Using Differential Methylation
Hybridization (DMH) in combination with a custom DMH array containing 51,243
features covering more than 16,000 murine genes, we carried out a genome-wide
screen for cell- and tissue-specific differentially methylated regions (tDMRs) in
undifferentiated embryonic stem cells (ESCs), in in-vitro induced neural stem
cells (NSCs) and 8 differentiated embryonic and adult tissues. Unsupervised
clustering of the generated data showed distinct cell- and tissue-specific DNA
methylation profiles, revealing 202 significant tDMRs (p<0.005) between ESCs and 
NSCs and a further 380 tDMRs (p<0.05) between NSCs/ESCs and embryonic brain
tissue. We validated these tDMRs using direct bisulfite sequencing (DBS) and
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation on chip (MeDIP-chip). Gene ontology (GO)
analysis of the genes associated with these tDMRs showed significant (absolute Z 
score>1.96) enrichment for genes involved in neural differentiation, including,
for example, Jag1 and Tcf4. Our results provide robust evidence for the relevance
of DNA methylation in early neural development and identify novel marker
candidates for neural cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3196508
PMID: 22028803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2011 Nov;138(22):4843-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.070284.

Lhx2 differentially regulates Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5 in hair follicle stem cells to 
promote epidermal regeneration after injury.

Mardaryev AN(1), Meier N, Poterlowicz K, Sharov AA, Sharova TY, Ahmed MI,
Rapisarda V, Lewis C, Fessing MY, Ruenger TM, Bhawan J, Werner S, Paus R,
Botchkarev VA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Skin Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Bradford, UK.

The Lhx2 transcription factor plays essential roles in morphogenesis and
patterning of ectodermal derivatives as well as in controlling stem cell
activity. Here, we show that during murine skin morphogenesis, Lhx2 is expressed 
in the hair follicle (HF) buds, whereas in postnatal telogen HFs Lhx2(+) cells
reside in the stem cell-enriched epithelial compartments (bulge, secondary hair
germ) and co-express selected stem cell markers (Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5).
Remarkably, Lhx2(+) cells represent the vast majority of cells in the bulge and
secondary hair germ that proliferate in response to skin injury. This is
functionally important, as wound re-epithelization is significantly retarded in
heterozygous Lhx2 knockout (+/-) mice, whereas anagen onset in the HFs located
closely to the wound is accelerated compared with wild-type mice. Cell
proliferation in the bulge and the number of Sox9(+) and Tcf4(+) cells in the HFs
closely adjacent to the wound in Lhx2(+/-) mice are decreased in comparison with 
wild-type controls, whereas expression of Lgr5 and cell proliferation in the
secondary hair germ are increased. Furthermore, acceleration of wound-induced
anagen development in Lhx2(+/-) mice is inhibited by administration of Lgr5
siRNA. Finally, Chip-on-chip/ChIP-qPCR and reporter assay analyses identified
Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5 as direct Lhx2 targets in keratinocytes. These data strongly 
suggest that Lhx2 positively regulates Sox9 and Tcf4 in the bulge cells, and
promotes wound re-epithelization, whereas it simultaneously negatively regulates 
Lgr5 in the secondary hair germ and inhibits HF cycling. Thus, Lhx2 operates as
an important regulator of epithelial stem cell activity in the skin response to
injury.

PMCID: PMC4067271
PMID: 22028024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Res. 2011 Dec 15;71(24):7694-704. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1714. Epub
2011 Oct 24.

GLIPR1 suppresses prostate cancer development through targeted oncoprotein
destruction.

Li L(1), Ren C, Yang G, Fattah EA, Goltsov AA, Kim SM, Lee JS, Park S, Demayo FJ,
Ittmann MM, Troncoso P, Thompson TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Downregulation of the proapoptotic p53 target gene glioma pathogenesis-related
protein 1 (GLIPR1) occurs frequently in prostate cancer, but the functional
meaning of this event is obscure. Here, we report the discovery of functional
relationship between GLIPR1 and c-Myc in prostate cancer where c-Myc is often
upregulated. We found that the expression of GLIPR1 and c-Myc were inversely
correlated in human prostate cancer. Restoration of GLIPR1 expression in prostate
cancer cells downregulated c-myc levels, inhibiting cell-cycle progression.
Downregulation was linked to a reduction in ß-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription
of the c-myc gene, which was caused by GLIPR1-mediated redistribution of casein
kinase 1a (CK1a) from the Golgi apparatus to the cytoplasm where CK1a could
phosphorylate ß-catenin and mediate its destruction. In parallel, GLIPR1 also
promoted c-Myc protein ubiquitination and degradation by glycogen synthase
kinase-3a- and/or CK1a-mediated c-Myc phosphorylation. Notably, genetic ablation 
of the mouse homolog of Glipr1 cooperated with c-myc overexpression to induce
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer. Together, our findings
provide evidence for CK1a-mediated destruction of c-Myc and identify c-Myc S252
as a crucial CK1a phosphorylation site for c-Myc degradation. Furthermore, they
reveal parallel mechanisms of c-myc downregulation by GLIPR1 that when ablated in
the prostate are sufficient to drive c-Myc expression and malignant development.

PMCID: PMC3813470
PMID: 22025562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026143. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Human FasL gene is a target of ß-catenin/T-cell factor pathway and complex FasL
haplotypes alter promoter functions.

Wu J(1), Richards MH, Huang J, Al-Harthi L, Xu X, Lin R, Xie F, Gibson AW, Edberg
JC, Kimberly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, St.
Paul, Minnesota, United States of America. jmwu@umn.edu

FasL expression on human immune cells and cancer cells plays important roles in
immune homeostasis and in cancer development. Our previous study suggests that
polymorphisms in the FasL promoter can significantly affect the gene expression
in human cells. In addition to the functional FasL SNP -844C>T (rs763110), three 
other SNPs (SNP -756A>G or rs2021837, SNP -478A>T or rs41309790, and SNP -205 C>G
or rs74124371) exist in the proximal FasL promoter. In the current study, we
established three major FasL hyplotypes in humans. Interestingly, a transcription
motif search revealed that the FasL promoter possessed two consensus T-cell
factor (TCF/LEF1) binding elements (TBEs), which is either polymorphic (SNP
-205C>G) or close to the functional SNP -844C>T. Subsequently, we demonstrate
that both FasL TBEs formed complexes with the TCF-4 and ß-catenin transcription
factors in vitro and in vivo. Co-transfection of LEF-1 and ß-catenin
transcription factors significantly increased FasL promoter activities,
suggesting that FasL is a target gene of the ß-catenin/T-cell factor pathway.
More importantly, we found that the rare allele (-205G) of the polymorphic FasL
TBE (SNP -205C>G) failed to bind the TCF-4 transcription factor and that SNP -205
C>G significantly affected the promoter activity. Furthermore, promoter reporter 
assays revealed that FasL SNP haplotypes influenced promoter activities in human 
colon cancer cells and in human T cells. Finally, ß-catenin knockdown
significantly decreased the FasL expression in human SW480 colon cancer cells.
Collectively, our data suggest that ß-catenin may be involved in FasL gene
regulation and that FasL expression is influenced by FasL SNP haplotypes, which
may have significant implications in immune response and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3191176
PMID: 22022540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):44845-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225466. Epub
2011 Oct 20.

Tumor-suppressive effects of psoriasin (S100A7) are mediated through the
ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 protein pathway in estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer cells.

Deol YS(1), Nasser MW, Yu L, Zou X, Ganju RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University Medical and Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Psoriasin (S100A7) is expressed in several epithelial malignancies including
breast cancer. Although S100A7 is associated with the worst prognosis in estrogen
receptor a-negative (ERa(-)) invasive breast cancers, its role in ERa-positive
(ERa(+)) breast cancers is relatively unknown. We investigated the significance
of S100A7 in ERa(+) breast cancer cells and observed that S100A7 overexpression
in ERa(+) breast cancer cells, MCF7 and T47D, exhibited decreased migration,
proliferation, and wound healing. These results were confirmed in vivo in nude
mouse model system. Mice injected with S100A7-overexpressing MCF7 cells showed
significant reduction in tumor size compared with mice injected with vector
control cells. Further mechanistic studies revealed that S100A7 mediates the
tumor-suppressive effects via a coordinated regulation of the ß-catenin/TCF4
pathway and an enhanced interaction of ß-catenin and E-cadherin in
S100A7-overexpressing ERa(+) breast cancer cells. We observed down-regulation of 
ß-catenin, p-GSK3ß, TCF4, cyclin D1, and c-myc in S100A7-overexpressing ERa(+)
breast cancer cells. In addition, we observed increased expression of GSK3ß.
Treatment with GSK3ß inhibitor CHIR 99021 increased the expression of ß-catenin
and its downstream target c-myc in S100A7-overexpressing cells. Tumors derived
from mice injected with S100A7-overexpressing MCF7 cells also showed reduced
activation of the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway. Therefore, our studies reveal for the
first time that S100A7-overexpressing ERa(+) breast cancer cells exhibit tumor
suppressor capabilities through down-modulation of the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway
both in vitro and in vivo. Because S100A7 has been shown to enhance
tumorigenicity in ERa(-) cells, our studies suggest that S100A7 may possess
differential activities in ERa(+) compared with ERa(-) cells.

PMCID: PMC3248020
PMID: 22016394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42575-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.294595. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Regulation of breast cancer-induced bone lesions by ß-catenin protein signaling.

Chen Y(1), Shi HY, Stock SR, Stern PH, Zhang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Breast cancer patients have an extremely high rate of bone metastases.
Morphological analyses of the bones in most of the patients have revealed the
mixed bone lesions, comprising both osteolytic and osteoblastic elements.
ß-Catenin plays a key role in both embryonic skeletogenesis and postnatal bone
regeneration. Although this pathway is also involved in many bone malignancy,
such as osteosarcoma and prostate cancer-induced bone metastases, its regulation 
of breast cancer bone metastases remains unknown. Here, we provide evidence that 
the ß-catenin signaling pathway has a significant impact on the bone lesion
phenotype. In this study, we established a novel mouse model of mixed bone
lesions using intratibial injection of TM40D-MB cells, a breast cancer cell line 
that is highly metastatic to bone. We found that both upstream and downstream
molecules of the ß-catenin pathway are up-regulated in TM40D-MB cells compared
with non-bone metastatic TM40D cells. TM40D-MB cells also have a higher T cell
factor (TCF) reporter activity than TM40D cells. Inactivation of ß-catenin in
TM40D-MB cells through expression of a dominant negative TCF4 not only increases 
osteoclast differentiation in a tumor-bone co-culture system and enhances
osteolytic bone destruction in mice, but also inhibits osteoblast
differentiation. Surprisingly, although tumor cells overexpressing ß-catenin did 
induce a slight increase of osteoblast differentiation in vitro, these cells
display a minimal effect on osteoblastic bone formation in mice. These data
collectively demonstrate that ß-catenin acts as an important determinant in mixed
bone lesions, especially in controlling osteoblastic effect within
tumor-harboring bone environment.

PMCID: PMC3234960
PMID: 22009747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Jan 1;83(1):47-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.10.001. Epub
2011 Oct 8.

DIF-1 inhibits the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by inhibiting TCF7L2
expression in colon cancer cell lines.

Jingushi K(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F, Yoshihara T, Shiraishi F, Watanabe Y, Hirata
M, Morimoto S, Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

We previously reported that differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), a
morphogen in Dictyostelium discoideum, inhibits the proliferation of human cancer
cell lines by inducing ß-catenin degradation and suppressing the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway. To determine whether ß-catenin degradation is essential for
the effect of DIF-1, we examined the effect of DIF-1 on human colon cancer cell
lines (HCT-116, SW-620 and DLD-1), in which the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway
is constitutively active. DIF-1 strongly inhibited cell proliferation and
arrested the cell cycle in the G(0)/G(1) phase via the suppression of cyclin D1
expression at mRNA and protein levels without reducing ß-catenin protein.
TCF-dependent transcriptional activity and cyclin D1 promoter activity were
revealed to be inhibited via suppression of transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) expression. Luciferase reporter assays and EMSAs using the TCF7L2
promoter fragments indicated that the binding site for the transcription factor
early growth response-1 (Egr-1), which is located in the -609 to -601 bp region
relative to the start codon in the TCF7L2 promoter, was involved in DIF-1
activity. Moreover, RNAi-mediated depletion of endogenous TCF7L2 resulted in
reduced cyclin D1 promoter activity and protein expression, and the
overexpression of TCF7L2 overrode the inhibition of the TCF-dependent
transcriptional activity and cyclin D1 promoter activity induced by DIF-1.
Therefore, DIF-1 seemed to inhibit the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by
suppressing TCF7L2 expression via reduced Egr-1-dependent transcriptional
activity in these colon cancer cell lines. Our results provide a novel insight
into the mechanisms by which DIF-1 inhibits the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22005519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Dec;32(12):1824-31. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr222. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

Silencing of the Wnt transcription factor TCF4 sensitizes colorectal cancer cells
to (chemo-) radiotherapy.

Kendziorra E(1), Ahlborn K, Spitzner M, Rave-Fränk M, Emons G, Gaedcke J, Kramer 
F, Wolff HA, Becker H, Beissbarth T, Ebner R, Ghadimi BM, Pukrop T, Ried T, Grade
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center,
Göttingen 37075, Germany.

A considerable percentage of rectal cancers are resistant to standard
preoperative chemoradiotherapy. Because patients with a priori-resistant tumors
do not benefit from multimodal treatment, understanding and overcoming this
resistance remains of utmost clinical importance. We recently reported
overexpression of the Wnt transcription factor TCF4, also known as TCF7L2, in
rectal cancers that were resistant to 5-fluorouracil-based chemoradiotherapy.
Because Wnt signaling has not been associated with treatment response, we aimed
to investigate whether TCF4 mediates chemoradioresistance. RNA
interference-mediated silencing of TCF4 was employed in three colorectal cancer
(CRC) cell lines, and sensitivity to (chemo-) radiotherapy was assessed using a
standard colony formation assay. Silencing of TCF4 caused a significant
sensitization of CRC cells to clinically relevant doses of X-rays. This effect
was restricted to tumor cells with high T cell factor (TCF) reporter activity,
presumably in a ß-catenin-independent manner. Radiosensitization was the
consequence of (i) a transcriptional deregulation of Wnt/TCF4 target genes, (ii) 
a silencing-induced G(2)/M phase arrest, (iii) an impaired ability to adequately 
halt cell cycle progression after radiation and (iv) a compromised DNA double
strand break repair as assessed by <U+03B3>H2AX staining. Taken together, our results
indicate a novel mechanism through which the Wnt transcription factor TCF4
mediates chemoradioresistance. Moreover, they suggest that TCF4 is a promising
molecular target to sensitize resistant tumor cells to (chemo-) radiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3254167
PMID: 21983179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jan 1;21(1):196-207. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr454. Epub 2011 Sep
30.

Survival of pancreatic beta cells is partly controlled by a
TCF7L2-p53-p53INP1-dependent pathway.

Zhou Y(1), Zhang E, Berggreen C, Jing X, Osmark P, Lang S, Cilio CM, Göransson O,
Groop L, Renström E, Hansson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden.
yuedan.zhou@med.lu.se

The transcription factor T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) confers type 2 diabetes 
risk mainly through impaired insulin secretion, perturbed incretin effect and
reduced beta-cell survival. The aim of this study was to identify the molecular
mechanism through which TCF7L2 influences beta-cell survival. TCF7L2 target genes
in INS-1 cells were identified using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation. Validation of
targets was obtained by: siRNA silencing, real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, luciferase reporter assays and
western blot. Apoptosis rate was measured by DNA degradation and caspase-3
content. Islet viability was estimated by measuring metabolic rate. TCF7L2 binds 
to 3646 gene promoters in INS-1 cells in high or low glucose, including Tp53,
Pten, Uggt1, Adamts9 and Fto. SiRNA-mediated reduction in TCF7L2 activity
resulted in increased apoptosis and increased expression of Tp53, which resulted 
in elevated p53 protein activity and an increased expression of the p53 target
gene Tp53inp1 (encoding p53-induced-nuclear-protein 1). Reversing the increase in
p53INP1 protein expression, seen after Tcf7l2 silencing, protected INS-1 cells
from Tcf7l2 depletion-induced apoptosis. This result was replicated in primary
rat islets. The risk T-allele of rs7903146 is associated with increased TCF7L2
mRNA expression and transcriptional activity. On the other hand, in vitro
silencing of TCF7L2 lead to increased apoptosis. One possibility is that the risk
T-allele increases expression of an inhibitory TCF7L2 isoform with lower
transcriptional activity. These results identify the p53-p53INP1 pathway as a
molecular mechanism through which TCF7L2 may affect beta-cell survival and
established a molecular link between Tcf7l2 and two type 2 diabetes-associated
genes, Tp53inp1 and Adamts9.

PMID: 21965303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncogene. 2012 May 31;31(22):2750-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.453. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Attenuation of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in colorectal cancer cells induces
several growth-suppressive microRNAs that target cancer promoting genes.

Schepeler T(1), Holm A, Halvey P, Nordentoft I, Lamy P, Riising EM, Christensen
LL, Thorsen K, Liebler DC, Helin K, Ørntoft TF, Andersen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine (MOMA), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N,
Denmark.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is causally involved in the
formation of most colorectal cancers (CRCs). Although detailed knowledge exists
regarding Wnt-regulated protein-coding genes, much less is known about the
possible involvement of non-coding RNAs. Here we used TaqMan Array MicroRNA
Cards, capable of detecting 664 unique human microRNAs (miRNAs), to describe
changes of the miRNA transcriptome following disruption of beta-catenin/TCF4
activity in DLD1 CRC cells. Most miRNAs appeared to respond independent of host
gene regulation and proximal TCF4 chromatin occupancy as inferred from expression
microarray and ChIP-chip data. A module of miRNAs induced by abrogated Wnt
signaling in vitro was downregulated in two independent series of human primary
CRCs (n=76) relative to normal adjacent mucosa (n=34). Several of these miRNAs
(miR-145, miR-126, miR-30e-3p and miR-139-5p) markedly inhibited CRC cell growth 
in vitro when ectopically expressed. By using an integrative approach of
proteomics and expression microarrays, we found numerous mRNAs and proteins to be
affected by ectopic miR-30e-3p levels. This included HELZ and PIK3C2A that were
directly repressed by several miRNA binding sites as confirmed by luciferase
reporter assays in combination with mutational analyses. Finally, small
interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of PIK3C2A, but not HELZ, was sufficient 
on its own to restrict CRC cell growth. Collectively, our study demonstrates that
multiple miRNAs are upregulated as a consequence of forced attenuation of Wnt
signaling in CRC cells, and some of these miRNAs inhibit cell growth with
concomitant suppression of several growth-stimulatory cancer-related genes.

PMID: 21963845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Oncol. 2012 Feb;40(2):519-26. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1215. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Genome-wide identification of TCF7L2/TCF4 target miRNAs reveals a role for miR-21
in Wnt-driven epithelial cancer.

Lan F(1), Yue X, Han L, Shi Z, Yang Y, Pu P, Yao Z, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300052, 
PR China.

Transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2, also known as TCF4) is a Wnt signaling
pathway transcription factor involved in regulation of numerous Wnt targeted
genes. Recently, thousands of high-confidence TCF4 binding sites were reported in
LS174T colon carcinoma cells, however, potential TCF4 target miRNAs remain
largely unknown. Here, we utilized a bioinformatics approach to discover 26 miRNA
transcription start sites (TSSs) within close proximity to TCF4 chromatin
occupancy sites, and validated these sites as bona fide TCF4 targets in LS174T
colon carcinoma cells, MCF-7 breast cancer cells and U87 glioma cells by
ChIP-PCR. We then selected miR-21 to demonstrate for the first time direct TCF4
transcriptional activation of a miRNA via binding to the promoter region. Tissue 
array analysis supported this finding, revealing a positive correlation between
activation of the ß-catenin pathway and in situ expression of miR-21. Finally,
based upon the well known but poorly understood preventive effect of aspirin on
colorectal cancer incidence and mortality, we report downregulation of miR-21
upon administration of aspirin. In sum, our findings identify direct
transcriptional regulation of miR-21 by TCF4 and suggest a role for miR-21 in
cancer cell proliferation and invasion upon activation of ß-catenin/TCF4
signaling.

PMID: 21956205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012 Jan;36(1):556-71. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.09.001. Epub 2011 Sep 17.

Genome wide association studies (GWAS) and copy number variation (CNV) studies of
the major psychoses: what have we learnt?

Lee KW(1), Woon PS, Teo YY, Sim K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health/Woodbridge Hospital 10, Buangkok View, Singapore
539747, Singapore.

Schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BPD) have high heritabilities and are
clinically and genetically complex. Genome wide association studies (GWAS) and
studies of copy number variations (CNV) in SZ and BPD have allowed probing of
their underlying genetic risks. In this systematic review, we assess extant
genetic signals from published GWAS and CNV studies of SZ and BPD up till March
2011. Risk genes associated with SZ at genome wide significance level (p
value<7.2 × 10(-8)) include zinc finger binding protein 804A (ZNF804A), major
histocompatibility (MHC) region on chromosome 6, neurogranin (NRGN) and
transcription factor 4 (TCF4). Risk genes associated with BPD include ankyrin 3, 
node of Ranvier (ANK3), calcium channel, voltage dependent, L type, alpha 1C
subunit (CACNA1C), diacylglycerol kinase eta (DGKH), gene locus on chromosome
16p12, and polybromo-1 (PBRM1) and very recently neurocan gene (NCAN). Possible
common genes underlying psychosis include ZNF804A, CACNA1C, NRGN and PBRM1. The
CNV studies suggest that whilst CNVs are found in both SZ and BPD, the large
deletions and duplications are more likely found in SZ rather than BPD. The
validation of any genetic signal is likely confounded by genetic and phenotypic
heterogeneities which are influenced by epistatic, epigenetic and
gene-environment interactions. There is a pressing need to better integrate the
multiple research platforms including systems biology computational models,
genomics, cross disorder phenotyping studies, transcriptomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, neuroimaging and clinical correlations in order to get us closer to
a more enlightened understanding of the genetic and biological basis underlying
these potentially crippling conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21946175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;226(11):2849-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22633.

Bcr-Abl oncogene stimulates Jab1 expression via cooperative interaction of
ß-catenin and STAT1 in chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Yang KT(1), Wang MC, Chen JY, Hsu MC, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

Jab1, a co-activator of AP-1 transcription factor and the fifth subunit of the
COP9 signalosome, mediates degradation of the tumor suppressor p53 and p27(Kip1) 
and functions as a tumor promoter in different types of human cancer. In this
study, we show that inhibition of Bcr-Abl oncogene by imatinib induces
down-regulation of Jab1 in Bcr-Abl-positive K562, Ku812, and MEG01 leukemia cells
suggesting Bcr-Abl may regulate Jab1 expression. Promoter deletion and mutation
analysis indicate the Tcf-4/ß-catenin and STAT1 binding sites located between the
-405/-223 region of the human Jab1 promoter are important for the activation of
Jab1 by Bcr-Abl. Double mutation of these two sites reverses the inhibitory
effect of imatinib. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay verifies the binding of
ß-catenin and STAT1 to human Jab1 promoter. Ectopic expression of
dominant-negative Tcf-4 mutant significantly attenuates Jab1 expression while
over-expression of ß-catenin and STAT1 cooperatively up-regulates Jab1 promoter
activity and mRNA expression. Our results also demonstrate that the AKT signaling
pathway is involved in the regulation of Jab1 by Bcr-Abl because the AKT
inhibitor LY294002 but not the ERK inhibitor PD98059 reduces Jab1 promoter
activity and mRNA expression. Taken together, our results suggest that Bcr-Abl
stimulates Jab1 expression via the cooperative interaction of ß-catenin and STAT1
in leukemia cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21935931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2011 Nov;261 Suppl 2:S161-5. doi:
10.1007/s00406-011-0256-9. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Impact of TCF4 on the genetics of schizophrenia.

Lennertz L(1), Quednow BB, Benninghoff J, Wagner M, Maier W, Mössner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.

Mutations of the transcription factor 4 (TCF4) gene cause mental retardation with
or without associated facial dysmorphisms and intermittent hyperventilation.
Subsequently, a polymorphism of TCF4 was shown in a genome-wide association study
to slightly increase the risk of schizophrenia. We have further analysed the
impact of this TCF4 variant rs9960767 on early information processing and
cognitive functions in schizophrenia patients. We have shown in a sample of 401
schizophrenia patients that TCF4 influences verbal memory in the Rey Auditory
Verbal Learning Test. Contrary to expectations, carriers of the
schizophrenia-associated allele showed better recognition, thus indicating that
while TCF4 influences verbal memory, the TCF4-mediated schizophrenia risk is not 
determined by the influence of TCF4 on verbal memory. TCF4 does not impact on
various other cognitive functions belonging to the domains of attention and
executive functions. Moreover, in a pharmacogenetic approach, TCF4 does not
modulate the improvement of positive or negative schizophrenia symptoms during
treatment with antipsychotics. Finally, we have assessed a key
electrophysiological endophenotype of schizophrenia, sensorimotor gating. As
measured by prepulse inhibition, the schizophrenia risk allele C of TCF4
rs9960767 reduces sensorimotor gating. This indicates that TCF4 influences key
mechanisms of information processing, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of
schizophrenia.

PMID: 21932083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neurochem Res. 2012 Jan;37(1):96-104. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0586-z. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

Increased ß-catenin/Tcf signaling in pilocytic astrocytomas: a comparative study 
to distinguish pilocytic astrocytomas from low-grade diffuse astrocytomas.

Sareddy GR(1), Geeviman K, Panigrahi M, Challa S, Mahadevan A, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad 500046, India.

Although pilocytic and diffuse grade II astrocytomas considered as low-grade
tumors, the distinction between them is still a major clinical problem.
Previously we reported the activation of Wnt/ß-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway in
diffuse astrocytomas, however its role in pilocytic astrocytomas is not well
understood. In this study, we investigated the Wnt/ß-catenin/Tcf pathway in
pilocytic astrocytomas and compared with diffuse astrocytomas. We observed the
differential expression of ß-catenin, Tcf4, Lef1 and c-Myc in astrocytomas
particularly higher levels were observed in pilocytic astrocytomas and GBM while 
very little expression was documented in grade II tumors. Further,
immunohistochemical analysis revealed the strong positivity of ß-catenin, Tcf4,
Lef1 and c-Myc in pilocytic astrocytomas than that of grade II tumors and also
exhibited the strong positivity in vascular endothelial cells of pilocytic
astrocytomas and GBM. Hence, Wnt/ß-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway is
differentially expressed in astrocytomas, activation of this pathway might be
helpful in separating pilocytic astrocytomas from low-grade diffuse astrocytomas.

PMID: 21922255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncol Rep. 2011 Dec;26(6):1617-21. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1458. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Expression and function of miR-27b in human glioma.

Chen L(1), Li H, Han L, Zhang K, Wang G, Wang Y, Liu Y, Zheng Y, Jiang T, Pu P,
Jiang C, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, PR China.

Our previous miRNAs profiling study showed that miR-27b was up-regulated in
glioma cells compared with H4 low grade astrocytoma cells. However, the main
function of miR-27b in glioma in not known yet. The aim of this study was to
investigate the expression and function of miR-27b in the pathogenesis of glioma.
Real-time PCR showed that miR-27b was up-regulated in glioma samples and glioma
cells. Down-regulation of miR-27b triggered growth inhibition, induced apoptosis 
and inhibited invasion in glioma cells. Furthermore, TOPflash luciferase activity
was decreased significantly, while FOPflash luciferase did not change
significantly. In addition, Western blot assay showed that STAT3, c-myc and
cyclin D1 were knocked down after treatment with miR-27b inhibitor. These
findings suggest that aberrantly up-regulated miR-27b may be one of the critical 
factors that contribute to malignancy in human gliomas.

PMID: 21922148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Obes Facts. 2011;4(4):290-6. doi: 10.1159/000330881. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Evaluation of the obesity genes FTO and MC4R and the type 2 diabetes mellitus
gene TCF7L2 for contribution to stroke risk: The Mannheim-Heidelberg Stroke
Study.

Winter Y(1), Back T, Scherag A, Linseisen J, Rohrmann S, Lanczik O, Hinney A,
Scherag S, Neumaier M, Ringleb PA, Dodel R, Hebebrand J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Studies evaluating genetic markers for vascular risk and risk of
stroke are limited, and none of them evaluated obesity genes. The objective was
to investigate the genetic markers related to obesity genes FTO and MC4R and the 
gene of type 2 diabetes mellitus TCF7L2 for their contribution to risk of stroke 
and transient ischemic attacks (TIA).
METHODS: We recruited 379 consecutive patients with stroke/TIA and 379 healthy
population-based controls. The single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs9937053
(FTO), rs2229616 (MC4R V103I), rs17782313 (188kb downstream of MC4R), and
rs7903146 (TCF7L2) were evaluated for association with stroke using logistic
regression analyses.
RESULTS: The odds ratios for stroke/TIA were 1.14 (95%CI 0.91-1.42) for
rs9937053/FTO, 1.11 (95%CI 0.49-2.51) for rs2229616/MC4R, 1.05 (95%CI 0.82-1.3)
for rs17782313/MC4R, and 0.99 (95%CI 0.78-1.25) for rs7903146/TCF7L2. Further
exploration revealed that male patients with the T allele of rs7903146/TCF7L2 had
a worse clinical outcome compared with male patients carrying the C allele.
CONCLUSION: The observed trends of obesity risk alleles for risk of stroke/TIA as
well as the possible sex-specific differences in clinical outcomes found for the 
TCF7L2 (rs7903146) require replication in future studies. Our study demonstrates 
that candidate gene studies for common stroke may benefit from focusing on
polymorphisms that predispose to vascular risk.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21921652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3078-82. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2290-6. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

An alternative polyadenylation signal in TCF7L2 generates isoforms that inhibit T
cell factor/lymphoid-enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)-dependent target genes.

Locke JM(1), Da Silva Xavier G, Rutter GA, Harries LW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3170.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms within the
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with risk of type 2
diabetes. It is widely hypothesised that the predisposing variation is involved
in cis-regulation of TCF7L2 activity. The aim of this study was to seek evidence 
for the existence of novel TCF7L2 isoforms encoded within the type 2
diabetes-associated genomic region.
METHODS: We searched expressed sequence tag (EST) databases for novel TCF7L2
transcripts and sought to validate the function and integrity of any isoforms
found using a combination of RT-PCR, western blotting and reporter gene
techniques.
RESULTS: Analysis of EST databases suggested the presence of an alternative
polyadenylation site located in intron 4 of TCF7L2. We used 3' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends and real-time PCR to validate the integrity of this
polyadenylation signal and show its wide use across human tissues. Western
blotting results are consistent with the use of this polyadenylation signal to
generate novel protein isoforms. The alternative polyadenylation signal results
in the production of isoforms that retain the ß-catenin binding domain but do not
possess the high-mobility group box DNA-binding domain. Promoter-reporter gene
assays suggest that these isoforms inhibit TCF7L2-dependent target genes by
sequestering ß-catenin.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have identified a novel polyadenylation signal
within TCF7L2 that can result in the production of isoforms that act to repress
TCF/LEF-dependent target genes. These findings may provide new insights into the 
association of TCF7L2 with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3210366
PMID: 21913056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jul 21;17(27):3198-203. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v17.i27.3198.

From intestinal stem cells to inflammatory bowel diseases.

Gersemann M(1), Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine I, Robert Bosch Hospital, Auerbachstrasse 110, D-70376
Stuttgart, Germany. michael.gersemann@rbk.de

The pathogenesis of both entities of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), namely
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), is still complex and under
investigation. The importance of the microbial flora in developing IBD is beyond 
debate. In the last few years, the focus has changed from adaptive towards innate
immunity. Crohn's ileitis is associated with a deficiency of the antimicrobial
shield, as shown by a reduced expression and secretion of the Paneth cell
defensin HD5 and HD6, which is related to a Paneth cell differentiation defect
mediated by a diminished expression of the Wnt transcription factor TCF4. In UC, 
the protective mucus layer, acting as a physical and chemical barrier between the
gut epithelium and the luminal microbes, is thinner and in part denuded as
compared to controls. This could be caused by a missing induction of the goblet
cell differentiation factors Hath1 and KLF4 leading to immature goblet cells.
This defective Paneth and goblet cell differentiation in Crohn's ileitis and UC
may enable the luminal microbes to invade the mucosa and trigger the
inflammation. The exact molecular mechanisms behind ileal CD and also UC must be 
further clarified, but these observations could give rise to new therapeutic
strategies based on a stimulation of the protective innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC3158395
PMID: 21912468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Oct;17(10):2076-86. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21577. Epub 2010 Dec
16.

Intestinal alpha-defensin expression in pediatric inflammatory bowel disease.

Zilbauer M(1), Jenke A, Wenzel G, Goedde D, Postberg J, Phillips AD, Lucas M,
Noble-Jamieson G, Torrente F, Salvestrini C, Heuschkel R, Wirth S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, HELIOS Klinikum Wuppertal, Germany.
mz304@medschl.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Reduced alpha-defensin expression has been reported in the terminal
ileum (TI) of adult patients with ileal Crohn's disease (CD). However, little is 
known about alpha-defensin expression in children with chronic inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD).
METHODS: In all, 283 intestinal biopsies were obtained from children with CD,
ulcerative colitis (UC), and healthy controls. Absolute mRNA copy numbers for
HD5, HD6, IL-8, Villin 1, and Tcf-4 were analyzed by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). HD5 immunostaining was performed on biopsy
sections and patients genotyped for NOD2 mutations.
RESULTS: Equal expression levels of alpha-defensins (HD5 and HD6) were found in
TI biopsies of children with ileal CD (L1+L3) compared to patients with colonic
disease (L2) and healthy controls. In contrast, we found significantly higher
levels of alpha-defensins in the TI of children with UC compared to CD and
controls. Reduced expression of Tcf-4 was observed exclusively in the duodenum
and TI of CD patients with L1+L3 phenotype. We demonstrate significantly
increased expression of HD5 and HD6 in the inflamed colon of IBD children (UC and
CD) attributable to the presence of metaplastic Paneth cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study no difference in alpha-defensin expression was found
in the TI of CD children and controls. However, significant reduction of Tcf-4 in
L1+L3 phenotype suggests that a possibly impaired PC differentiation may lead to 
altered HD5 and HD6 expression at some stage of disease. Additionally,
substantially increased expression of alpha-defensins in the inflamed colonic
mucosa of children with IBD raises the question for their potential involvement
in modulating inflammation in these patients.

Copyright © 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 21910169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 28;286(43):37732-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.242826. Epub
2011 Sep 9.

Transcription factor Zic2 inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin protein signaling.

Pourebrahim R(1), Houtmeyers R, Ghogomu S, Janssens S, Thelie A, Tran HT,
Langenberg T, Vleminckx K, Bellefroid E, Cassiman JJ, Tejpar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

The Zic transcription factors play critical roles during embryonic development.
Mutations in the ZIC2 gene are associated with human holoprosencephaly, but the
etiology is still unclear. Here, we report a novel function for ZIC2 as a
regulator of ß-catenin·TCF4-mediated transcription. We show that ZIC2 can bind
directly to the DNA-binding high mobility group box of TCF4 via its zinc finger
domain and inhibit the transcriptional activity of the ß-catenin·TCF4 complex.
However, the binding of TCF4 to DNA was not affected by ZIC2. Zic2 RNA injection 
completely inhibited ß-catenin-induced axis duplication in Xenopus embryos and
strongly blocked the ability of ß-catenin to induce expression of known Wnt
targets in animal caps. Moreover, Zic2 knockdown in transgenic Xenopus Wnt
reporter embryos led to ectopic Wnt signaling activity mainly at the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary. Together, our results demonstrate a previously
unknown role for ZIC2 as a transcriptional regulator of the ß-catenin·TCF4
complex.

PMCID: PMC3199516
PMID: 21908606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3132-42. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2289-z. Epub 2011 
Sep 7.

Chromatin occupancy of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and its role in
hepatic glucose metabolism.

Norton L(1), Fourcaudot M, Abdul-Ghani MA, Winnier D, Mehta FF, Jenkinson CP,
Defronzo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health Science Center, 7703 Floyd Curl 
Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. nortonl@uthscsa.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The mechanisms by which transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
regulates the pathways that are important in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes 
are unknown. We therefore examined the role of TCF7L2 in hepatic glucose
production (HGP) in vitro and characterised the whole-genome chromatin occupancy 
of TCF7L2 in hepatocytes.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of TCF7L2 silencing and overexpression on HGP
from gluconeogenic precursors and used chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
combined with massively parallel DNA sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to investigate the DNA
binding patterns of TCF7L2 across the whole genome.
RESULTS: Silencing of TCF7L2 induced a marked increase in basal HGP, which was
accompanied by significant increases in the expression of the gluconeogenic genes
Fbp1, Pck1 and G6pc. Overexpression of Tcf7l2 reversed this phenotype and
significantly reduced HGP. TCF7L2 silencing did not affect the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration of insulin or metformin, but HGP remained elevated in
TCF7L2-silenced cells due to the increased baseline HGP. Using ChIP-Seq, we
detected 2,119 binding events across the genome. Pathway analysis demonstrated
that diabetes genes were significantly over-represented in the dataset. Our
results indicate that TCF7L2 binds directly to multiple genes that are important 
in regulation of glucose metabolism in the liver, including Pck1, Fbp1, Irs1,
Irs2, Akt2, Adipor1, Pdk4 and Cpt1a.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 is an important regulator of HGP in vitro and 
binds directly to genes that are important in pathways of glucose metabolism in
the liver. These data highlight the possibility that TCF7L2 may affect fasting
and postprandial hyperglycaemia in carriers of at-risk TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms.

PMID: 21901280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024153. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Inactivation of a single copy of Crebbp selectively alters pre-mRNA processing in
mouse hematopoietic stem cells.

Lemieux ME(1), Cheng Z, Zhou Q, White R, Cornell J, Kung AL, Rebel VI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Global expression analysis of fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells (FL HSCs)
revealed the presence of unspliced pre-mRNA for a number of genes in normal FL
HSCs. In a subset of these genes, Crebbp+/- FL HSCs had less unprocessed pre-mRNA
without a corresponding reduction in total mRNA levels. Among the genes thus
identified were the key regulators of HSC function Itga4, Msi2 and Tcf4. A
similar but much weaker effect was apparent in Ep300+/- FL HSCs, indicating that,
in this context as in others, the two paralogs are not interchangeable. As a
group, the down-regulated intronic probe sets could discriminate adult HSCs from 
more mature cell types, suggesting that the underlying mechanism is regulated
with differentiation stage and is active in both fetal and adult hematopoiesis.
Consistent with increased myelopoiesis in Crebbp hemizygous mice, targeted
reduction of CREBBP abundance by shRNA in the multipotent EML cell line triggered
spontaneous myeloid differentiation in the absence of the normally required
inductive signals. In addition, differences in protein levels between
phenotypically distinct EML subpopulations were better predicted by taking into
account not only the total mRNA signal but also the amount of unspliced message
present. CREBBP thus appears to selectively influence the timing and degree of
pre-mRNA processing of genes essential for HSC regulation and thereby has the
potential to alter subsequent cell fate decisions in HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3162030
PMID: 21901164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biochem Genet. 2012 Apr;50(3-4):159-79. doi: 10.1007/s10528-011-9456-2. Epub 2011
Sep 7.

Worldwide distribution of type II diabetes-associated TCF7L2 SNPs: evidence for
stratification in Europe.

Guinan KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)guinank@tcd.ie

Type II diabetes is a multifactorial disease with a complex etiology. Numerous
genes have been implicated in disease pathogenesis. In particular, SNPs at the
TCF7L2 locus have consistently shown strong associations with type II diabetes.
This study characterizes the global distribution of type II diabetes-associated
TCF7L2 SNPs utilizing HapMap, HGDP-CEPH, and Alfred databases and the literature.
High frequencies of rs7903146(T), rs12255372(T), and rs7901695(C) SNPs are
observed in Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, but they are reduced and almost 
absent in Southeast Asian and Native American populations. In contrast,
rs11196218(A) has the highest frequency in Eurasia but is reduced in sub-Saharan 
African and Native American populations. Regional variations in rs7903146(T)
follow a gradient of decreasing frequency from southern into northeastern Europe.
These findings demonstrate extensive global and regional variations in the
frequencies of TCF7L2 SNPs, which may contribute to differences in the incidence 
of type II diabetes worldwide.

PMID: 21898192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 4;43(10):964-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.936.

Genomic sequencing of colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent
VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion.

Bass AJ(1), Lawrence MS, Brace LE, Ramos AH, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C,
Voet D, Saksena G, Sivachenko A, Jing R, Parkin M, Pugh T, Verhaak RG, Stransky
N, Boutin AT, Barretina J, Solit DB, Vakiani E, Shao W, Mishina Y, Warmuth M,
Jimenez J, Chiang DY, Signoretti S, Kaelin WG, Spardy N, Hahn WC, Hoshida Y,
Ogino S, Depinho RA, Chin L, Garraway LA, Fuchs CS, Baselga J, Tabernero J,
Gabriel S, Lander ES, Getz G, Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Prior studies have identified recurrent oncogenic mutations in colorectal
adenocarcinoma and have surveyed exons of protein-coding genes for mutations in
11 affected individuals. Here we report whole-genome sequencing from nine
individuals with colorectal cancer, including primary colorectal tumors and
matched adjacent non-tumor tissues, at an average of 30.7× and 31.9× coverage,
respectively. We identify an average of 75 somatic rearrangements per tumor,
including complex networks of translocations between pairs of chromosomes. Eleven
rearrangements encode predicted in-frame fusion proteins, including a fusion of
VTI1A and TCF7L2 found in 3 out of 97 colorectal cancers. Although TCF7L2 encodes
TCF4, which cooperates with ß-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, the fusion
lacks the TCF4 ß-catenin-binding domain. We found a colorectal carcinoma cell
line harboring the fusion gene to be dependent on VTI1A-TCF7L2 for
anchorage-independent growth using RNA interference-mediated knockdown. This
study shows previously unidentified levels of genomic rearrangements in
colorectal carcinoma that can lead to essential gene fusions and other oncogenic 
events.

PMCID: PMC3802528
PMID: 21892161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Aug;93 Suppl 1:S9-24. doi:
10.1016/S0168-8227(11)70008-0.

New type 2 diabetes risk genes provide new insights in insulin secretion
mechanisms.

Schäfer SA(1), Machicao F, Fritsche A, Häring HU, Kantartzis K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Germany.

Type 2 diabetes results from the inability of beta cells to increase insulin
secretion sufficiently to compensate for insulin resistance. Insulin resistance
is thought to result mainly from environmental factors, such as obesity. However,
there is compelling evidence that the decline of both insulin sensitivity and
insulin secretion have also a genetic component. Recent genome-wide association
studies identified several novel risk genes for type 2 diabetes. The vast
majority of these genes affect beta cell function by molecular mechanisms that
remain unknown in detail. Nevertheless, we and others could show that a group of 
genes affect glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, a group incretin-stimulated
insulin secretion (incretin sensitivity or secretion) and a group
proinsulin-to-insulin conversion. The most important so far type 2 diabetes risk 
gene, TCF7L2, interferes with all three mechanisms. In addition to advancing
knowledge in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes, the discovery of novel
genetic determinants of diabetes susceptibility may help understanding of
gene-environment, gene-therapy and gene-gene interactions. It was also hoped that
it could make determination of the individual risk for type 2 diabetes feasible. 
However, the allelic relative risks of most genetic variants discovered so far
are relatively low. Thus, at present, clinical criteria assess the risk for type 
2 diabetes with greater sensitivity and specificity than the combination of all
known genetic variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21864758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Gut. 2012 May;61(5):714-24. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300783. Epub 2011 Aug 28.

The orphan receptor TR3 suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in mice by
downregulating Wnt signalling.

Chen HZ(1), Liu QF, Li L, Wang WJ, Yao LM, Yang M, Liu B, Chen W, Zhan YY, Zhang 
MQ, Cai JC, Zheng ZH, Lin SC, Li BA, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China.

AIMS: Wnt signalling is involved in cellular homeostasis and development.
Dysregulation of the Wnt signalling pathway has been linked to colorectal cancer.
The orphan nuclear receptor TR3 plays important roles in proliferation and
apoptosis. In this study, we investigated how TR3 suppresses intestinal
tumorigenesis by regulating Wnt signalling.
METHODS: Intestinal polyps were quantified in Apc(min/+), Apc(min/+)/TR3(-/-) and
Apc(min/+)/villin-TR3 mice. Wnt signalling activity was evaluated by assessing
ß-galactosidase activity in a BAT-Gal reporter strain. The TR3 agonist
cytosporone B was used to evaluate the role of TR3 in intestinal tumorigenesis.
Crosstalk between TR3 and ß-catenin/TCF4 was analysed by molecular methods in
colorectal cancer cells. The phosphorylation of TR3 by glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK) 3ß and the correlation between GSK3ß activity and TR3 phosphorylation were 
evaluated in clinical samples and colorectal cancer cells.
RESULTS: TR3 was found to significantly suppress Wnt signalling activity and the 
proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells. Apc(min/+)/TR3(-/-) mice developed 
more intestinal polyps than Apc(min/+)/TR3(+/+) mice, whereas either transgenic
overexpression of TR3 in the intestine or treatment with cytosporone B in
Apc(min/+) mice significantly decreased intestinal tumour number.
Mechanistically, TR3 disrupted the association of ß-catenin and TCF4 on chromatin
and facilitated the recruitment of transcriptional co-repressors to the promoters
of Wnt signalling target genes. However, TR3 was phosphorylated by GSK3ß in most 
clinical colorectal cancers, which attenuated the inhibitory activity of TR3
towards Wnt signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: TR3 is a negative regulator of Wnt signalling and thus significantly
suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in Apc(min/+) mice. This inhibitory effect of
TR3 may be paradoxically overcome through phosphorylation by GSK3ß in clinical
colorectal cancers.

PMID: 21873734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Science. 2011 Aug 26;333(6046):1161-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1206638.

MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early 
gene expression.

Hashimoto S(1), Boissel S, Zarhrate M, Rio M, Munnich A, Egly JM, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université de Strasbourg, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C. U.
Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2012 May;81(5):430.

MED23 is a subunit of the Mediator complex, a key regulator of protein-coding
gene expression. Here, we report a missense mutation (p. R617Q) in MED23 that
cosegregates with nonsyndromic autosomal recessive intellectual disability. This 
mutation specifically impaired the response of JUN and FOS immediate early genes 
(IEGs) to serum mitogens by altering the interaction between enhancer-bound
transcription factors (TCF4 and ELK1, respectively) and Mediator. Transcriptional
dysregulation of these genes was also observed in cells derived from patients
presenting with other neurological disorders linked to mutations in other
Mediator subunits or proteins interacting with MED. These findings highlight the 
crucial role of Mediator in brain development and functioning and suggest that
altered IEG expression might be a common molecular hallmark of cognitive deficit.

PMID: 21868677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Pharmacol Rep. 2011;63(3):826-33.

Association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism with
posttransplant diabetes mellitus in kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus.

Kurzawski M(1), Dziewanowski K, Kedzierska K, Wajda A, Lapczuk J, Drozdzik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstanców Wlkp.
72, PL 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.

New onset posttransplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) has a high incidence after
kidney transplantation in patients medicated with tacrolimus. PTDM can adversely 
affect patient and graft survival. The pathophysiology of PTDM closely mimics
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). One of the possible genetic factors predisposing
individuals to PTDM might be a polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 
gene (TCF7L2). This polymorphism has previously been associated with increased
risk of T2DM in the general population. Therefore, the present study aimed to
evaluate TCF7L2 polymorphisms in PTDM in kidney transplant patients medicated
with tacrolimus. Non-diabetic kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus (n = 234) were genotyped for the presence of TCF7L2 gene variants
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) using TaqMan probes. Of the 234 patients, 66 patients 
had developed PTDM and 168 had not. Frequencies of the studied single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) did not differ significantly between the study groups.
Moreover, haplotype analyses failed to detect any associations between TCF7L2
haplotypes and PTDM. However, in late-onset PTDM (developed later that 2 weeks
from transplantation), frequencies of the rs7903146 TT genotype and T minor
allele were significantly increased compared to non-PTDM controls (17.9% vs.
5.9%, p = 0.017, OR: 4.13, 95% CI: 1.19-14.33 for TT genotype, 39.3% vs. 25.9%, p
= 0.038 for T allele). If the application of TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNPs as a marker
for PTDM is confirmed by further independent studies, replacing tacrolimus with
other immunosuppressants could be warranted in patients at high risk of PTDM, as 
diagnosed by TCF7L2 genotyping.

PMID: 21857094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1783-95. doi: 10.1101/gad.17227011. Epub 2011 Aug
19.

A novel mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of Wnt signaling in
development.

Vacik T(1), Stubbs JL, Lemke G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1759-62.

Axial patterning of the embryonic brain requires a precise balance between
canonical Wnt signaling, which dorsalizes the nervous system, and Sonic hedgehog 
(Shh), which ventralizes it. The ventral anterior homeobox (Vax) transcription
factors are induced by Shh and ventralize the forebrain through a mechanism that 
is poorly understood. We therefore sought to delineate direct Vax target genes.
Among these, we identify an extraordinarily conserved intronic region within the 
gene encoding Tcf7l2, a key mediator of canonical Wnt signaling. This region
functions as a Vax2-activated internal promoter that drives the expression of
dnTcf7l2, a truncated Tcf7l2 isoform that cannot bind ß-catenin and that
therefore acts as a potent dominant-negative Wnt antagonist. Vax2 concomitantly
activates the expression of additional Wnt antagonists that cooperate with
dnTcf7l2. Specific elimination of dnTcf7l2 in Xenopus results in headless
embryos, a phenotype consistent with a fundamental role for this regulator in
forebrain development.

PMCID: PMC3175715
PMID: 21856776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Nov;48(3):205-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.07.010. Epub
2011 Aug 11.

Dynamic changes in Wnt signaling are required for neuronal differentiation of
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Slawny NA(1), O'Shea KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESC) and the epiblast share a similar gene expression
profile and an attenuated cell cycle, making them an accessible and tractable
model system to study lineage choice at gastrulation. Differentiation of the
epiblast and ESC to the mesendodermal lineage has been shown to rely on
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling; which counterintuitively, is also required to inhibit
differentiation and maintain pluripotency. To examine these seemingly
contradictory roles, we developed a mouse ESC (ESC) line that inducibly expresses
a dominant negative Tcf4 (dnTcf4) protein to block canonical Wnt signaling. Cells
expressing the dnTcf4 protein differentiated largely to Sox3 positive neural
precursors but were unable to progress to ßIII tubulin positive neurons unless
Wnt signaling was derepressed, demonstrating a sequential requirement for Wnt
signaling in lineage differentiation. To determine if Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is 
similarily required at sequential stages of neural differentiation in the intact 
embryo, we delivered shRNA targeting ß-catenin to pregnant mice on E5.5 of
development. Blocking canonical Wnt signaling during post-implantation
development increased the number of neural precursors which failed to
differentiate to mature neurons, and produced defects of embryonic axis
elongation, neurulation and neural tube closure that phenocopy the ß-catenin null
embryo. These results demonstrate that lineage differentiation relies on
sequential repression and derepression of critical signaling pathways involved in
maintaining pluripotency versus differentiation.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4625916
PMID: 21856426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Nov;94(2):e43-6. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.07.033. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

The expression of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in fat and placental
tissue from women with gestational diabetes.

Kuzmicki M(1), Telejko B, Wawrusiewicz-Kurylonek N, Kalejta K, Lemancewicz A,
Zdrodowski M, Grabiec M, Pryszczepko-Wawreszuk AM, Kretowski A, Gorska M,
Szamatowicz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. 
mkuzmicki@op.pl

In the present study we showed that the expression of transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) mRNA in visceral adipose tissue obtained from 20 women with
gestational diabetes was lower than in 18 pregnant women with normal glucose
tolerance (p = 0.02), however after adjusting for BMI values, the difference was 
not significant.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Dec 1;82(11):1682-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.08.001.
Epub 2011 Aug 6.

Interferon-a2b and transforming growth factor-ß1 treatments on HCC cell lines:
Are Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and Smads signaling connected in hepatocellular
carcinoma?

Ceballos MP(1), Parody JP, Alvarez Mde L, Ingaramo PI, Carnovale CE, Carrillo MC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas, Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas,
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.
ceballos@ifise-conicet.gov.ar

Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is often dysregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Activated ß-catenin accumulates in the cytosol and nucleus and forms a nuclear
complex with TCF/LEF factors like TCF4. Interferon-a (IFN-a) has recently been
recognized to harbor therapeutic potential in prevention and treatment of HCC.
Transforming Growth Factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) is a mediator of apoptosis, exerting its
effects via Smads proteins. One mode of interaction between Wnt/ß-catenin and
TGF-ß1/Smads pathways is the association of Smads with ß-catenin/TCF4. In this
study we analyzed the effects of IFN-a2b and TGF-ß1 treatments on Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway, Smads proteins levels, ß-catenin/TCF4/Smads interaction and
proliferation and apoptotic death in HepG2/C3A and Huh7 cell lines. IFN-a2b and
TGF-ß1 attenuated Wnt/ß-catenin signal by decreasing ß-catenin and Frizzled7
receptor proteins contents and the interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4. Truncated 
ß-catenin form present in C3A cell line also diminished after treatments. Both
cytokines declined Smads proteins and their interaction with TCF4. The overall
cellular response to cytokines was the decrease in proliferation and increase in 
apoptotic death. Treatment with Wnt3a, which elevates ß-catenin protein levels,
also generated the increment of Smads proteins contents when comparing with
untreated cells. In conclusion, IFN-a2b and TGF-ß1 proved to be effective as
modulators of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in HCC cell lines holding both wild-type and 
truncated ß-catenin. Since the inhibition of ß-catenin/TCF4/Smads complexes
formation may have a critical role in slowing down oncogenesis, IFN-a2b and
TGF-ß1 could be useful as potential treatments in patients with HCC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;75(5):612-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2011.00668.x.

A replication study of the IRS1, CAPN10, TCF7L2, and PPARG gene polymorphisms
associated with type 2 diabetes in two different populations of Mexico.

Martínez-Gómez LE(1), Cruz M, Martínez-Nava GA, Madrid-Marina V, Parra E,
García-Mena J, Espinoza-Rojo M, Estrada-Velasco BI, Piza-Roman LF, Aguilera P,
Burguete-García AI.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, México.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a chronic degenerative disease that involves the
participation of several genetic and environmental factors. The objective of the 
study was to determine the association of the IRS1 (rs1801278), CAPN10
(rs3792267), TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), and PPARG (rs1801282) gene
polymorphisms with T2D, in two different Mexican populations. We conducted a
case-control replication study in the state of Guerrero and in Mexico City, with 
400 subjects from Guerrero and 1065 from Mexico City. Data were analyzed by
logistic regression, adjusting by ancestry, age, gender, and BMI, to determine
the association with T2D. Heterozygosity for the Gly972Arg variant of the IRS1
gene showed the strongest association for T2D in both analyzed samples (OR =
2.43, 95% CI 1.12-5.26 and 2.64, 95% CI 1.37-5.10, respectively). In addition, an
association of two SNPs of the TCF7L2 gene with T2D was observed in both cities: 
rs7903146, (for Guerrero OR = 1.98 CI95% 1.02-3.89 and for Mexico OR = 1.94 CI95%
1.31-2.88) and rs12255372 (OR = 1.79 CI95% 1.08-2.97, OR = 1.78 CI95% 1.17-2.71
respectively). We suggest that our results provide strong evidence that variation
in the IRS1 and TCF7L2 genes confers susceptibility to T2D in our studied
populations.

© 2011 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2011 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 21834909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3625-37. doi: 10.1242/dev.064162.

Satellite cells, connective tissue fibroblasts and their interactions are crucial
for muscle regeneration.

Murphy MM(1), Lawson JA, Mathew SJ, Hutcheson DA, Kardon G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 North 2030 East, Salt
Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Muscle regeneration requires the coordinated interaction of multiple cell types. 
Satellite cells have been implicated as the primary stem cell responsible for
regenerating muscle, yet the necessity of these cells for regeneration has not
been tested. Connective tissue fibroblasts also are likely to play a role in
regeneration, as connective tissue fibrosis is a hallmark of regenerating muscle.
However, the lack of molecular markers for these fibroblasts has precluded an
investigation of their role. Using Tcf4, a newly identified fibroblast marker,
and Pax7, a satellite cell marker, we found that after injury satellite cells and
fibroblasts rapidly proliferate in close proximity to one another. To test the
role of satellite cells and fibroblasts in muscle regeneration in vivo, we
created Pax7(CreERT2) and Tcf4(CreERT2) mice and crossed these to R26R(DTA) mice 
to genetically ablate satellite cells and fibroblasts. Ablation of satellite
cells resulted in a complete loss of regenerated muscle, as well as misregulation
of fibroblasts and a dramatic increase in connective tissue. Ablation of
fibroblasts altered the dynamics of satellite cells, leading to premature
satellite cell differentiation, depletion of the early pool of satellite cells,
and smaller regenerated myofibers. Thus, we provide direct, genetic evidence that
satellite cells are required for muscle regeneration and also identify resident
fibroblasts as a novel and vital component of the niche regulating satellite cell
expansion during regeneration. Furthermore, we demonstrate that reciprocal
interactions between fibroblasts and satellite cells contribute significantly to 
efficient, effective muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3152921
PMID: 21828091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021518. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

TCF7L2 polymorphism, weight loss and proinsulin:insulin ratio in the diabetes
prevention program.

McCaffery JM(1), Jablonski KA, Franks PW, Dagogo-Jack S, Wing RR, Knowler WC,
Delahanty L, Dabelea D, Hamman R, Shuldiner AR, Florez JC; Diabetes Prevention
Program Research Group.

Collaborators: Bray GA, Culbert IW, Champagne CM, Eberhardt B, Greenway F,
Guillory FG, Herbert AA, Jeffirs ML, Kennedy BM, Lovejoy JC, Morris LH, Melancon 
LE, Ryan D, Sanford DA, Smith KG, Smith LL, St Amant JA, Tulley RT, Vicknair PC, 
Williamson D, Zachwieja JJ, Polonsky KS, Tobian J, Ehrmann D, Matulik MJ, Clark
B, Czech K, DeSandre C, Hilbrich R, McNabb W, Semenske AR, Caro JF, Watson PG,
Goldstein BJ, Smith KA, Mendoza J, Liberoni R, Pepe C, Spandorfer J, Donahue RP, 
Goldberg RB, Prineas R, Rowe P, Calles J, Cassanova-Romero P, Florez HJ,
Giannella A, Kirby L, Larreal C, McLymont V, Mendez J, Ojito J, Perry A, Saab P, 
Haffner SM, Montez MG, Lorenzo C, Martinez A, Hamman RF, Nash PV, Testaverde L,
Anderson DR, Ballonoff LB, Bouffard A, Calonge BN, Delve L, Farago M, Hill JO,
Hoyer SR, Jortberg BT, Lenz D, Miller M, Price DW, Regensteiner JG, Seagle H,
Smith CM, Steinke SC, VanDorsten B, Horton ES, Lawton KE, Arky RA, Bryant M,
Burke JP, Caballero E, Callaphan KM, Ganda OP, Franklin T, Jackson SD, Jacobsen
AM, Kula LM, Kocal M, Malloy MA, Nicosia M, Oldmixon CF, Pan J, Quitingon M,
Rubtchinsky S, Seely EW, Schweizer D, Simonson D, Smith F, Solomon CG, Warram J, 
Kahn SE, Montgomery BK, Fujimoto W, Knopp RH, Lipkin EW, Marr M, Trence D,
Kitabchi AE, Murphy ME, Applegate WB, Bryer-Ash M, Frieson SL, Imseis R, Lambeth 
H, Lichtermann LC, Oktaei H, Rutledge LM, Sherman AR, Smith CM, Soberman JE,
Williams-Cleaves B, Metzger BE, Johnson MK, Behrends C, Cook M, Fitzgibbon M,
Giles MM, Heard D, Johnson CK, Larsen D, Lowe A, Lyman M, McPherson D, Molitch
ME, Pitts T, Reinhart R, Roston S, Schinleber PA, Nathan DM, McKitrick C, Turgeon
H, Abbott K, Anderson E, Bissett L, Cagliero E, Florez JC, Delahanty L, Goldman
V, Poulos A, Olefsky JM, Carrion-Petersen ML, Barrett-Connor E, Edelman SV, Henry
RR, Horne J, Janesch SS, Leos D, Mudaliar S, Polonsky W, Smith J, Vejvoda K,
Pi-Sunyer FX, Lee JE, Allison DB, Aronoff NJ, Crandall JP, Foo ST, Pal C, Parkes 
K, Pena MB, Rooney ES, Van Wye GE, Viscovich KA, Marrero DG, Prince MJ, Kelly SM,
Dotson YF, Fineberg ES, Guare JC, Hadden AM, Ignaut JM, Jackson ML, Kirkman MS,
Mather KJ, Porter BD, Roach PJ, Rowland ND, Wheeler ML, Ratner RE, Youssef G,
Shapiro S, Bavido-Arrage C, Boggs G, Bronsord M, Brown E, Cheatham WW, Cola S,
Evans C, Gibbs P, Kellum T, Levatan C, Nair AK, Passaro M, Uwaifo G, Saad MF,
Budget M, Jinagouda S, Akbar K, Conzues C, Magpuri P, Ngo K, Rassam A, Waters D, 
Xapthalamous K, Santiago JV, Dagogo-Jack S, White NH, Das S, Santiago A, Brown A,
Fisher E, Hurt E, Jones T, Kerr M, Ryder L, Wernimont C, Saudek CD, Bradley V,
Sullivan E, Whittington T, Abbas C, Brancati FL, Clark JM, Charleston JB, Freel
J, Horak K, Jiggetts D, Johnson D, Joseph H, Loman K, Mosley H, Rubin RR, Samuels
A, Stewart KJ, Williamson P, Schade DS, Adams KS, Johannes C, Atler LF, Boyle PJ,
Burge MR, Canady JL, Chai L, Gonzales Y, Hernandez-McGinnis DA, Katz P, King C,
Rassam A, Rubinchik S, Senter W, Waters D, Shamoon H, Brown JO, Adorno E, Cox L, 
Crandall J, Duffy H, Engel S, Friedler A, Howard-Century CJ, Kloiber S, Longchamp
N, Martinez H, Pompi D, Scheindlin J, Violino E, Walker E, Wylie-Rosett J,
Zimmerman E, Zonszein J, Orchard T, Wing RR, Koenning G, Kramer MK, Barr S, Boraz
M, Clifford L, Culyba R, Frazier M, Gilligan R, Harrier S, Harris L, Jeffries S, 
Kriska A, Manjoo Q, Mullen M, Noel A, Otto A, Semler L, Smith CF, Smith M,
Venditti E, Weinzierl V, Williams KV, Wilson T, Arakaki RF, Latimer RW,
Baker-Ladao NK, Beddow R, Dias L, Inouye J, Mau MK, Mikami K, Mohideen P, Odom
SK, Perry RU, Knowler WC, Cooeyate N, Hoskin MA, Percy CA, Acton KJ, Andre VL,
Barber R, Begay S, Bennett PH, Benson MB, Bird EC, Broussard BA, Chavez M,
Dacawyma T, Doughty MS, Duncan R, Edgerton C, Ghahate JM, Glass J, Glass M,
Gohdes D, Grant W, Hanson RL, Horse E, Ingraham LE, Jackson M, Jay P, Kaskalla
RS, Kessler D, Kobus KM, Krakoff J, Manus C, Michaels S, Morgan T, Nashboo Y,
Nelson JA, Poirier S, Polczynski E, Reidy M, Roumain J, Rowse D, Sangster S,
Sewenemewa J, Tonemah D, Wilson C, Yazzie M, Bain R, Fowler S, Brenneman T, Abebe
S, Bamdad J, Callaghan J, Edelstein SL, Gao Y, Grimes KL, Grover N, Haffner L,
Jones S, Jones TL, Katz R, Lachin JM, Mucik P, Orlosky R, Rochon J, Sapozhnikova 
A, Sherif H, Stimpson C, Temprosa M, Walker-Murray F, Marcovina S, Strylewicz G, 
Aldrich FA, O'Leary D, Stamm E, Rautaharju P, Prineas RJ, Alexander T, Campbell
C, Hall S, Li Y, Mills M, Pemberton N, Rautaharju F, Zhang Z, Mayer-Davis E,
Moran RR, Ganiats T, David K, Sarkin AJ, Eastman R, Fradkin J, Garfield S, Gregg 
E, Zhang P, Herman W, Florez JC, Altshuler D, de Bakker PI, Franks PW, Hanson RL,
Jablonski K, Knowler WC, McAteer JB, Pollin TI, Shuldiner AR.

AIMS: TCF7L2 variants have been associated with type 2 diabetes, body mass index 
(BMI), and deficits in proinsulin processing and insulin secretion. Here we
sought to test whether these effects were apparent in high-risk individuals and
modify treatment responses.
METHODS: We examined the potential role of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant in
predicting resistance to weight loss or a lack of improvement of proinsulin
processing during 2.5-years of follow-up participants (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,994) from the
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), a randomized controlled trial designed to
prevent or delay diabetes in high-risk adults.
RESULTS: We observed no difference in the degree of weight loss by rs7903146
genotypes. However, the T allele (conferring higher risk of diabetes) at
rs7903146 was associated with higher fasting proinsulin at baseline (P<0.001),
higher baseline proinsulin:insulin ratio (p<0.0001) and increased
proinsulin:insulin ratio over a median of 2.5 years of follow-up (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003).
Effects were comparable across treatment arms.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of a lack of impact of the TCF7L2 genotypes on the
ability to lose weight, but the presence of a consistent effect on the
proinsulin:insulin ratio over the course of DPP, suggests that high-risk genotype
carriers at this locus can successfully lose weight to counter diabetes risk
despite persistent deficits in insulin production.

PMCID: PMC3144193
PMID: 21814547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Dec;156B(7):781-4. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31219. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Association between TCF4 and schizophrenia does not exert its effect by common
nonsynonymous variation or by influencing cis-acting regulation of mRNA
expression in adult human brain.

Williams HJ(1), Moskvina V, Smith RL, Dwyer S, Russo G, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, UK.

Large collaborative Genome-wide Association studies of schizophrenia have
identified genes and genomic regions that are associated with the disorder at
highly stringent levels of statistical significance. Among these, transcription
factor 4 (TCF4) is one of the best supported although the associated SNP
(rs9960767) is located within intron 3 and has no obvious function. Seeking the
mechanism at TCF responsible for the association, we examined TCF4 for coding
variants, and for cis regulated variation in TCF4 gene expression correlated with
the associated SNP using an assay to detect differential allelic expression.
Using data from the 1000 genomes project, we were unable to identify any
nonsynonymous coding variants at the locus. Allele specific expression analysis
using human post mortem brain samples revealed no evidence for cis-regulated mRNA
expression related to genotype at the schizophrenia associated SNP. We conclude
that association between schizophrenia and TCF4 is not mediated by a relatively
common non-synonymous variant, or by a variant that alters mRNA expression as
measured in adult human brain. It remains possible that the risk allele at this
locus exerts effects on expression exclusively in a developmental context, in
cell types or brain regions not adequately represented in our analysis, or
through post-transcriptional effects, for example in the abundance of the protein
or its sub-cellular distribution.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3168711
PMID: 21812098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Dyn. 2011 Sep;240(9):2060-8. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22704. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

A re-evaluation of two key reagents for in vivo studies of Wnt signaling.

Ahrens MJ(1), Romereim S, Dudley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, USA.

Conditional mutations and transcription-based reporters are important new tools
for exploring the dynamic functions of biological pathways in vivo. While
studying the role of the Wnt signaling pathway in cartilage, we observed that the
ß-catenin-dependent reporter TOPGAL was expressed in chondrocytes in which
ß-catenin was conditionally inactivated using a Col2a1::cre driver. Here we show 
that in these embryos recombination is complete and full-length ß-catenin protein
is absent in chondrocytes. Although a null allele in this context, the recombined
ß-catenin locus produces a stable transcript that encodes a truncated protein.
The truncated protein alone fails to activate TOPFLASH, but strongly potentiates 
reporter activity in the presence of expressed ß-catenin or Tcf4. Together, these
data show that each mouse model exhibits specific undesirable properties,
findings that strongly suggest the need for specific standards to ensure proper
validation of this new generation of genetic tools.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3192924
PMID: 21793100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 15;20(20):4076-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr325. Epub 2011 Jul
26.

Common variants at VRK2 and TCF4 conferring risk of schizophrenia.

Steinberg S(1), de Jong S; Irish Schizophrenia Genomics Consortium, Andreassen
OA, Werge T, Børglum AD, Mors O, Mortensen PB, Gustafsson O, Costas J,
Pietiläinen OP, Demontis D, Papiol S, Huttenlocher J, Mattheisen M, Breuer R,
Vassos E, Giegling I, Fraser G, Walker N, Tuulio-Henriksson A, Suvisaari J,
Lönnqvist J, Paunio T, Agartz I, Melle I, Djurovic S, Strengman E; GROUP, Jürgens
G, Glenthøj B, Terenius L, Hougaard DM, Ørntoft T, Wiuf C, Didriksen M,
Hollegaard MV, Nordentoft M, van Winkel R, Kenis G, Abramova L, Kaleda V, Arrojo 
M, Sanjuán J, Arango C, Sperling S, Rossner M, Ribolsi M, Magni V, Siracusano A, 
Christiansen C, Kiemeney LA, Veldink J, van den Berg L, Ingason A, Muglia P,
Murray R, Nöthen MM, Sigurdsson E, Petursson H, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A,
Rubino IA, De Hert M, Réthelyi JM, Bitter I, Jönsson EG, Golimbet V, Carracedo A,
Ehrenreich H, Craddock N, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC; Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium 2, Ruggeri M, Tosato S, Peltonen L, Ophoff RA, Collier DA, St Clair D,
Rietschel M, Cichon S, Stefansson H, Rujescu D, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Common sequence variants have recently joined rare structural polymorphisms as
genetic factors with strong evidence for association with schizophrenia. Here we 
extend our previous genome-wide association study and meta-analysis (totalling 7 
946 cases and 19 036 controls) by examining an expanded set of variants using an 
enlarged follow-up sample (up to 10 260 cases and 23 500 controls). In addition
to previously reported alleles in the major histocompatibility complex region,
near neurogranin (NRGN) and in an intron of transcription factor 4 (TCF4), we
find two novel variants showing genome-wide significant association:
rs2312147[C], upstream of vaccinia-related kinase 2 (VRK2) [odds ratio (OR) =
1.09, P = 1.9 × 10(-9)] and rs4309482[A], between coiled-coiled domain containing
68 (CCDC68) and TCF4, about 400 kb from the previously described risk allele, but
not accounted for by its association (OR = 1.09, P = 7.8 × 10(-9)).

PMCID: PMC3298077
PMID: 21791550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022138. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Functional diversity of human basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TCF4
isoforms generated by alternative 5' exon usage and splicing.

Sepp M(1), Kannike K, Eesmaa A, Urb M, Timmusk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 4 (TCF4 alias ITF2, E2-2, ME2 or SEF2) is a
ubiquitous class A basic helix-loop-helix protein that binds to E-box DNA
sequences (CANNTG). While involved in the development and functioning of many
different cell types, recent studies point to important roles for TCF4 in the
nervous system. Specifically, human TCF4 gene is implicated in susceptibility to 
schizophrenia and TCF4 haploinsufficiency is the cause of the Pitt-Hopkins mental
retardation syndrome. However, the structure, expression and coding potential of 
the human TCF4 gene have not been described in detail.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present study we used human tissue samples to
characterize human TCF4 gene structure and TCF4 expression at mRNA and protein
level. We report that although widely expressed, human TCF4 mRNA expression is
particularly high in the brain. We demonstrate that usage of numerous 5' exons of
the human TCF4 gene potentially yields in TCF4 protein isoforms with 18 different
N-termini. In addition, the diversity of isoforms is increased by alternative
splicing of several internal exons. For functional characterization of TCF4
isoforms, we overexpressed individual isoforms in cultured human cells. Our
analysis revealed that subcellular distribution of TCF4 isoforms is
differentially regulated: Some isoforms contain a bipartite nuclear localization 
signal and are exclusively nuclear, whereas distribution of other isoforms relies
on heterodimerization partners. Furthermore, the ability of different TCF4
isoforms to regulate E-box controlled reporter gene transcription is varied
depending on whether one or both of the two TCF4 transcription activation domains
are present in the protein. Both TCF4 activation domains are able to activate
transcription independently, but act synergistically in combination.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, in this study we have described the inter-tissue
variability of TCF4 expression in human and provided evidence about the
functional diversity of the alternative TCF4 protein isoforms.

PMCID: PMC3137626
PMID: 21789225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3711-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.068270. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Tcf/Lef repressors differentially regulate Shh-Gli target gene activation
thresholds to generate progenitor patterning in the developing CNS.

Wang H(1), Lei Q, Oosterveen T, Ericson J, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

During neural tube development, Shh signaling through Gli transcription factors
is necessary to establish five distinct ventral progenitor domains that give rise
to unique classes of neurons and glia that arise in specific positions along the 
dorsoventral axis. These cells are generated from progenitors that display
distinct transcription factor gene expression profiles in specific domains in the
ventricular zone. However, the molecular genetic mechanisms that control the
differential spatiotemporal transcriptional responses of progenitor target genes 
to graded Shh-Gli signaling remain unclear. The current study demonstrates a role
for Tcf/Lef repressor activity in this process. We show that Tcf3 and Tcf7L2
(Tcf4) are required for proper ventral patterning and function by independently
regulating two Shh-Gli target genes, Nkx2.2 and Olig2, which are initially
induced in a common pool of progenitors that ultimately segregate into unique
territories giving rise to distinct progeny. Genetic and functional studies in
vivo show that Tcf transcriptional repressors selectively elevate the strength
and duration of Gli activity necessary to induce Nkx2.2, but have no effect on
Olig2, and thereby contribute to the establishment of their distinct expression
domains in cooperation with graded Shh signaling. Together, our data reveal a
Shh-Gli-independent transcriptional input that is required to shape the precise
spatial and temporal response to extracellular morphogen signaling information
during lineage segregation in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3152926
PMID: 21775418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Br J Cancer. 2011 Aug 9;105(4):542-51. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.269. Epub 2011 Jul
19.

Wnt-ß-catenin-Tcf-4 signalling-modulated invasiveness is dependent on osteopontin
expression in breast cancer.

Ravindranath A(1), Yuen HF, Chan KK, Grills C, Fennell DA, Lappin TR, El-Tanani
M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK.

BACKGROUND: We have previously demonstrated that Tcf-4 regulates osteopontin
(OPN) in rat breast epithelial cells, Rama37. In this report, we have examined
the importance of this regulation in human breast cancer.
METHODS: The regulatory roles of Tcf-4 on cell invasion and OPN expression were
investigated. The mRNA expression of Tcf-4 and OPN, and survival of breast cancer
patients were correlated.
RESULTS: Tcf-4 enhanced cell invasion in both MCF10AT and MDA MB 231 breast
cancer cells by transcriptionally activating OPN expression. Osteopontin was
activated by Wnt signalling in MDA MB 231 cells. Paradoxical results on
Tcf-4-regulated OPN expression in MCF10AT (activation) and Rama37 (repression)
cells were shown to be a result of differential Wnt signalling competency in
MCF10AT and Rama37 cells. High levels of OPN and Tcf-4 mRNA expression were
significantly associated with survival in breast cancer patients. Most
importantly, Tcf-4-positive patients had a poorer prognosis when OPN was
overexpressed, while OPN-negative patients had a better prognosis when Tcf-4 was 
overexpressed.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that Tcf-4 can act as a repressor or activator of
breast cancer progression by regulating OPN expression in a Wnt-dependent manner 
and that Tcf-4 and OPN together may be a novel prognostic indicator for breast
cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3170969
PMID: 21772333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Jun;23(6):646-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.03.009. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Capsaicin represses transcriptional activity of ß-catenin in human colorectal
cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Richardson RL, Dashwood RH, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-4542, USA. slee27@utk.edu

Capsaicin is a pungent ingredient in chili red peppers and has been linked to
suppression of growth in various cancer cells. However, the underlying
mechanism(s) by which capsaicin induces growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer
cells is not completely understood. In the present study, we investigated whether
capsaicin alters ß-catenin-dependent signaling in human colorectal cancer cells
in vitro. Exposure of SW480, LoVo and HCT-116 cells to capsaicin suppressed cell 
proliferation. Transient transfection with a ß-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF)-responsive reporter indicated that capsaicin suppressed the transcriptional
activity of ß-catenin/TCF. Capsaicin treatment resulted in a decrease of
intracellular ß-catenin levels and a reduction of transcripts from the ß-catenin 
gene (CTNNB1). These results were confirmed by a reduced luciferase reporter
activity driven by promoter-reporter construct containing the promoter region of 
the Catnb gene. In addition, capsaicin destabilized ß-catenin through enhancement
of proteosomal-dependent degradation. Western blot and immunoprecipitation
studies indicated that capsaicin treatment suppressed TCF-4 expression and
disrupted the interaction of TCF-4 and ß-catenin. This study identifies a role
for the ß-catenin/TCF-dependent pathway that potentially contributes to the
anticancer activity of capsaicin in human colorectal cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3197951
PMID: 21764279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011 Dec;28(8):743-50. doi: 10.1007/s10585-011-9406-8. Epub 
2011 Jul 13.

Galectin-3 germline variant at position 191 enhances nuclear accumulation and
activation of ß-catenin in gastric cancer.

Kim SJ(1), Shin JY, Cheong TC, Choi IJ, Lee YS, Park SH, Chun KH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastric Cancer Branch, Division of Translational & Clinical Research I,
National Cancer Center, 323 Ilsan-ro, Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do,
Republic of Korea.

Mutation of galectin-3 at position 191 (rs4644) substituting proline to histidine
(gal-3H(64)) resulted in the acquisition of resistance to drug-induced apoptosis 
by breast cancer cells. This study employed gastric cancer cells and patient
tissues in attempts to elucidate how and why this mutation in galectin-3
(gal-3H(64)) enhances cancer progression, compared to wild type galectin-3
(gal-3P(64)). First, we prepared lenti-virus constructs containing gal-3P(64),
gal-3H(64) and LacZ, and used them to infect galectin-3 null SNU-638 cells. We
found that gal-3H(64) over-expression increases gastric cancer cell growth more
than gal-3P(64) or LacZ over-expression. Also, gal-3H(64) over-expression
conferred more resistance to cisplatin or 5-FU induced cytotoxicity than
gal-3P(64). Gal-3H(64) also enhanced nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin as well as
increased expression of TCF-4 target genes, such as fascin-1 and c-Myc through
the augmented promoter binding activity of TCF-4, than gal-3P(64). We also
demonstrated stronger staining of ß-catenin and galectin-3 in malignant tissues
from gastric cancer patients with mutated galectin-3 at position 191 (gal-3 191) 
(A/A) (H(64)) and greater localization in the nucleus than in gal-3 191 A/C
(P(64)) cancer patients. Taken together, we elucidated in this study that
germline variant of gal-3H(64) increases nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin and
promotes TCF transcriptional activity and enhances more the galectin-3's role in 
gastric cancer progression.

PMID: 21750908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 16;31(7):842-57. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.287. Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 promotes hepatocarcinogenesis through
activation of a novel EGR1/ß-catenin signaling axis.

Lu D(1), Han C, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) is a key enzyme that couples with
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) for the production of PGE(2). Although COX-2 is known to
mediate the growth and progression of several human cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the role of mPGES-1 in hepatocarcinogenesis is
not well established. This study provides novel evidence for a key role of
mPGES-1 in HCC growth and progression. Forced overexpression of mPGES-1 in two
HCC cell lines (Hep3B and Huh7) increased tumor cell growth, clonogenic
formation, migration and invasion, whereas knockdown of mPGES-1 inhibited these
parameters, in vitro. In a mouse tumor xenograft model, mPGES-1-overexpressed
cells formed palpable tumors at earlier time points and developed larger tumors
when compared with the control (P<0.01); in contrast, mPGES-1 knockdown delayed
tumor development and reduced tumor size (P<0.01). Mechanistically,
mPGES-1-induced HCC cell proliferation, invasion and migration involve PGE(2)
production and activation of early growth response 1 (EGR1) and ß-catenin.
Specifically, mPGES-1-derived PGE(2) induces the formation of EGR1-ß-catenin
complex, which interacts with T-cell factor 4/lymphoid enhancer factor 1
transcription factors and activates the expression of ß-catenin downstream genes.
Our findings depict a novel crosstalk between mPGES-1/PGE(2) and EGR1/ß-catenin
signaling that is critical for hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3193853
PMID: 21743491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Sci. 2011 Oct;102(10):1808-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02022.x. Epub
2011 Aug 2.

Interference of E2-2-mediated effect in endothelial cells by FAM96B through its
limited expression of E2-2.

Yang W(1), Itoh F, Ohya H, Kishimoto F, Tanaka A, Nakano N, Itoh S, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The basic helixloophelix protein E2-2 is known to play a role in quiescence of 
endothelial cells (ECs). However, it is unclear how the activity of E2-2 is
controlled in the cells. In this study, we identified FAM96B as an interaction
partner of E2-2. FAM96B interfered with E2-2-mediated effects on luciferase
reporter activities. Furthermore, the suppression of vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor 2 promoter activity by E2-2 was rescued by the expression of
FAM96B in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, FAM96B decreased the expression
of ectopic and endogenous E2-2 proteins. Mutational analysis revealed that the
middle region of FAM96B is required for the limited expression of E2-2 protein.
When FAM96B was expressed in ECs, the EC migration, proliferation, and tube
formation were potentiated. Taken together, these findings suggest that FAM96B
acts as a regulator of E2-2 through the control of its protein expression.

PMID: 21722264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int J Oncol. 2011 Oct;39(4):883-90. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1104. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

ß-catenin/Tcf-4 complex transcriptionally regulates AKT1 in glioma.

Chen L(1), Huang K, Han L, Shi Z, Zhang K, Pu P, Jiang C, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, PR China.

Increasing evidence suggests that interplays between Wnt/ß-catenin and PI3K/AKT
signaling cascades are involved in tumor development and progression. However,
the exact mechanism in glioma is not well known. Using aspirin, we found that the
expression levels of AKT1 in glioma cells significantly correlated with the
transcriptional activity of ß-catenin. Similar observations were made when we
subjected glioma cells to treatment with Tcf4 siRNA. Moreover, both aspirin and
Tcf4 siRNA can suppress the proliferation and induce apoptosis of glioma. In
addition, our analysis of the gene promoter of AKT1 revealed multiple putative
Tcf-4 binding sites. In support of the concept that ß-catenin/Tcf-4 is a
transcriptional regulator for AKT1, results from our chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies and luciferase assay showed that ß-catenin/Tcf-4
binds to the potential binding sites in the gene promoter of AKT1. Furthermore,
using immunohistochemistry, we found that Tcf-4 protein expression increased
significantly in high-grade glioma in comparison to low-grade glioma and
correlated with AKT1 expression. In conclusion, our results support the concept
that ß-catenin/Tcf-4 directly regulates AKT1 in glioma, and these two proteins
may cooperate with each other in exerting their oncogenic effects in glioma.

PMID: 21720709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021219. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Copy number variants in candidate genes are genetic modifiers of Hirschsprung
disease.

Jiang Q(1), Ho YY, Hao L, Nichols Berrios C, Chakravarti A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Complex Disease Genomics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a neurocristopathy characterized by absence of
intramural ganglion cells along variable lengths of the gastrointestinal tract.
The HSCR phenotype is highly variable with respect to gender, length of
aganglionosis, familiality and the presence of additional anomalies. By molecular
genetic analysis, a minimum of 11 neuro-developmental genes (RET, GDNF, NRTN,
SOX10, EDNRB, EDN3, ECE1, ZFHX1B, PHOX2B, KIAA1279, TCF4) are known to harbor
rare, high-penetrance mutations that confer a large risk to the bearer. In
addition, two other genes (RET, NRG1) harbor common, low-penetrance polymorphisms
that contribute only partially to risk and can act as genetic modifiers. To
broaden this search, we examined whether a set of 67 proven and candidate HSCR
genes harbored additional modifier alleles. In this pilot study, we utilized a
custom-designed array CGH with ~33,000 test probes at an average resolution of
~185 bp to detect gene-sized or smaller copy number variants (CNVs) within these 
67 genes in 18 heterogeneous HSCR patients. Using stringent criteria, we
identified CNVs at three loci (MAPK10, ZFHX1B, SOX2) that are novel, involve
regulatory and coding sequences of neuro-developmental genes, and show
association with HSCR in combination with other congenital anomalies. Additional 
CNVs are observed under relaxed criteria. Our research suggests a role for CNVs
in HSCR and, importantly, emphasizes the role of variation in regulatory
sequences. A much larger study will be necessary both for replication and for
identifying the full spectrum of small CNV effects.

PMCID: PMC3119685
PMID: 21712996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cell Biosci. 2011 Jan 18;1(1):4. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-1-4.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activates microRNA-181 expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Ji J(1), Yamashita T, Wang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
xw3u@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignant cancer with an
observable heterogeneity and microRNAs are functionally associated with the
tumorigenesis of HCC. We recently identified that EpCAM (CD326)-positive cells
isolated from alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)-positive HCC samples are hepatic cancer
stem cells (HepCSCs). EpCAM+AFP+ HepCSCs have an activated Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling with a parallel increased expression of all four microRNA-181 family
members. We hypothesized that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling transcriptionally activates
microRNA-181s in HCC.
RESULTS: Using both western blot and quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR
analyses, we found that the expression of all four microRNA-181 family members
was positively correlated with ß-catenin expression in HCC cell lines.
MicroRNA-181 expression could be directly induced upon an activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which includes Wnt10B overexpression, inhibition of
GSK3ß signaling by LiCl, or forced expression of ß-catenin/Tcf4. Moreover,
microRNA-181 expression was inhibited upon an inactivation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling by an induction of adenomatosis polyposis coli (APC) expression or
silencing ß-catenin via RNA interference. In addition, seven putative
ß-catenin/Tcf4 binding sites were identified in the promoter region of the
microRNA-181a-2 and microRNA-181b-2 transcripts. Consistently, we found that Tcf4
interacted with these regions in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results demonstrate that microRNA-181s are
transcriptionally activated by the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3116242
PMID: 21711587  [PubMed]


199. Diabetologia. 2011 Sep;54(9):2217-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2222-5. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Type 2 diabetes: unravelling the interaction between genetic predisposition and
lifestyle.

Rathmann W(1), Kowall B, Giani G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biometrics and Epidemiology, German Diabetes Centre, Auf'm
Hennekamp 65, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany. rathmann@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de

PMID: 21710289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Transl Sci. 2011 Jun;4(3):183-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-8062.2011.00284.x.

Association of TCF7L2 allelic variations with gastric function, satiation, and
GLP-1 levels.

Vazquez-Roque MI(1), Camilleri M, Vella A, Carlson P, Laugen J, Zinsmeister AR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Enteric Neuroscience Translational and Epidemiological Research
(CENTER), Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), a
regulator of proglucagon processing, is reproducibly associated with type 2
diabetes. GLP-1 alters gastric function and increases satiation.
HYPOTHESIS: Genetic variation in TCF7L2 is associated with satiation, gastric
motor function, and GLP-1 concentrations.
METHODS: In 62 adults, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of TCF7L2
(rs7903146) was genotyped and associations with gastric emptying (GE) of solids
and liquids, gastric volume (GV), and satiation (maximum tolerated volume and
symptoms after nutrient drink test) were explored using a dominant genetic model,
with gender and BMI as covariates. In 50 of the participants, we also measured
plasma GLP-1 during fasting and after ingestion of a nutrient drink.
RESULTS: Presence of the T allele compared to CC genotype in rs7903146 SNP of the
TCF7L2 gene was associated with reduced fasting GV (246.3 ± 11.4 mL for CC group,
compared to 215.7 ± 11.4 mL for CT/TT group, p= 0.05) and accelerated GE t(1/2)
of liquids (26.3 ± 2.0 minutes for CC compared to 17.7 ± 1.4 for CT/TT, p <
0.005). There was no significant association of rs7903146 SNP with GE of solids, 
gastric accommodation, satiation, fasting, or postprandial GLP-1.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest TCF7L2 is associated with altered gastric functions 
that may predispose to obesity.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3125688
PMID: 21707949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Exp Med. 2012 Jun;12(2):115-9. doi: 10.1007/s10238-011-0144-7. Epub 2011 Jun
16.

Association of a common variant in TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus in a
Persian population.

Palizban A(1), Nikpour M, Salehi R, Maracy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Isfahan Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Centre, Isfahan University of 
Medical Sciences, Isfahan, I. R. Iran. palizban@pharm.mui.ac.ir

Diabetes is one of the most common and challenging health problems. Studies in
several nations show that polymorphisms within the transcription factor 7-like 2 
genes could be associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). Therefore, a case-control
study was conducted to find the association between SNP rs7903146 and T2D in our 
population. The study consists of 110 patients referring to clinic and 80 healthy
controls randomly selected based on WHO guideline. DNA was extracted from blood
and genotyped by PCR-RFLP with specific primers to amplify a fragment for
restriction enzyme (RsaI). A chi-square test was calculated to compare the
proportions of genotypes or alleles. Using a logistic regression model, the odds 
ratio for risk of developing T2D was calculated with and without adjustment for
age, sex, and BMI. The frequency of the T allele of rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism 
was significantly higher in diabetic subjects (47.3%) compared to that in normal 
subjects (34.4%). Logistic regression analysis of the rs7903146 polymorphism
showed that the odds ratio was 3.71(95% CI: 1.43-9.56; P: 0.008) for the TT
genotype and 1.26 (95% CI: 0.67-2.39; P: 0.516) for the CT genotype when compared
with the CC genotype. Odds ratio adjusted for age, sex, and BMI have shown
similar results. The results show that rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene is an important
susceptibility gene for T2D mellitus in the province of Isfahan, Iran. Our
results support the recent findings that rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene is an important
genetic risk factor for the development of T2D in multiple ethnic groups.

PMID: 21678030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Tsitologiia. 2011;53(4):332-40.

[Epithelial intestine cells transdifferentiate into bladder urothelium in
experiments in vivo].

[Article in Russian]

Popov BK, Zaichik AM, Bud'ko MB, Zlobina OV, Tolkunova EN, Zhidkova OV, Petrov
NS.

The autoplastic surgery by intestine tissue has been used for reconstructive
therapy of the urinary tract since the middle of the last century; however, cell 
mechanisms of the urothelium engraftment are still obscure. Intestine stem cells 
possess plasticity and presumably enable after the autoplastic surgery to
transdifferentiate into mature cells of urinary tract. Using the preliminary
developed in vivo model for evaluation of somatic cells transdifferentiation into
urothelium, we have found that the epithelial intestine cells producing Gfp
transdifferentiate into the cryoinjured bladder urothelium of the syngenetic
C57BL mice. Gfp was detected in the bladder tissue of mice-recipients using
reverted polymerase chain reaction, primary fluorescence and immunofluorescence, 
while colocalization of the Gfp and Her-4 revealing similar to urothelium
staining pattern was demonstrated in a few urothelium cells by double
immunohistochemical staining of the bladder tissue with specific antibodies. The 
results obtained suggest that epithelial intestine cells enable to
transdifferentiate into bladder urothelium, however the transdifferentiation
level is low and presumably can not provide full functional urothelium
engraftment in the case of autoplastic bladder surgery by intestine tissue.

PMID: 21675212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genome Res. 2011 Sep;21(9):1417-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.123745.111. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Alterations in TCF7L2 expression define its role as a key regulator of glucose
metabolism.

Savic D(1), Ye H, Aneas I, Park SY, Bell GI, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
dsavic@uchicago.edu

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have consistently implicated noncoding
variation within the TCF7L2 locus with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk. While this
locus represents the strongest genetic determinant for T2D risk in humans, it
remains unclear how these noncoding variants affect disease etiology. To test the
hypothesis that the T2D-associated interval harbors cis-regulatory elements
controlling TCF7L2 expression, we conducted in vivo transgenic reporter assays to
characterize the TCF7L2 regulatory landscape. We found that the 92-kb genomic
interval associated with T2D harbors long-range enhancers regulating various
aspects of the spatial-temporal expression patterns of TCF7L2, including
expression in tissues involved in the control of glucose homeostasis. By
selectively deleting this interval, we establish a critical role for these
enhancers in robust TCF7L2 expression. To further determine whether variation in 
Tcf7l2 expression may lead to diabetes, we developed a Tcf7l2 copy-number allelic
series in mice. We show that a null Tcf7l2 allele leads, in a dose-dependent
manner, to lower glycemic profiles. Tcf7l2 null mice also display enhanced
glucose tolerance coupled to significantly lowered insulin levels, suggesting
that these mice are protected against T2D. Confirming these observations,
transgenic mice harboring multiple Tcf7l2 copies and overexpressing this gene
display reciprocal phenotypes, including glucose intolerance. These results
directly demonstrate that Tcf7l2 plays a role in regulating glucose tolerance,
suggesting that overexpression of this gene is associated with increased risk of 
T2D. These data highlight the role of enhancer elements as mediators of T2D risk 
in humans, strengthening the evidence that variation in cis-regulatory elements
may be a paradigm for genetic predispositions to common disease.

PMCID: PMC3166827
PMID: 21673050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1018-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2011.03359.x.

Gestational diabetes mellitus is associated with TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
independent of HLA-DQB1*0602 genotypes and islet cell autoantibodies.

Papadopoulou A(1), Lynch KF, Shaat N, Håkansson R, Ivarsson SA, Berntorp K,
Agardh CD, Lernmark Å; DiPiS Study Group.

Collaborators: Carlsson A, Cederwall E, Cilio C, Jönsson B, Larsson H, Larsson K,
Lernmark B, Lindberg B, Neiderud J, Resic-Lindehammer S, Sjöblad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
Anastasia.Papadopoulou@med.lu.se

AIMS: To test whether the TCF7L2 gene was associated with gestational diabetes,
whether the association between TCF7L2 and gestational diabetes was independent
of HLA-DQB1*0602 and islet cell autoantibodies, as well as maternal age, number
of pregnancies, family history of diabetes and the HLA-DQB1 genotypes, and to
test whether the distribution of HLA-DQB1 alleles was affected by country of
birth.
METHODS: We genotyped the rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs7901695 single nucleotide
polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene in 826 mothers with gestational diabetes and in 
1185 healthy control subjects in the Diabetes Prediction in Skåne Study. The
mothers were also typed for HLA-DQB1 genotypes and tested for islet cell
autoantibodies against GAD65, insulinoma-associated antigen-2 and insulin.
RESULTS: The heterozygous genotypes CT, GT and TC of the rs7903146 (T is risk for
Type 2 diabetes), rs12255372 (T is risk for Type 2 diabetes) and rs7901695 (C is 
risk for Type 2 diabetes), respectively, as well as the homozygous genotypes TT, 
TT and CC of the rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs7901695, respectively, were strongly
associated with gestational diabetes (P < 0.0001). These associations remained
statistically significant after adjusting for maternal age, number of
pregnancies, family history of diabetes and HLA-DQ genotypes and were independent
of the presence of islet cell autoantibodies. No interaction was observed between
TCF7L2 and HLA-DQB1*0602, which was shown to be negatively associated with
gestational diabetes in mothers born in Sweden (P = 0.010).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 was associated with susceptibility for gestational
diabetes independently of the presence of HLA-DQB1*0602 and islet cell
autoantibodies and other factors such as maternal age, number of pregnancies,
family history of diabetes and other HLA-DQ genotypes. The HLA-DQB1*0602 was
negatively associated with gestational diabetes in mothers born in Sweden.

© 2011 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2011 Diabetes UK.

PMCID: PMC3170100
PMID: 21672010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jul;155A(7):1536-45. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34070. Epub 2011 
Jun 10.

The Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: report of 16 new patients and clinical diagnostic
criteria.

Marangi G(1), Ricciardi S, Orteschi D, Lattante S, Murdolo M, Dallapiccola B,
Biscione C, Lecce R, Chiurazzi P, Romano C, Greco D, Pettinato R, Sorge G,
Pantaleoni C, Alfei E, Toldo I, Magnani C, Bonanni P, Martinez F, Serra G,
Battaglia D, Lettori D, Vasco G, Baroncini A, Daolio C, Zollino M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma,
Italy.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by severe intellectual disability, 
typical facial gestalt and additional features, such as breathing anomalies.
Following the discovery of the causative haploinsufficiency of transcription
factor 4 (TCF4), about 60 patients have been reported. We looked for TCF4
mutations in 63 patients with a suspected PTHS. Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 was
identified in 14 patients, as a consequence of large 18q21.2 chromosome deletions
involving TCF4 (2 patients), gene mutations (11 patients) and a t(14q;18q)
balanced translocation disrupting TCF4 (one patient). By evaluating the clinical 
features of these patients, along with literature data, we noticed that, in
addition to the typical facial gestalt, the PTHS phenotype results from the
various combinations of the following characteristics: intellectual disability
with severe speech impairment, normal growth parameters at birth, postnatal
microcephaly, breathing anomalies, motor incoordination, ocular anomalies,
constipation, seizures, typical behavior and subtle brain abnormalities. Although
PTHS is currently considered to be involved in differential diagnosis with
Angelman and Rett syndromes, we found that combining the facial characteristics
with a detailed analysis of both the physical and the neurological phenotype,
made molecular testing for PTHS the first choice. Based on striking clinical
criteria, a diagnosis of PTHS was made clinically in two patients who had normal 
TCF4. This report deals with the first series of PTHS patients of Italian origin.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21671391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jul;155A(7):1685-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34055. Epub 2011
Jun 10.

Fetal pads as a clue to the diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Lehalle D(1), Williams C, Siu VM, Clayton-Smith J.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, MAHSC, St Mary's Hospital, UK.
daphnelehalle@yahoo.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is characterized by severe mental retardation,
characteristic facial features including a wide mouth and intermittent
overbreathing. It is due to abnormalities of the TCF4 gene at 18q21.1 and over 50
cases have now been reported in the literature. The clinical features overlap
significantly with those of Angelman, Rett, and Mowat-Wilson syndromes. We have
observed prominent fetal pads as a feature in several individuals with PHS and
suggested that this is a useful clinical sign which helps to distinguish PHS from
other conditions in the differential diagnosis and may guide genetic testing.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21671383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Hum Genet. 2011 Dec;130(6):777-87. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1020-y. Epub 2011 Jun 
14.

The role of the TCF4 gene in the phenotype of individuals with 18q segmental
deletions.

Hasi M(1), Soileau B, Sebold C, Hill A, Hale DE, O'Donnell L, Cody JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UT Health Science Center, 7703 Floyd Curl Dive, San 
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

The goal of this study is to define the effects of TCF4 hemizygosity in the
context of a larger segmental deletion of chromosome 18q. Our cohort included 37 
individuals with deletions of 18q. Twenty-seven had deletions including TCF4
(TCF4 (+/-)); nine had deletions that did not include TCF4 (TCF4 (+/+)); and one 
individual had a microdeletion that included only the TCF4 gene. We compared
phenotypic data from the participants' medical records, survey responses, and
in-person evaluations. Features unique to the TCF4 (+/-) individuals included
abnormal corpus callosum, short neck, small penis, accessory and wide-spaced
nipples, broad or clubbed fingers, and sacral dimple. The developmental data
revealed that TCF4 (+/+) individuals were only moderately developmentally delayed
while TCF4 (+/-) individuals failed to reach developmental milestones beyond
those typically acquired by 12 months of age. TCF4 hemizygosity also conferred an
increased risk of early death principally due to aspiration-related
complications. Hemizygosity for TCF4 confers a significant impact primarily with 
regard to cognitive and motor development, resulting in a very different
prognosis for individuals hemizygous for TCF4 when compared to individuals
hemizygous for other regions of distal 18q.

PMCID: PMC3215814
PMID: 21671075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Cell Sci. 2011 Jul 1;124(Pt 13):2298-309. doi: 10.1242/jcs.082693.

Wnt controls the transcriptional activity of Kaiso through CK1e-dependent
phosphorylation of p120-catenin.

Del Valle-Pérez B(1), Casagolda D, Lugilde E, Valls G, Codina M, Dave N, de
Herreros AG, Duñach M.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, CEB, Facultat de Medicina,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra E-08193, Spain.

Erratum in
    J Cell Sci. 2016 Feb 15;129(4):873.

p120-catenin is an E-cadherin-associated protein that modulates E-cadherin
function and stability. In response to Wnt3a, p120-catenin is phosphorylated at
Ser268 and Ser269, disrupting its interaction with E-cadherin. Here, we describe 
that Wnt-induced p120-catenin phosphorylation at Ser268 and Ser269 also enhances 
its binding to the transcriptional factor Kaiso, preventing Kaiso-mediated
inhibition of the ß-catenin-Tcf-4 transcriptional complex. Kaiso-mediated
repression of this complex is due to its association not only with Tcf-4 but also
with ß-catenin. Disruption of Tcf-4-Kaiso and ß-catenin-Kaiso interactions by
p120-catenin not only releases Tcf-4 and ß-catenin enabling its mutual
association and the formation of the transcriptional complex but also permits
Kaiso binding to methylated CpG islands, an interaction that is weakly inhibited 
by p120-catenin. Consequently, Wnt stimulates Kaiso association to the CDKN2A
promoter, which contains CpG sequences, in cells where these sequences are
extensively methylated, such as HT-29 M6, an effect accompanied by decreased
expression of its gene product. These results indicate that, when released from
E-cadherin by Wnt3a-stimulated phosphorylation, p120-catenin controls the
activity of the Kaiso transcriptional factor, enhancing its binding to repressed 
promoters and relieving its inhibition of the ß-catenin-Tcf-4 transcriptional
complex.

PMID: 21670201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jun 13;11:238. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-238.

COX-2 gene expression in colon cancer tissue related to regulating factors and
promoter methylation status.

Asting AG(1), Carén H, Andersson M, Lönnroth C, Lagerstedt K, Lundholm K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Increased cyclooxygenase activity promotes progression of colorectal 
cancer, but the mechanisms behind COX-2 induction remain elusive. This study was 
therefore aimed to define external cell signaling and transcription factors
relating to high COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue.
METHOD: Tumor and normal colon tissue were collected at primary curative
operation in 48 unselected patients. COX-2 expression in tumor and normal colon
tissue was quantified including microarray analyses on tumor mRNA accounting for 
high and low tumor COX-2 expression. Cross hybridization was performed between
tumor and normal colon tissue. Methylation status of up-stream COX-2 promoter
region was evaluated.
RESULTS: Tumors with high COX-2 expression displayed large differences in gene
expression compared to normal colon. Numerous genes with altered expression
appeared in tumors of high COX-2 expression compared to tumors of low COX-2.
COX-2 expression in normal colon was increased in patients with tumors of high
COX-2 compared to normal colon from patients with tumors of low COX-2. IL1ß, IL6 
and iNOS transcripts were up-regulated among external cell signaling factors;
nine transcription factors (ATF3, C/EBP, c-Fos, Fos-B, JDP2, JunB, c-Maf, NF-<U+03BA>B, 
TCF4) showed increased expression and 5 (AP-2, CBP, Elk-1, p53, PEA3) were
decreased in tumors with high COX-2. The promoter region of COX-2 gene did not
show consistent methylation in tumor or normal colon tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcription and external cell signaling factors are altered as
covariates to COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue, but DNA methylation of the
COX-2 promoter region was not a significant factor behind COX-2 expression in
tumor and normal colon tissue.

PMCID: PMC3130705
PMID: 21668942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jul 29;52(8):5573-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7568.

Association of TCF4 gene polymorphisms with Fuchs' corneal dystrophy in the
Chinese.

Thalamuthu A(1), Khor CC, Venkataraman D, Koh LW, Tan DT, Aung T, Mehta JS,
Vithana EN.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

PURPOSE: To test the association between TCF4, a gene recently found to confer
susceptibility to Fuchs' corneal dystrophy (FCD) in Caucasian populations, and
Chinese patients with FCD.
METHODS: Fifty-seven Chinese subjects with clinically diagnosed FCD and 121
normal control subjects were recruited. Genomic DNA was extracted and the 18
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within TCF4 were genotyped (Sequenom
MassArray primer extension system; Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA). Statistical
association between individual SNPs and FCD was evaluated using 1 df additive
genetic models, and verified with 2 df unguided genotype tests of association. P 
< 0.002 was considered statistically significant after accounting for the 18
SNPs.
RESULTS: The affected individuals ranged in age from 48 to 87 years, with an
average age of 67 years. There was no statistical difference in the demographic
information between the FCD and the control group (mean age of 65.1 years; range,
39-85, P = 0.12). Two SNPs within TCF4 (rs17089887 and rs17089925) were
significant experiment-wide (P = 7.34 × 10(-5) and P = 0.00045 respectively) with
an increase in disease risk of >2.3-fold per copy of the risk allele compared
with individuals who were wild type. However, the most significantly associated
SNP from the original report (rs613872) was not found to be present in Chinese
FCD subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms within TCF4, a gene which has been implicated in FCD
susceptibility among Europeans, was also found to be strongly associated with FCD
in Chinese.

PMID: 21659310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Sep;93(3):390-5. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.05.017. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism and
complication/comorbidity profile in type 2 diabetes patients.

Buraczynska M(1), Swatowski A, Markowska-Gosik D, Kuczmaszewska A, Ksiazek A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for DNA Analysis and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of
Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Dr K. Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954 Lublin,
Poland. monika.buraczynska@am.lublin.pl

Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) has been associated with type 2
diabetes. We investigated the association of the rs7903146 SNP in this gene with 
clinical profile of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) patients. The study involved 980
patients with diabetic nephropathy (44%), diabetic retinopathy (42%), CVD (65%)
and early onset of diabetes (45%) and 924 healthy controls. Subjects were
genotyped for rs7903146 by PCR-RFLP. Genotype frequencies significantly differed 
between T2DM patients and controls (p<0.01, odds ratio (OR) for TT genotype 2.49 
(95% confidence interval (CI) 1.84-3.39). An association was observed between
rs7903146 and nephropathy (p<0.001), with 22% of TT homozygotes in this subgroup 
vs. 11% in patients without nephropathy (p=0.006, OR for TT 2.83, 95% CI
1.94-4.13). Association was stronger in patients with early onset of diabetes
(34% of TT vs. 12% in the late onset, p<0.001). In DN group 71% of TT homozygotes
had an early onset (OR 7.64, 95% CI 4.98-11.73 vs. controls). Our results confirm
association of rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene with increased risk of type 2
diabetes. The T allele is strongly associated with nephropathy, especially in
early onset of diabetes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21641671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Neuro Oncol. 2011 Jun;13(6):600-9. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nor034.

High ß-catenin/Tcf-4 activity confers glioma progression via direct regulation of
AKT2 gene expression.

Zhang J(1), Huang K, Shi Z, Zou J, Wang Y, Jia Z, Zhang A, Han L, Yue X, Liu N,
Jiang T, You Y, Pu P, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300052,
China.

Recent data suggest that the ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling pathway plays an important
role in human cancer tumorigenesis. However, the mechanism of ß-catenin/Tcf-4
signaling in tumorigenesis is poorly understood. In this study, we show that
Tcf-4 protein levels were significantly elevated in high-grade gliomas in
comparison with low-grade gliomas and that Tcf-4 levels correlated with levels of
AKT2. Reduction of ß-catenin/Tcf-4 activity inhibited glioma cell proliferation
and invasion in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. This effect of ß-catenin/Tcf-4
activity was mediated by AKT2, and in vivo binding of ß-catenin/Tcf-4 to the AKT2
promoter was validated using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and
luciferase reporter assays. Taken together, we have demonstrated that Tcf-4 is
associated with glioma progression and that AKT2 is a new member of the genes
that are regulated by ß-catenin/Tcf-4.

PMCID: PMC3107098
PMID: 21636708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020098. Epub 2011 May 20.

Thermostable direct hemolysin downregulates human colon carcinoma cell
proliferation with the involvement of E-cadherin, and ß-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling.

Chowdhury P(1), Pore D, Mahata N, Karmakar P, Pal A, Chakrabarti MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathophysiology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric
Diseases, Beliaghata, Kolkata, India.

BACKGROUND: Colon cancers are the frequent causes of cancer mortality worldwide. 
Recently bacterial toxins have received marked attention as promising approaches 
in the treatment of colon cancer. Thermostable direct hemolysin (TDH) secreted by
Vibrio parahaemolyticus causes influx of extracellular calcium with the
subsequent rise in intracellular calcium level in intestinal epithelial cells and
it is known that calcium has antiproliferative activity against colon cancer.
KEY RESULTS: In the present study it has been shown that TDH, a well-known
traditional virulent factor inhibits proliferation of human colon carcinoma cells
through the involvement of CaSR in its mechanism. TDH treatment does not induce
DNA fragmentation, nor causes the release of lactate dehydrogenase. Therefore,
apoptosis and cytotoxicity are not contributing to the TDH-mediated reduction of 
proliferation rate, and hence the reduction appears to be caused by decrease in
cell proliferation. The elevation of E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule and
suppression of ß-catenin, a proto-oncogene have been observed in presence of CaSR
agonists whereas reverse effect has been seen in presence of CaSR antagonist as
well as si-RNA in TDH treated cells. TDH also triggers a significant reduction of
Cyclin-D and cdk2, two important cell cycle regulatory proteins along with an up 
regulation of cell cycle inhibitory protein p27(Kip1) in presence of CaSR
agonists.
CONCLUSION: Therefore TDH can downregulate colonic carcinoma cell proliferation
and involves CaSR in its mechanism of action. The downregulation occurs mainly
through the involvement of E-cadherin-ß-catenin mediated pathway and the
inhibition of cell cycle regulators as well as upregulation of cell cycle
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3098874
PMID: 21625458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;25(8):1364-75. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0503. Epub 2011 May 
26.

StarD7 gene expression in trophoblast cells: contribution of SF-1 and
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling.

Rena V(1), Flores-Martín J, Angeletti S, Panzetta-Dutari GM, Genti-Raimondi S.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional de Córdoba-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Departamento de Bioquímica
Clínica-Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, X5000HUA
Córdoba, Argentina.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer domain containing 7
(StarD7) is a poorly characterized member of the steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein-related lipid transfer proteins, up-regulated in JEG-3 cells, involved in
intracellular transport and metabolism of lipids. Previous studies dealing with
the mechanisms underlying the human StarD7 gene expression led us to define the
cis-acting regulatory sequences in the StarD7 promoter using as a model JEG-3
cells. These include a functional T cell-specific transcription factor 4 (TCF4)
site involved in Wnt-ß-catenin signaling. To understand these mechanisms in more 
depth, we examined the steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) contribution to StarD7
expression. Cotransfection experiments in JEG-3 cells point out that the StarD7
promoter is activated by SF-1, and this effect is increased by forskolin. EMSA
using JEG-3 nuclear proteins demonstrated that SF-1 binds to the StarD7 promoter.
Additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that SF-1 and
ß-catenin are bound in vivo to the StarD7 promoter. Reporter gene assays in
combination with mutations in the SF-1 and TCF4 binding sites revealed that the
StarD7 promoter is synergistically activated by SF-1 and ß-catenin and that the
TCF4 binding site (-614/-608) plays an important role in this activation. SF-1
amino acid mutations involved in the physical interaction with ß-catenin
abolished this activation; thus demonstrating that the contact between the two
proteins is necessary for an efficient StarD7 transcriptional induction. Finally,
these data suggest that ß-catenin could function as a bridge between SF-1 and
TCF4 forming a ternary complex, which would stimulate StarD7 expression. The SF-1
and ß-catenin pathway convergence on StarD7 expression may have important
implications in the phospholipid uptake and transport, contributing to the normal
trophoblast development.

PMID: 21622533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Surg Res. 2011 Sep;170(1):41-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.03.041. Epub 2011 Apr
15.

Distraction induced enterogenesis: a unique mouse model using polyethylene
glycol.

Okawada M(1), Maria HM, Teitelbaum DH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, and C.S. Mott Children's 
Hospital, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0245, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated that the small intestine can be
lengthened by applying mechanical forces to the bowel lumen-distraction-induced
enterogenesis. However, the mechanisms which account for this growth are unknown,
and might be best examined using a mouse model. The purpose of this study is to
establish the feasibility of developing distractive-induced small bowel growth in
mouse.
METHODS: Twelve-week old C57BL/6J mice had a jejunal segment taken out of
continuity, and distended with polyethylene glycol (PEG: 3350 KDa); this group
was compared with a control group without stretching. Segment length and diameter
were measured intra-operatively and after 5 d. Villus height, crypt depth, and
muscle thickness in the isolated segment were assessed. Rate of epithelial cell
proliferation (5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine: BrdU incorporation) in crypts were also
examined. The mucosal mRNA expression of targeted factors was performed to
investigate potential mechanisms which might lead to distraction-induced
enterogenesis.
RESULTS: At harvest, the PEG-stretched group showed a significant increase in
length and diameter versus controls. Villus height, crypt depth, and muscular
layer thickness increased in the PEG group. The PEG group also showed
significantly increased rates of epithelial cell proliferation versus controls.
Real-time PCR showed a trend toward higher ß-catenin and c-myc mRNA expression in
the PEG-stretched group; however, this difference was not statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Radial distraction-induced enterogenesis with PEG is a viable method
for increasing small intestinal length and diameter. This model may provide a new
method for studying the mechanisms leading to distraction-induced enterogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3154514
PMID: 21605872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2011 Aug;24(4):631-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2011.00871.x. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

Differential LEF1 and TCF4 expression is involved in melanoma cell phenotype
switching.

Eichhoff OM(1), Weeraratna A, Zipser MC, Denat L, Widmer DS, Xu M, Kriegl L,
Kirchner T, Larue L, Dummer R, Hoek KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Recent observations suggest that melanoma cells drive disease progression by
switching back and forth between phenotypic states of proliferation and invasion.
Phenotype switching has been linked to changes in Wnt signalling, and we
therefore looked for cell phenotype-specific differences in the levels and
activity of ß-catenin and its LEF/TCF co-factors. We found that while cytosolic
ß-catenin distribution is phenotype-specific (membrane-associated in
proliferative cells and cytosolic in invasive cells), its nuclear distribution
and activity is not. Instead, the expression patterns of two ß-catenin
co-factors, LEF1 and TCF4, are both phenotype-specific and inversely correlated. 
LEF1 is preferentially expressed by differentiated/proliferative phenotype cells 
and TCF4 by dedifferentiated/invasive phenotype cells. Knock-down experiments
confirmed that these co-factors are important for the phenotype-specific
expression of M-MITF, WNT5A and other genes and that LEF1 suppresses TCF4
expression independently of ß-catenin. Our data show that melanoma cell phenotype
switching behaviour is regulated by differential LEF1/TCF4 activity.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21599871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;18(4):401-12. doi: 10.1530/ERC-10-0258. Print
2011 Aug.

In vitro transforming potential, intracellular signaling properties, and
sensitivity to a kinase inhibitor (sorafenib) of RET proto-oncogene variants
Glu511Lys, Ser649Leu, and Arg886Trp.

Prazeres H(1), Couto JP, Rodrigues F, Vinagre J, Torres J, Trovisco V, Martins
TC, Sobrinho-Simões M, Soares P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP) - Cancer Biology, Rua Dr Roberto Frias, Porto, Portugal.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 and a subset of apparently sporadic medullary
thyroid carcinoma (AS-MTC) are caused by germ line activating point mutations of 
the rearranged during transfection (RET) proto-oncogene. RET encodes a receptor
with tyrosine kinase activity that targets several intracellular signaling
cascades, such as RAS-RAF-ERK1/2, PIK3-AKT, and STAT transcription factors. The
objective of this study was to assess the function of three germ line RET
variants Arg886Trp, Ser649Leu, and Glu511Lys of undetermined pathogenic
significance, which were found in three kindreds of isolated AS-MTC. For this
purpose, we employed vectors expressing each of the RET variants and measured the
number of NIH3T3 transformation foci and soft agar colonies, the degree of
activation of known RET intracellular signaling targets (ERK1/2, STAT1, STAT3,
and TCF4), and the extent of ERK1/2 inhibition on sorafenib treatment. We found
that RET variants Arg886Trp and Glu511Lys have shown increased in vitro
transforming potential in a glial-derived neurotrophic factor-dependent manner.
In contrast, the Ser649Leu variant did not significantly increased the number of 
foci and agar colonies relative to wild-type RET (RET-WT). The variants Glu511Lys
and Arg886Trp showed 10- and 12.5-fold ERK1/2 activation respectively, that was
significantly higher than that observed for RET-WT (fivefold). Increased levels
of STAT1 and TCF4 activation were only observed for RET Arg886Trp (2.5- and
3-fold versus 1.2- and 2-fold in RET-WT respectively). The three RET variants
analyzed here were sensitive to treatment with sorafenib. In conclusion, our
results allow to classify previously uncharacterized RET genotypes, which may be 
of use to define follow-up and therapeutic regimens.

PMID: 21551259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Genet. 2011 Nov;130(5):645-55. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0999-4. Epub 2011 May 
5.

Neurologic and ocular phenotype in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and a zebrafish model.

Brockschmidt A(1), Filippi A, Charbel Issa P, Nelles M, Urbach H, Eter N, Driever
W, Weber RG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.

In this study, we performed an in-depth analysis of the neurologic and
ophthalmologic phenotype in a patient with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), a
disorder characterized by severe mental and motor retardation, carrying a
uniallelic TCF4 deletion, and studied a zebrafish model. The PTHS-patient was
characterized by high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with diffusion 
tensor imaging to analyze the brain structurally, spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography to visualize the retinal layers, and electroretinography to 
evaluate retinal function. A zebrafish model was generated by knockdown of
tcf4-function by injection of morpholino antisense oligos into zebrafish embryos 
and the morphant phenotype was characterized for expression of neural
differentiation genes neurog1, ascl1b, pax6a, zic1, atoh1a, atoh2b. Data from
PTHS-patient and zebrafish morphants were compared. While a cerebral MRI-scan
showed markedly delayed myelination and ventriculomegaly in the 1-year-old
PTHS-patient, no structural cerebral anomalies including no white matter tract
alterations were detected at 9 years of age. Structural ocular examinations
showed highly myopic eyes and an increase in ocular length, while retinal layers 
were normal. Knockdown of tcf4-function in zebrafish embryos resulted in a
developmental delay or defects in terminal differentiation of brain and eyes,
small eyes with a relative increase in ocular length and an enlargement of the
hindbrain ventricle. In summary, tcf4-knockdown in zebrafish embryos does not
seem to affect early neural patterning and regionalization of the forebrain, but 
may be involved in later aspects of neurogenesis and differentiation. We provide 
evidence for a role of TCF4/E2-2 in ocular growth control in PTHS-patients and
the zebrafish model.

PMID: 21544580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Neurosci. 2011 May 4;31(18):6684-91. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0526-11.2011.

The schizophrenia risk allele C of the TCF4 rs9960767 polymorphism disrupts
sensorimotor gating in schizophrenia spectrum and healthy volunteers.

Quednow BB(1), Ettinger U, Mössner R, Rujescu D, Giegling I, Collier DA,
Schmechtig A, Kühn KU, Möller HJ, Maier W, Wagner M, Kumari V.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital of Psychiatry, Division of Experimental and Clinical
Pharmacopsychology, University of Zurich, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland.
quednow@bli.uzh.ch

In a large-scale meta-analysis, it has been recently shown that the transcription
factor 4 (TCF4) gene is among the most prominent susceptibility genes for
schizophrenia. Moreover, transgenic mice overexpressing TCF4 in the brain display
a reduction of sensorimotor gating measured by prepulse inhibition (PPI) of the
acoustic startle response (ASR). PPI is heritable and has been established as an 
important translational endophenotype of schizophrenia. We therefore investigated
the impact of the schizophrenia susceptibility gene TCF4 (rs9960767) on
sensorimotor gating of the ASR in healthy humans and in patients with a
schizophrenia spectrum disorder. We assessed PPI, startle reactivity, and
habituation of the ASR in two independent samples. The first sample consisted of 
107 healthy volunteers from London, UK. The second sample was a schizophrenia
spectrum group (n = 113) of 73 schizophrenia patients and 40 individuals at high 
risk for schizophrenia from Bonn, Germany (total sample n = 220). In both
samples, PPI was strongly decreased in carriers of the schizophrenia risk allele 
C of the TCF4 gene (meta-analysis across both samples: p = 0.00002), whereas
startle reactivity and habituation were unaffected by TCF4 genotype. Sensorimotor
gating is modulated by TCF4 genotype, indicating an influential role of TCF4 gene
variations in the development of early information-processing deficits in
schizophrenia.

PMID: 21543597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Mar;23(3):239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.11.020. Epub
2011 May 2.

Dietary saturated fat, gender and genetic variation at the TCF7L2 locus predict
the development of metabolic syndrome.

Phillips CM(1), Goumidi L, Bertrais S, Field MR, McManus R, Hercberg S, Lairon D,
Planells R, Roche HM.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrigenomics Research Group, UCD School of Public Health and Population
Science, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is the strongest genetic determinant of
type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and insulin-related phenotypes to date. Dietary fat is a
key environmental factor which may interact with genotype to affect risk of
metabolic syndrome (MetS) and T2DM. This study investigated the relationship
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, insulin sensitivity/resistance and
MetS in the LIPGENE-SU.VI.MAX study of MetS cases and matched controls (n=1754)
and determined potential interactions with dietary fat intake. Female minor T
allele carriers of rs7903146 had increased MetS risk (odds ratio [OR] 1.66,
confidence interval [CI] 1.02-2.70, P=.04) and displayed elevated insulin
concentrations (P=.005), impaired insulin sensitivity (P=.011), increased
abdominal obesity (P=.008) and body mass index (P=.001) and higher blood pressure
(P<.05) compared to the CC homozygotes. Metabolic syndrome risk was also
modulated by dietary saturated fat (SFA) intake (P=.035 for interaction). High
dietary SFA intake (=15.5% energy) exacerbated MetS risk (OR 2.35, 95% CI
1.29-4.27, P=.005) and was associated with further impaired insulin sensitivity
in the T allele carriers relative to the CC homozygotes (P=.025) and particularly
to the T allele carriers with the lowest SFA intake (P=.008). No significant
genotype effect on MetS risk or insulin sensitivity was evident among low-SFA
consumers. In conclusion, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism influences MetS risk,
which is augmented by both gender and dietary SFA intake, suggesting novel
gene-diet-gender interactions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21543200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):115-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.012. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

Functional analyses of vertebrate TCF proteins in C. elegans embryos.

Robertson SM(1), Lo MC, Odom R, Yang XD, Medina J, Huang S, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA

In the canonical Wnt pathway, signaling results in the stabilization and
increased levels of ß-catenin in responding cells. ß-catenin then enters the
nucleus, functioning as a coactivator for the Wnt effector, TCF/LEF protein. In
the absence of Wnt signaling, TCF is complexed with corepressors, together
repressing Wnt target genes. In C. elegans, Wnt signaling specifies the E
blastomere to become the endoderm precursor. Activation of endoderm genes in E
requires not only an increase in ß-catenin level, but a concomitant decrease in
the nuclear level of POP-1, the sole C. elegans TCF. A decrease in nuclear POP-1 
levels requires Wnt-induced phosphorylation of POP-1 and 14-3-3 protein-mediated 
nuclear export. Nuclear POP-1 levels remain high in the sister cell of E, MS,
where POP-1 represses the expression of endoderm genes. Here we express three
vertebrate TCF proteins (human TCF4, mouse LEF1 and Xenopus TCF3) in C. elegans
embryos and compare their localization, repression and activation functions to
POP-1. All three TCFs are localized to the nucleus in C. elegans embryos, but
none undergoes Wnt-induced nuclear export. Although unable to undergo Wnt-induced
nuclear export, human TCF4, but not mouse LEF1 or Xenopus TCF3, can repress
endoderm genes in MS, in a manner very similar to POP-1. This repressive activity
requires that human TCF4 recognizes specific promoter sequences upstream of
endoderm genes and interacts with C. elegans corepressors. Domain swapping
identified two regions of POP-1 that are sufficient to confer nuclear asymmetry
to human TCF4 when swapped with its corresponding domains. Despite undergoing
Wnt-induced nuclear export, the human TCF4/POP-1 chimeric protein continues to
function as a repressor for endoderm genes in E, a result we attribute to the
inability of hTCF4 to bind to C. elegans ß-catenin. Our results reveal a higher
degree of species specificity among TCF proteins for coactivator interactions
than for corepressor interactions, and uncover a basic difference between how
POP-1 and human TCF4 steady state nuclear levels are regulated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3104061
PMID: 21539828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 20;6(4):e18044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018044.

Replication of TCF4 through association and linkage studies in late-onset Fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Li YJ(1), Minear MA, Rimmler J, Zhao B, Balajonda E, Hauser MA, Allingham RR,
Eghrari AO, Riazuddin SA, Katsanis N, Gottsch JD, Gregory SG, Klintworth GK,
Afshari NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America. yiju.li@duke.edu

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a common, late-onset disorder of
the corneal endothelium. Although progress has been made in understanding the
genetic basis of FECD by studying large families in which the phenotype is
transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion, a recently reported genome-wide
association study identified common alleles at a locus on chromosome 18 near TCF4
which confer susceptibility to FECD. Here, we report the findings of our
independent validation study for TCF4 using the largest FECD dataset to date (450
FECD cases and 340 normal controls). Logistic regression with sex as a covariate 
was performed for three genetic models: dominant (DOM), additive (ADD), and
recessive (REC). We found significant association with rs613872, the target
marker reported by Baratz et al.(2010), for all three genetic models (DOM:
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.33×10(-35); ADD: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.48×10(-30); REC: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.27×10(-6)). To strengthen the
association study, we also conducted a genome-wide linkage scan on 64 multiplex
families, composed primarily of affected sibling pairs (ASPs), using both
parametric and non-parametric two-point and multipoint analyses. The most
significant linkage region localizes to chromosome 18 from 69.94cM to 85.29cM,
with a peak multipoint HLOD<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.5 at rs1145315 (75.58cM) under the DOM model,
mapping 1.5 Mb proximal to rs613872. In summary, our study presents evidence to
support the role of the intronic TCF4 single nucleotide polymorphism rs613872 in 
late-onset FECD through both association and linkage studies.

PMCID: PMC3080358
PMID: 21533127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 20;6(4):e18966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018966.

Multiple Wnt/ß-catenin responsive enhancers align with the MYC promoter through
long-range chromatin loops.

Yochum GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, United States of America. 
gsy3@psu.edu

Inappropriate activation of c-Myc (MYC) gene expression by the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway is required for colorectal carcinogenesis. The elevated MYC
levels in colon cancer cells are attributed in part to ß-catenin/TCF4
transcription complexes that are assembled at proximal Wnt/ß-catenin responsive
enhancers (WREs). Recent studies suggest that additional WREs that control MYC
expression reside far upstream of the MYC transcription start site. Here, I
report the characterization of five novel WREs that localize to a region over 400
kb upstream from MYC. These WREs harbor nucleosomes with post-translational
histone modifications that demarcate enhancer and gene promoter regions. Using
quantitative chromatin conformation capture, I show that the distal WREs are
aligned with the MYC promoter through large chromatin loops. The chromatin loops 
are not restricted to colon cancer cells, but are also found in kidney epithelial
and lung fibroblast cell lines that lack de-regulated Wnt signaling and nuclear
ß-catenin/TCF4 complexes. While each chromatin loop is detected in quiescent
cells, the positioning of three of the five distal enhancers with the MYC
promoter is induced by serum mitogens. These findings suggest that the
architecture of the MYC promoter is comprised of distal elements that are
juxtaposed through large chromatin loops and that ß-catenin/TCF4 complexes
utilize this conformation to activate MYC expression in colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3080403
PMID: 21533051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 15;30(37):3979-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.129. Epub 2011 May 2.

E2F1 suppresses Wnt/ß-catenin activity through transactivation of ß-catenin
interacting protein ICAT.

Wu Z(1), Zheng S, Li Z, Tan J, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 
A*Star (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore.

Deregulation of the pRb/E2F or Wnt/ß-catenin pathway occurs frequently in human
cancers, which is often associated with inappropriate cell proliferation.
Although the oncogenic roles of pRb/E2F1 and Wnt/ß-catenin pathways have been
well studied, the functional interaction between the two pathways has only
recently been characterized. In particular, E2F1 has been recently reported to
negatively regulate Wnt/ß-catenin activity in human colorectal cancers, though
the mechanism underlying this regulation is not fully understood. Here we provide
evidence that ß-catenin interacting protein 1 (CTNNBIP1), also known as ICAT
(inhibitor of ß-catenin and TCF4), functions as a crucial node to mediate the
cross talk between E2F1 and ß-catenin signaling. We show that ICAT is a direct
transcriptional target of E2F1, and that activation of ICAT by E2F1 is required
for E2F1 to inhibit ß-catenin activity. This study provides a mechanistic insight
into the antagonistic interaction between E2F1 and ß-catenin signaling.

PMID: 21532622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Jun;15(6):399-405. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0199.
Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Association of genetic variations in TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2
with Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Tunisia.

Kifagi C(1), Makni K, Boudawara M, Mnif F, Hamza N, Abid M, Granier C, Ayadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Targets for Diagnosis and Therapeutic in the Human Pathology Research Unit,
Center of Biotechnology of Sfax, route Sidi Mansour km 6, Sfax, Tunisia.

AIM: In recent genome-wide association studies, genetic variants in TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2 were associated with risk for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM). We aimed at investigating the association of these
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with T2DM and defining their corresponding
allelic and genotypic combinations in the Tunisian population. We also tried to
determine the effect of R325W of SLC30A8 on the modeled structural properties of 
the protein.
METHODS: Five SNPs were genotyped in 331 T2DM Tunisian patients and 403 healthy
subjects by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. A
model of residues 318-366 of the SLC30A8 protein was built by homology modeling.
RESULTS: LOC387761 provided the strongest evidence for replication, where
rs7480010 presented a risk of 2.41 with T2DM, followed by rs1111875 in HHEX (odds
ratio=1.95) and rs13266634 in SLC30A8 (odds ratio=1.59). None of the two other
SNPs previously reported was associated. The highest risk of T2DM was 3.1,
obtained by the genotype combination of the three associated SNPs. Modeling of
the cytoplasmic part of the SLC30A8 protein showed that the R325W change might
affect the electrostatic potential of the SLC30A8 protein.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that the SLC30A8, HHEX, and LOC387761 are more likely to
represent the genuine signals of T2DM in the Tunisian population.

PMID: 21510814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Front Neuroanat. 2011 Apr 5;5:23. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2011.00023. eCollection
2011.

Comparison of Pretectal Genoarchitectonic Pattern between Quail and Chicken
Embryos.

Merchán P(1), Bardet SM, Puelles L, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Centre for Biomedical Research 
on Rare Diseases (CIBERER 736), School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, 
Spain.

Regionalization of the central nervous system is controlled by local networks of 
transcription factors that establish and maintain the identities of
neuroepithelial progenitor areas and their neuronal derivatives. The conserved
cerebral Bauplan of vertebrates must result essentially from conserved patterns
of developmentally expressed transcription factors. We have previously produced
detailed molecular maps for the alar plate of prosomere 1 (the pretectal region) 
in chicken (Ferran et al., 2007, 2008, 2009). Here we compare the early molecular
signature of the pretectum of two closely related avian species of the family
Phasianidae, Coturnix japonica (Japanese quail) and Gallus gallus (chicken),
aiming to test conservation of the described pattern at a microevolutionary
level. We studied the developmental pretectal expression of Bhlhb4, Dbx1, Ebf1,
Gata3, Gbx2, Lim1, Meis1, Meis2, Pax3, Pax6, Six3, Tal2, and Tcf7l2 (Tcf4) mRNA, 
using in situ hybridization, and PAX7 immunohistochemistry. The genoarchitectonic
profile of individual pretectal domains and strata was produced, using comparable
section planes. Remarkable conservation of the combinatorial genoarchitectonic
code was observed, fundamented in a tripartite anteroposterior subdivision.
However, we found that at corresponding developmental stages the pretectal region
of G. gallus was approximately 30% larger than that of C. japonica, but seemed
relatively less mature. Altogether, our results on a conserved genoarchitectonic 
pattern highlight the importance of early developmental gene networks that
causally underlie the production of homologous derivatives in these two
evolutionarily closely related species. The shared patterns probably apply to
sauropsids in general, as well as to more distantly related vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC3074437
PMID: 21503155  [PubMed]


227. Oncogene. 2011 Oct 6;30(40):4152-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.123. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

MSX2 is an oncogenic downstream target of activated WNT signaling in ovarian
endometrioid adenocarcinoma.

Zhai Y(1), Iura A, Yeasmin S, Wiese AB, Wu R, Feng Y, Fearon ER, Cho KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.

Ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas (OEAs) frequently exhibit constitutive
activation of canonical WNT signaling, usually as a result of oncogenic mutations
that stabilize and dysregulate the ß-catenin protein. In previous work, we used
microarray-based methods to compare gene expression in OEAs with and without
dysregulated ß-catenin as a strategy for identifying novel ß-catenin/TCF target
genes with important roles in ovarian cancer pathogenesis. Among the genes
highlighted by the microarray studies was MSX2, which encodes a homeobox
transcription factor. We found MSX2 expression was markedly increased in primary 
human and murine OEAs with dysregulated ß-catenin compared with OEAs with intact 
ß-catenin regulation. WNT pathway activation by WNT3a ligand or GSK3ß inhibitor
treatment potently induced MSX2 and ectopic expression of a dominant negative
form of TCF4 inhibited MSX2 expression in ovarian cancer cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that ß-catenin/TCF directly regulates
MSX2 expression via binding to TCF binding elements in multiple regions of the
MSX2 gene. Notably, ectopic MSX2 expression was found to promote neoplastic
transformation of the rodent RK3E model epithelial cell line and to enhance the
invasiveness of immortalized human ovarian epithelial cells in vitro and ovarian 
carcinoma cells in vivo. Inhibition of endogenous MSX2 expression in ovarian
endometrioid cancer cells carrying a ß-catenin mutation using shRNA approaches
inhibited neoplastic properties of the cells in vitro and in vivo. Expression of 
MSX2 in selected ovarian carcinoma cells induced changes suggestive of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), but based on analysis of ovarian cell
lines and primary tumor tissues, effects of MSX2 on EMT appear to be complex and 
context-dependent. Our findings indicate MSX2 is a direct downstream
transcriptional target of ß-catenin/TCF and has a key contributing role in the
cancer phenotype of OEAs carrying WNT/ß-catenin pathway defects.

PMCID: PMC3140605
PMID: 21499300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jun 10;317(10):1368-81. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.03.019. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

The Notch ligand Delta-like 1 integrates inputs from TGFbeta/Activin and Wnt
pathways.

Bordonaro M(1), Tewari S, Atamna W, Lazarova DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, The Commonwealth Medical College, 525 Pine
Street, Scranton, PA 18509, USA. mbordonaro@tcmedc.org

Unlike the well-characterized nuclear function of the Notch intracellular domain,
it has been difficult to identify a nuclear role for the ligands of Notch. Here
we provide evidence for the nuclear function of the Notch ligand Delta-like 1 in 
colon cancer (CC) cells exposed to butyrate. We demonstrate that the
intracellular domain of Delta-like 1 (Dll1icd) augments the activity of Wnt
signaling-dependent reporters and that of the promoter of the connective tissue
growth factor (CTGF) gene. Data suggest that Dll1icd upregulates CTGF promoter
activity through both direct and indirect mechanisms. The direct mechanism is
supported by co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous Smad2/3 proteins and Dll1 and
by chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses that revealed the occupancy of Dll1icd 
on CTGF promoter sequences containing a Smad binding element. The indirect
upregulation of CTGF expression by Dll1 is likely due to the ability of Dll1icd
to increase Wnt signaling, a pathway that targets CTGF. CTGF expression is
induced in butyrate-treated CC cells and results from clonal growth assays
support a role for CTGF in the cell growth-suppressive role of butyrate. In
conclusion, integration of the Notch, Wnt, and TGFbeta/Activin signaling pathways
is in part mediated by the interactions of Dll1 with Smad2/3 and Tcf4.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3097118
PMID: 21473864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oncogene. 2011 Aug 4;30(31):3440-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.54. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

miR-155 promotes macroscopic tumor formation yet inhibits tumor dissemination
from mammary fat pads to the lung by preventing EMT.

Xiang X(1), Zhuang X, Ju S, Zhang S, Jiang H, Mu J, Zhang L, Miller D, Grizzle W,
Zhang HG.

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. KY 40202, USA.

A micro-RNA, miR-155, is overexpressed in many types of cancer cells, including
breast cancer, and its role(s) in tumor metastasis has been studied on a very
limited basis. Tumor metastasis is a multi-step process with the last step in the
process being formation of macroscopic tumor in organs distant from the primary
tumor site. This step is the least studied. Here, we report that stable
expression of miR-155 in 4T1 breast tumor cells reduces significantly the
aggressiveness of tumor cell dissemination as a result of preventing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tumor cells in vivo. Further,
miR-155 directly suppresses the expression of the transcription factor TCF4,
which is an important regulator of EMT. However, when tumor cells are injected
directly into the bloodstream, miR-155 remarkably promotes macroscopic tumor
formation in the lung. Analysis of gene expression profiling identified a group
of genes that are associated with promoting macroscopic tumor formation in the
lung. Importantly, most of these genes are overexpressed in epithelial cells. Our
findings provide new insight into how miR-155 modulates the development of tumor 
metastasis. This study suggests that the location of tumor cells overexpressing
miR-155 is a critical factor: in mammary fat pads miR-155 prevents tumor
dissemination; whereas in the lung miR-155 apparently maintains the epithelial
phenotype of tumor cells that is critical for macroscopic tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC4139014
PMID: 21460854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Metab. 2011 Apr 6;13(4):413-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014.

TLE3 is a dual-function transcriptional coregulator of adipogenesis.

Villanueva CJ(1), Waki H, Godio C, Nielsen R, Chou WL, Vargas L, Wroblewski K,
Schmedt C, Chao LC, Boyadjian R, Mandrup S, Hevener A, Saez E, Tontonoz P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

PPAR<U+03B3> and Wnt signaling are central positive and negative regulators of
adipogenesis, respectively. Here we identify the groucho family member TLE3 as a 
transcriptional integrator of the PPAR<U+03B3> and Wnt pathways. TLE3 is a direct target
of PPAR<U+03B3> that participates in a feed-forward loop during adipocyte
differentiation. TLE3 enhances PPAR<U+03B3> activity and functions synergistically with 
PPAR<U+03B3> on its target promoters to stimulate adipogenesis. At the same time,
induction of TLE3 during differentiation provides a mechanism for termination of 
Wnt signaling. TLE3 antagonizes TCF4 activation by ß-catenin in preadipocytes,
thereby inhibiting Wnt target gene expression and reversing ß-catenin-dependent
repression of adipocyte gene expression. Transgenic expression of TLE3 in adipose
tissue in vivo mimics the effects of PPAR<U+03B3> agonist and ameliorates
high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance. Our data suggest that TLE3 acts as a
dual-function switch, driving the formation of both active and repressive
transcriptional complexes that facilitate the adipogenic program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3089971
PMID: 21459326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):19170-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189829. Epub 2011
Mar 30.

Zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK) modulates canonical Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling through interaction with Nemo-like kinase and T-cell factor 4
(NLK/TCF4).

Togi S(1), Ikeda O, Kamitani S, Nakasuji M, Sekine Y, Muromoto R, Nanbo A,
Oritani K, Kawai T, Akira S, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK) is a widely expressed serine/threonine
kinase that has been implicated in apoptosis and transcriptional regulation.
Here, we identified Nemo-like kinase (NLK) as a novel ZIPK-binding partner and
found that ZIPK regulates NLK-mediated repression of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. Indeed, siRNA-mediated reduction of endogenous ZIPK expression reduced
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Furthermore, ZIPK affected the formation of NLK-T-cell
factor 4 (TCF4) complex. Importantly, ZIPK siRNA treatment in human colon
carcinoma cells resulted in a reduction of ß-catenin/TCF-mediated gene expression
and cell growth. These results indicate that ZIPK may serve as a transcriptional 
regulator of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through interaction with NLK/TCF4.

PMCID: PMC3099730
PMID: 21454679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 Apr;136(14):675-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1274562. Epub
2011 Mar 29.

[Recent advances in type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in German]

Barthel A(1), Rietzsch H, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik III, Universitätsklinikum Carl-Gustav-Carus
der technischen Universität Dresden, Bochum. Andreas.Barthel@endokrinologikum.com

Currently, the oral glucose tolerance test remains the "gold standard" for
diagnosing type 2 diabetes, HbA (1c) being of subordinate value because of its
limited diagnostic sensitivity. Fully evaluated risk scores and questionnaires
are helpful in determining individual type 2 diabetes risk profiles and may prove
valuable tools in preventing this type of diabetes. Genetic studies support our
current understanding of the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. In the near
future genetic data may become useful in optimizing individual preventative and
therapeutic strategies. Recent data suggest that it is reasonable to adjust
therapeutic aims on the specific situation of individual patients for achieving
optimal results. The present therapeutic armamentarium for the treatment of type 
2 diabetes has been rapidly extended over the recent years. To deal with this
situation, pharmacovigilance is an essential tool to ensure drug safety and
improve existing therapeutic standards.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21448825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jan;39(1):17-23. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0705-6. Epub 2011 Mar
25.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, PCSK1 and
PCSK2) and proinsulin conversion in a Chinese population.

Zheng X(1), Ren W, Zhang S, Liu J, Li S, Li J, Yang P, He J, Su S, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, China.

TCF7L2 and SLC30A8 have been found to be associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) as well as with impaired proinsulin processing recently, enzymes encoded
by PCSK1 and PCSK2 are reported to play an important role in the process of
proinsulin conversion. To investigate whether the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of TCF7L2, SLC30A8, PCSK1 and PCSK2 were associated with T2DM as well as
with proinsulin conversion in a Han Chinese population from Chongqing. A
case-control study was performed in Han Chinese subjects with normal control
(n=152) and T2DM (n=227), we genotyped rs7903146 and rs11196218 at TCF7L2,
rs13266634 at SLC30A8, rs3811951 at PCSK1 and rs2021785 at PCSK2. Plasma levels
of proinsulin were measured with an Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
Genotype distribution and associations with T2DM and fasting levels of proinsulin
and proinsulin/insulin ratios were analyzed. We confirmed the association of risk
allele of rs2021785 at PCSK2 with type 2 diabetes also existed in Han Chinese
population [OR=1.4489 with 95% CI (1.0285, 2.0412), P=0.0335]. Rs13266634 at
SLC30A8 had a tendency to be associated with fasting plasma levels of proinsulin 
(P=0.0639 in additive model). We did not find the significant association between
other SNPs and T2DM or fasting levels of proinsulin or proinsulin/insulin ratios.
Our results provide evidence that the association of PCSK2 and T2DM was also
existed in Han Chinese population in Chongqing. We were underpowered to detect
the association between other SNPs and T2DM or proinsulin conversion.

PMID: 21437630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.

The Notch-2 gene is regulated by Wnt signaling in cultured colorectal cancer
cells.

Ungerbäck J(1), Elander N, Grünberg J, Sigvardsson M, Söderkvist P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköpings university, Linköping, Sweden.
jonas.ungerback@liu.se

BACKGROUND: Notch and Wnt pathways are key regulators of intestinal homeostasis
and alterations in these pathways may lead to the development of colorectal
cancer (CRC). In CRC the Apc/ß-catenin genes in the Wnt signaling pathway are
frequently mutated and active Notch signaling contributes to tumorigenesis by
keeping the epithelial cells in a proliferative state. These pathways are
simultaneously active in proliferative adenoma cells and a crosstalk between them
has previously been suggested in normal development as well as in cancer.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, in silico analysis of putative promoters
involved in transcriptional regulation of genes coding for proteins in the Notch 
signaling pathway revealed several putative LEF-1/TCF sites as potential targets 
for ß-catenin and canonical Wnt signaling. Further results from competitive
electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA) studies suggest binding of several
putative sites in Notch pathway gene promoters to in vitro translated
ß-catenin/Lef-1. Wild type (wt)-Apc negatively regulates ß-catenin. By induction 
of wt-Apc or ß-catenin silencing in HT29 cells, we observed that several genes in
the Notch pathway, including Notch-2, were downregulated. Finally, active Notch
signaling was verified in the Apc(Min/+) mouse model where Hes-1 mRNA levels were
found significantly upregulated in intestinal tumors compared to normal
intestinal mucosa. Luciferase assays showed an increased activity for the core
and proximal Notch-2 promoter upon co-transfection of HCT116 cells with high
expression recombinant Tcf-4, Lef-1 or ß-catenin.
CONCLUSIONS: In this paper, we identified Notch-2 as a novel target for
ß-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling. Furthermore our data supports the notion that 
additional genes in the Notch pathway might be transcriptionally regulated by Wnt
signaling in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3060910
PMID: 21437251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Pathology. 2011 Apr;43(3):220-7. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e328344e391.

A gene signature distinguishing CD133hi from CD133- colorectal cancer cells:
essential role for EGR1 and downstream factors.

Ernst A(1), Aigner M, Nakata S, Engel F, Schlotter M, Kloor M, Brand K, Schmitt
S, Steinert G, Rahbari N, Koch M, Radlwimmer B, Weitz J, Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. aurelie.ernst@ki.se

AIMS: In colorectal cancer (CRC), CD133 expression is an independent prognostic
marker associated with adverse clinical outcome. The CD133 epitope AC133 allowed 
isolating stem cells from normal and cancerous tissues, although its use in colon
was questioned. We aimed to identify differences between AC133 and AC133 cells.
METHODS: We analysed the gene expression profiles of EpCAM/CEA/AC133 and
EpCAM/CEA/AC133 cells from primary CRC and liver metastasis tissues (n = 5).
Immunohistochemistry confirmed these results in a validation set.
RESULTS: We identified 68 genes differentially expressed between both
populations, including genes of notorious importance in CRC pathogenesis, and
several candidates not previously shown to play a major role in CRC. Notably,
EGR1 belonged to the most highly expressed genes in AC133 cells. In the
validation set, the presence of EGR1 and CD133 correlated (r = 0.625). Since EGR1
regulates Wnt through up-regulation of TCF4, which induces stem cell marker LGR5,
the potential association between LGR5, EGR1 and CD133 was investigated. The
presence of LGR5 correlated with the presence of EGR1 and CD133. Strong signals
for LGR5 were detected throughout tumour invasion fronts.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggests a connection between CD133 and EGR1 and
emphasises the importance of the EGR1/TCF4/CD133/LGR5 network in CRC.

PMID: 21436631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 15;6(3):e17978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017978.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are linked to diabetic coronary
atherosclerosis.

Muendlein A(1), Saely CH, Geller-Rhomberg S, Sonderegger G, Rein P, Winder T,
Beer S, Vonbank A, Drexel H.

Author information: 
(1)Vorarlberg Institute for Vascular Investigation and Treatment, Feldkirch,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery disease (CAD) shares common risk factors with type 2 
diabetes (T2DM). Variations in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene,
particularly rs7903146, increase T2DM risk. Potential links between genetic
variants of the TCF7L2 locus and coronary atherosclerosis are uncertain. We
therefore investigated the association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and
angiographically determined CAD in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genotyped TCF7L2 variants rs7903146,
rs12255372, and rs11196205 in a cross-sectional study including 1,650 consecutive
patients undergoing coronary angiography for the evaluation of established or
suspected stable CAD. Significant CAD was diagnosed in the presence of coronary
stenoses =50%. Variant rs7903146 in the total study cohort was significantly
associated with significant CAD (adjusted additive OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29 [1.09-1.53];
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003). This association was strong and significant in T2DM patients
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>393; OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.91 [1.32-2.75]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) but not in non-diabetic subjects
(OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.09 [0.90-1.33]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.370). The interaction risk allele by T2DM was
significant (p(interaction)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002), indicating a significantly stronger impact 
of the polymorphism on CAD in T2DM patients than in non-diabetic subjects. TCF7L2
polymorphisms rs12255372 and rs11196205 were also significantly associated with
CAD in diabetic patients (adjusted additive OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.90 [1.31-2.74]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001 and 
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.75 [1.22-2.50]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002, respectively). Further, haplotype analysis
demonstrated that haplotypes including the rare alleles of all investigated
variants were significantly associated with CAD in the whole cohort as well as in
diabetic subjects (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.22 [1.04-1.43]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.013 and OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.67 [1.19-2.22];
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that TCF7L2 variants rs7903146
rs12255372, and rs11196205 are significantly associated with angiographically
diagnosed CAD, specifically in patients with T2DM. TCF7L2 therefore appears as a 
genetic link between diabetes and atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3058059
PMID: 21423583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1952-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.101. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

System level changes in gene expression in maturing bladder mucosa.

Dozmorov M(1), Stone R 2nd, Clifford JL, Sabichi AL, Engles CD, Hauser PJ, Culkin
DJ, Hurst RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, Oklahoma University Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

PURPOSE: Bladder problems clinically present early in life as birth defects that 
often lead to kidney failure and late in life as overactive bladder, incontinence
and related disorders. We investigated the transcriptome of mouse bladder mucosa 
at juvenile and adult stages by microarray to identify the pathways associated
with normal, healthy growth and maturation. We hypothesized that understanding
these pathways could be key to achieving bladder regeneration or reawakening
normal function in the elderly population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RNA was isolated from the mucosa at 3, 6, 20 and 30 weeks 
postnatally. Affymetrix® Mouse 430 v2 arrays were used to profile the expression 
of approximately 45,000 genes. The software program Statistical Analysis of
Microarrays was used to identify genes that significantly changed during the time
course.
RESULTS: No genes were significantly up-regulated during maturation. However, 66 
well annotated genes demonstrated a statistically significant downward trend, of 
which 10 of 10 were confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The main
functions affected by age were transcription, regulation of cellular processes,
neurogenesis, blood vessel development and cell differentiation. Notable genes
included collagens, Mmp2, SPARC and several transcription factors, including
Crebbp, Runx1, Klf9, Mef2c, Nrp1, Pex1 and Tcf4. These molecules were indirectly 
regulated by inferred Tgfb1 and Egf growth factors. Analysis of gene promoter
regions for overrepresented upstream transcription factor binding sites
identified specificity protein 1 and epidermal growth factor receptor-specific
transcription factor as potentially major transcriptional regulators driving
maturation related changes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify a coherent set of genes that appear to be
down-regulated during urothelial maturation. These genes may represent an
attractive target for bladder regeneration or for treating age related loss of
function.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3407683
PMID: 21421225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 1;70(1):59-63. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.01.031.
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

At-risk variant in TCF7L2 for type II diabetes increases risk of schizophrenia.

Hansen T(1), Ingason A, Djurovic S, Melle I, Fenger M, Gustafsson O, Jakobsen KD,
Rasmussen HB, Tosato S, Rietschel M, Frank J, Owen M, Bonetto C, Suvisaari J,
Thygesen JH, Pétursson H, Lönnqvist J, Sigurdsson E, Giegling I, Craddock N,
O'Donovan MC, Ruggeri M, Cichon S, Ophoff RA, Pietiläinen O, Peltonen L, Nöthen
MM, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Collier DA, Andreassen OA, Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans, Copenhagen University Hospital, Research
Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark; Copenhagen University,
Center for Pharmacogenomics, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is associated with increased risk of type II diabetes
and metabolic disorders. However, it is unclear whether this comorbidity reflects
shared genetic risk factors, at-risk lifestyle, or side effects of antipsychotic 
medication.
METHODS: Eleven known risk variants of type II diabetes were genotyped in
patients with schizophrenia in a sample of 410 Danish patients, each matched with
two healthy control subjects on sex, birth year, and month. Replication was
carried out in a large multinational European sample of 4089 patients with
schizophrenia and 17,597 controls (SGENE+) using Mantel-Haenszel test.
RESULTS: One type II diabetes at-risk allele located in TCF7L2, rs7903146 [T],
was associated with schizophrenia in the discovery sample (p = .0052) and in the 
replication with an odds ratio of 1.07 (95% confidence interval 1.01-1.14, p =
.033).
CONCLUSION: The association reported here with a well-known diabetes variant
suggests that the observed comorbidity is partially caused by genetic risk
variants. This study also demonstrates how genetic studies can successfully
examine an epidemiologically derived hypothesis of comorbidity.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21414605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Physiol Genomics. 2011 May 1;43(10):640-54. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00213.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Integrated microRNA and mRNA expression profiling in a rat colon carcinogenesis
model: effect of a chemo-protective diet.

Shah MS(1), Schwartz SL, Zhao C, Davidson LA, Zhou B, Lupton JR, Ivanov I,
Chapkin RS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Integrative Nutrition & Complex Diseases, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, USA.

We have recently demonstrated that nutritional bioactives (fish oil and pectin)
modulate microRNA molecular switches in the colon. Since integrated analysis of
microRNA and mRNA expression at an early stage of colon cancer development is
lacking, in this study, four computational approaches were utilized to test the
hypothesis that microRNAs and their posttranscriptionally regulated mRNA targets,
i.e., both total mRNAs and actively translated mRNA transcripts, are
differentially modulated by carcinogen and diet treatment. Sprague-Dawley rats
were fed diets containing corn oil ± fish oil with pectin ± cellulose and
injected with azoxymethane or saline (control). Colonic mucosa was assayed at an 
early time of cancer progression, and global gene set enrichment analysis was
used to obtain those microRNAs significantly enriched by the change in expression
of their putative target genes. In addition, cumulative distribution function
plots and functional network analyses were used to evaluate the impact of diet
and carcinogen combination on mRNA levels induced via microRNA alterations.
Finally, linear discriminant analysis was used to identify the best single-,
two-, and three-microRNA combinations for classifying dietary effects and colon
tumor development. We demonstrate that polysomal profiling is tightly related to 
microRNA changes when compared with total mRNA profiling. In addition, diet and
carcinogen exposure modulated a number of microRNAs (miR-16, miR-19b, miR-21,
miR26b, miR27b, miR-93, and miR-203) linked to canonical oncogenic signaling
pathways. Complementary gene expression analyses showed that oncogenic PTK2B,
PDE4B, and TCF4 were suppressed by the chemoprotective diet at both the mRNA and 
protein levels.

PMCID: PMC3110886
PMID: 21406606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2011 Mar;44(3):240-4. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and incident glucose
intolerance in Japanese-Brazilians.

Franco LF(1), Crispim F, Pereira AC, Moisés RS; Japanese-Brazilian Diabetes Study
Group.

Collaborators: Hirai A, Hirai AT, Harima H, Osiro K, Iunes M, Kikuchi M, Ferreira
SR, Gimeno SG, Franco LJ, Matsumura L, Moisés RS, Cardoso MA, de Barros N Jr,
Tomita N, Wakisaka K, Chaim R.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Common variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
found to be associated with type 2 diabetes in different ethnic groups. The
Japanese-Brazilian population has one of the highest prevalence rates of
diabetes. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to assess whether two
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF7L2, rs7903146 and rs12255372, could
predict the development of glucose intolerance in Japanese-Brazilians. In a
population-based 7-year prospective study, we genotyped 222 individuals (72 males
and 150 females, aged 56.2 ± 10.5 years) with normal glucose tolerance at
baseline. In the study population, we found that the minor allele frequency was
0.05 for SNP rs7903146 and 0.03 for SNP rs12255372. No significant allele or
genotype association with glucose intolerance incidence was found for either SNP.
Haplotypes were constructed with these two SNPs and three haplotypes were
defined: CG (frequency: 0.94), TT (frequency = 0.027) and TG (frequency = 0.026).
None of the haplotypes provided evidence for association with the incidence of
glucose intolerance. Despite no associations between incidence of glucose
intolerance and SNPs of the TCF7L2 gene in Japanese-Brazilians, we found that
carriers of the CT genotype for rs7903146 had significantly lower insulin levels 
2 h after a 75-g glucose load than carriers of the CC genotype. In conclusion, in
Japanese-Brazilians, a population with a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes,
common TCF7L2 variants did not make major contributions to the incidence of
glucose tolerance abnormalities.

PMID: 21399856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nature. 2011 Mar 10;471(7337):235-9. doi: 10.1038/nature09727.

CREBBP mutations in relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Mullighan CG(1), Zhang J, Kasper LH, Lerach S, Payne-Turner D, Phillips LA,
Heatley SL, Holmfeldt L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Buetow KH, Pui CH, Baker SD,
Brindle PK, Downing JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is a leading cause of death due to
disease in young people, but the biological determinants of treatment failure
remain poorly understood. Recent genome-wide profiling of structural DNA
alterations in ALL have identified multiple submicroscopic somatic mutations
targeting key cellular pathways, and have demonstrated substantial evolution in
genetic alterations from diagnosis to relapse. However, DNA sequence mutations in
ALL have not been analysed in detail. To identify novel mutations in relapsed
ALL, we resequenced 300 genes in matched diagnosis and relapse samples from 23
patients with ALL. This identified 52 somatic non-synonymous mutations in 32
genes, many of which were novel, including the transcriptional coactivators
CREBBP and NCOR1, the transcription factors ERG, SPI1, TCF4 and TCF7L2,
components of the Ras signalling pathway, histone genes, genes involved in
histone modification (CREBBP and CTCF), and genes previously shown to be targets 
of recurring DNA copy number alteration in ALL. Analysis of an extended cohort of
71 diagnosis-relapse cases and 270 acute leukaemia cases that did not relapse
found that 18.3% of relapse cases had sequence or deletion mutations of CREBBP,
which encodes the transcriptional coactivator and histone acetyltransferase
CREB-binding protein (CREBBP, also known as CBP). The mutations were either
present at diagnosis or acquired at relapse, and resulted in truncated alleles or
deleterious substitutions in conserved residues of the histone acetyltransferase 
domain. Functionally, the mutations impaired histone acetylation and
transcriptional regulation of CREBBP targets, including glucocorticoid responsive
genes. Several mutations acquired at relapse were detected in subclones at
diagnosis, suggesting that the mutations may confer resistance to therapy. These 
results extend the landscape of genetic alterations in leukaemia, and identify
mutations targeting transcriptional and epigenetic regulation as a mechanism of
resistance in ALL.

PMCID: PMC3076610
PMID: 21390130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Hum Hered. 2011;71(1):50-8. doi: 10.1159/000323567. Epub 2011 Mar 10.

A principal components-based clustering method to identify variants associated
with complex traits.

Black MH(1), Watanabe RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-9011, USA.

BACKGROUND: Multivariate methods ranging from joint SNP to principal components
analysis (PCA) have been developed for testing multiple markers in a region for
association with disease and disease-related traits. However, these methods
suffer from low power and/or the inability to identify the subset of markers
contributing to evidence for association under various scenarios.
METHODS: We introduce orthoblique principal components-based clustering (OPCC) as
an alternative approach to identify specific subsets of markers showing
association with a quantitative outcome of interest. We demonstrate the utility
of OPCC using simulation studies and an example from the literature on type 2
diabetes.
RESULTS: Compared to traditional methods, OPCC has similar or improved power
under various scenarios of linkage disequilibrium structure and genotype
availability. Most importantly, our simulations show how OPCC accurately parses
large numbers of markers to a subset containing the causal variant or its proxy.
CONCLUSION: OPCC is a powerful and efficient data reduction method for detecting 
associations between gene variants and disease-related traits. Unlike alternative
methodologies, OPCC has the ability to isolate the effect of causal SNP(s) from
among large sets of markers in a candidate region. Therefore, OPCC is an
improvement over PCA for testing multiple SNP associations with phenotypes of
interest.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3089426
PMID: 21389731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):18515-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.229252. Epub
2011 Mar 9.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 (FGFR-3) regulates expression of paneth cell 
lineage-specific genes in intestinal epithelial cells through both
TCF4/beta-catenin-dependent and -independent signaling pathways.

Brodrick B(1), Vidrich A, Porter E, Bradley L, Buzan JM, Cohn SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 (FGFR-3) expression in the developing
intestine is restricted to the undifferentiated epithelial cells within the lower
portion of the crypt. We previously showed that mice lacking functional FGFR-3
have a significant decrease in the number of Paneth cells in the small intestine.
Here, we used Caco2 cells to investigate whether FGFR-3 signaling can directly
modulate expression of Paneth cell differentiation markers through its effects on
TCF4/ß-catenin or through other signaling pathways downstream of this receptor.
Caco2 cells treated with FGFR-3 ligands or expressing FGFR-3(K650E), a
constitutively active mutant, resulted in a significantly increased expression of
genes characteristic of mature Paneth cells, including human a-defensins 5 and 6 
(HD5 and HD6) and Paneth cell lysozyme, whereas enterocytic differentiation
markers were reduced. Activation of FGFR-3 signaling sustained high levels of
ß-catenin mRNA expression, leading to increased TCF4/ß-catenin-regulated
transcriptional activity in Caco2 cells. Sustained activity of the TCF4/ß-catenin
pathway was required for the induction of Paneth cell markers. Activation of the 
MAPK pathway by FGFR-3 is also required for the induction of Paneth cell markers 
in addition to and independent of the effect of FGFR-3 on TCF4/ß-catenin
activity. These studies suggest that coordinate activation of multiple
independent signaling pathways downstream of FGFR-3 is involved in regulation of 
Paneth cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3099668
PMID: 21388956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 15;17(6):1317-30. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2320.
Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Involvement of the TGF-beta and beta-catenin pathways in pelvic lymph node
metastasis in early-stage cervical cancer.

Noordhuis MG(1), Fehrmann RS, Wisman GB, Nijhuis ER, van Zanden JJ, Moerland PD, 
Ver Loren van Themaat E, Volders HH, Kok M, ten Hoor KA, Hollema H, de Vries EG, 
de Bock GH, van der Zee AG, Schuuring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Presence of pelvic lymph node metastases is the main prognostic factor
in early-stage cervical cancer patients, primarily treated with surgery. Aim of
this study was to identify cellular tumor pathways associated with pelvic lymph
node metastasis in early-stage cervical cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression profiles (Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0) of 20
patients with negative (N(0)) and 19 with positive lymph nodes (N(+)), were
compared with gene sets that represent all 285 presently available pathway
signatures. Validation immunostaining of tumors of 274 consecutive early-stage
cervical cancer patients was performed for representatives of the identified
pathways.
RESULTS: Analysis of 285 pathways resulted in identification of five pathways
(TGF-ß, NFAT, ALK, BAD, and PAR1) that were dysregulated in the N(0), and two
pathways (ß-catenin and Glycosphingolipid Biosynthesis Neo Lactoseries) in the
N(+) group. Class comparison analysis revealed that five of 149 genes that were
most significantly differentially expressed between N(0) and N(+) tumors (P <
0.001) were involved in ß-catenin signaling (TCF4, CTNNAL1, CTNND1/p120, DKK3,
and WNT5a). Immunohistochemical validation of two well-known cellular tumor
pathways (TGF-ß and ß-catenin) confirmed that the TGF-ß pathway (positivity of
Smad4) was related to N(0) (OR: 0.20, 95% CI: 0.06-0.66) and the ß-catenin
pathway (p120 positivity) to N(+) (OR: 1.79, 95%CI: 1.05-3.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides new, validated insights in the molecular
mechanism of lymph node metastasis in cervical cancer. Pathway analysis of the
microarray expression profile suggested that the TGF-ß and p120-associated
noncanonical ß-catenin pathways are important in pelvic lymph node metastasis in 
early-stage cervical cancer.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21385933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2011 Jul;27(5):499-505. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1194.

Association of TCF7L2 SNPs with age at onset of type 2 diabetes and
proinsulin/insulin ratio but not with glucagon-like peptide 1.

Silbernagel G(1), Renner W, Grammer TB, Hügl SR, Bertram J, Kleber ME, Hoffmann
MM, Winkelmann BR, März W, Boehm BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease, and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Variants in TCF7L2 have been associated with the age at onset of type
2 diabetes in Mexican Americans. However, there is a lack of data on this
relationship in Caucasians. Furthermore, risk alleles in TCF7L2 have been
suggested to account for decreased conversion of proinsulin to insulin and
decreased expression of GLP-1. We investigated the effect of the allelic variants
rs1225537 and rs7903146 in TCF7L2 on the age at onset of type 2 diabetes, the
plasma concentrations of proinsulin and GLP-1, and the ratio of proinsulin to
insulin in a German cohort.
METHODS: We studied 3185 participants of the LUdwigshafen RIsk and Cardiovascular
health (LURIC) study. Among these, 1021 subjects had type 2 diabetes. Data on age
at onset of diabetes were available in 925 subjects. OGTTs were performed in a
subgroup not previously known to have diabetes.
RESULTS: Carriers of the risk alleles in rs1225537 and rs7901346 had increased
risk of type 2 diabetes and elevated HbA(1c) (all p < 0.001). The risk alleles
were also associated with early onset of type 2 diabetes, decreased insulin
secretion and markedly increased proinsulin and proinsulin to insulin ratio (all 
p < 0.03). GLP-1 was not significantly related to the TCF7L2 genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that TCF7L2 variants are associated with an
early age of onset of type 2 diabetes in Caucasians and affects the conversion of
proinsulin to insulin. However, TCF7L2 is not consistently associated with
fasting GLP-1.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21384500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2011 Jun;6(2):247-59. doi: 10.1007/s11481-011-9266-7.
Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Role of ß-catenin/TCF-4 signaling in HIV replication and pathogenesis: insights
to informing novel anti-HIV molecular therapeutics.

Henderson LJ(1), Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology and Center for AIDS Research, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

A greater understanding of the interaction between HIV and host signaling
pathways that restrict virus production may lead to new methods to purge virus
from latent reservoirs and enhance survival/function of cells targeted by HIV.
This review highlights the role of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway as a host factor
that represses HIV replication in multiple targets, especially those relevant to 
HIV in the central nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3836044
PMID: 21384147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4914-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1102300108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

T-cell factor 4 functions as a tumor suppressor whose disruption modulates colon 
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Angus-Hill ML(1), Elbert KM, Hidalgo J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, and The Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway plays multiple and diverse roles in development by
regulating gene expression via T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor
(Tcf/Lef) DNA binding factors. Misregulation of this pathway is thought to
initiate colon adenoma formation. It is controversial whether Tcf4 (Tcf7L2)
functions as an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in colon carcinogenesis. We
show here that Tcf4 haploinsufficiency results in colon tumor formation in a
mouse tumor model that normally only develops small intestinal tumors. Further,
we show that loss of Tcf4 early in development and in adult colon results in
increased cell proliferation. These findings strongly suggest that Tcf4 normally 
modulates proliferation of the colonic epithelium and that disruption of Tcf4
activity increases proliferation, leading to colon tumorigenesis. Taken together,
our in vivo studies favor a tumor suppressor function for Tcf4.

PMCID: PMC3064334
PMID: 21383188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1906-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr072. Epub 2011 Feb
28.

TCF7L2 splice variants have distinct effects on beta-cell turnover and function.

Le Bacquer O(1), Shu L, Marchand M, Neve B, Paroni F, Kerr Conte J, Pattou F,
Froguel P, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Univ Lille Nord de France,
France.

Type 2 diabetes manifests when the ß-cell fails to secrete sufficient amounts of 
insulin to maintain normoglycemia and undergoes apoptosis. The disease
progression results from an interplay of environmental factors and genetic
predisposition. Polymorphisms in T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) strongly
correlate with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). While TCF7L2 mRNA is upregulated 
in islets in diabetes, protein levels are downregulated. The loss of TCF7L2
induces impaired function and apoptosis. By analyzing human isolated islets, we
provide three explanations for this opposite regulation and the mechanisms of
TCF7L2 on ß-cell function and survival. (i) We found TCF7L2 transcripts in the
human ß-cell, which had opposite effects on ß-cell survival, function and Wnt
signaling activation. While TCF7L2 clone B1, which lacks exons 13, 14, 15 and 16 
induced ß-cell apoptosis, impaired function and inhibited glucagon-like peptide 1
response and downstream targets of Wnt signaling, clones B3 and B7 which both
contain exon 13, improved ß-cell survival and function and activated Wnt
signaling. (ii) TCF7L2 mRNA is extremely unstable and is rapidly degraded under
pro-diabetic conditions and (iii) TCF7L2 depletion in islets induced activation
of glycogen synthase kinase 3-ß, but this was independent of endoplasmic
reticulum stress. We demonstrated function-specific transcripts of TCF7L2, which 
possessed distinct physiological and pathophysiological effects on the ß-cell.
The presence of deleterious TCF7L2 splice variants may be a mechanism of ß-cell
failure in T2DM.

PMID: 21357677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Feb 24;12:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-30.

TCF7L2 and therapeutic response to sulfonylureas in patients with type 2
diabetes.

Holstein A(1), Hahn M, Körner A, Stumvoll M, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Variants in the TCF7L2 have been shown to be associated with an
increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Since the association with diabetes
could be explained by effects on insulin secretion, we investigated whether
patients with diabetes risk alleles at rs7903146 might have an altered
hypoglycaemic response to sulfonylureas (SUs).
METHODS: We recruited 189 patients with T2D being treated with SUs and determined
the rs7903146 diabetes risk genotype. We used a logistic regression with
secondary SU failure defined as an A1C =7.0% after 6 months of SU treatment.
RESULTS: In univariate regression analyses, TCF7L2 genotype was the only
predictor of SU treatment failure. The rs7903146 T allele was significantly more 
frequent in the group of patients who failed to respond to SU (36%) than in the
control group (26%) [P = 0.046; odds ratio (OR): 1.57 (1.01-2.45) in an additive 
mode of inheritance].
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that patients with diabetes risk alleles in TCF7L2 
have an altered hypoglycaemic response to SUs resulting in earlier secondary
failure.

PMCID: PMC3051886
PMID: 21349175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):1007-12. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.33. Epub 2011 Feb 
22.

Expression of osteopontin coregulators in primary colorectal cancer and
associated liver metastases.

Mole DJ(1), O'Neill C, Hamilton P, Olabi B, Robinson V, Williams L, Diamond T,
El-Tanani M, Campbell FC.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Surgical Sciences (Surgery), The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9YL, Scotland, UK.

BACKGROUND: A transcription regulatory complex (TRC) that includes Ets1, Ets2,
PEA3 and ß-catenin/T-cell factors regulates osteopontin (OPN) that is implicated 
in colorectal cancer (CRC) dissemination. The consistency of OPN transcriptional 
control between primary CRC and metastases is unclear. This study investigates
expression and prognostic significance of the OPN-TRC in primary human CRC and
associated colorectal liver metastases (CRLM).
METHODS: Osteopontin-TRC factors were assayed by digital microscopy in 38 primary
CRCs and matched CRLM specimens and assessed against clinical prognosis.
RESULTS: In primary CRC, OPN expression intensity correlated with that of its
co-activators, PEA3 (r=0.600; P<0.01), Ets1 (r=0.552; P<0.01), Ets2 (r=0.521;
P<0.01) and had prognostic significance. Osteopontin intensity in primary CRC
inversely correlated with the interval between diagnosis and resection of CRLM.
Overall OPN intensity was lower in CRLM than primary CRC and correlations with
co-activators were weaker, for example, Ets1 (P=0.047), PEA3 (P=0.022) or
nonsignificant (Ets2). The ratio of OPN expression in CRLM vs primary CRC had
prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: This study supports transcriptional control of OPN by known
coregulators in both primary and secondary CRC. Weaker associations in CRLM
suggest involvement of other unknown factors possibly from the liver
microenvironment or resulting from additional genetic or epigenetic changes that 
drive tumour metastatic capability in OPN transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC3065273
PMID: 21343932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Gene. 2011 Jun 15;479(1-2):16-28. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.02.002. Epub 2011 Feb 
16.

ß-Catenin independent cross-control between the estradiol and Wnt pathways in
osteoblasts.

McCarthy TL(1), Kallen CB, Centrella M.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Surgery, New Haven, CT,
06520-8041, USA. thomas.mccarthy@yale.edu

Osteoblasts are controlled by the individual and combined effects of systemic and
local growth regulators. Here we show functional and physical interactions
between estradiol (17ßE) and Wnt activated pathways in osteoblasts. 17ßE
increased gene promoter activity by the Wnt pathway transcriptional effector T
cell factor (TCF) in an estrogen receptor (ER) dependent way. This occurred
independently of its activity through traditional estrogen response elements and 
was not replicated by androgen receptor activation. 17ßE also increased the
stimulatory effect of LiCl on TCF activity, LiCl increased the stimulatory effect
of 17ßE through estrogen response elements, and both were further enhanced by a
noncanonical Wnt receptor agonist (WAg) that functions independently of ß-catenin
stabilization. In contrast to LiCl, WAg increased DNA synthesis and reduced
relative collagen synthesis and alkaline phosphatase activity in otherwise
untreated or 17ßE stimulated cells. In addition, WAg suppressed Runx2, osterix,
and alkaline phosphatase mRNA levels, and potently induced osteoprotegerin mRNA, 
whereas LiCl was ineffective alone and inhibitory in combination with 17ßE. A
definitive intersection between the 17ßE and Wnt pathways occurred at the protein
level, where ERa physically associated with TCF-4 independently of its ß-catenin 
binding domain. This interaction required ligand-dependent exposure of a TCF
binding region that mapped to ERa domain E and was further enhanced by Wnt
pathway activation. Our studies reveal highly focused co-regulatory effects
between the 17ßE and Wnt pathways in osteoblasts that involve activated ERa and
TCF-4 and downstream changes in gene expression, osteoblast proliferation, and
differentiated cell function.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3094493
PMID: 21335072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Res. 2011 May;21(5):730-40. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.30. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

A diterpenoid derivative 15-oxospiramilactone inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
and colon cancer cell tumorigenesis.

Wang W(1), Liu H, Wang S, Hao X, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is a highly conserved pathway in organism
evolution and regulates many biological processes. Aberrant activation of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is closely related to tumorigenesis. In order to 
identify potent small molecules to treat the over-activated Wnt
signaling-mediated cancer, such as colon cancer, we established a mammalian cell 
line-based reporter gene screening system. The screen revealed a diterpenoid
derivative, 15-oxospiramilactone (NC043) that inhibits Wnt3a or LiCl-stimulated
Top-flash reporter activity in HEK293T cells and growth of colon cancer cells,
SW480 and Caco-2. Treatment of SW480 cells with NC043 led to decreases in the
mRNA and/or protein expression of Wnt target genes Axin2, Cyclin D1 and Survivin 
, as well as decreases in the protein levels of Cdc25c and Cdc2. NC043 did not
affect the cytosol-nuclear distribution and protein level of soluble ß-catenin,
but decreased ß-catenin/TCF4 association in SW480 cells. Moreover, NC043
inhibited anchorage-independent growth and xenograft tumorigenesis of SW480
cells. Collectively these results demonstrate that NC043 is a novel small
molecule that inhibits canonical Wnt signaling downstream of ß-catenin stability 
and may be a potential compound for treating colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3203668
PMID: 21321609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Cancer. 2011 Feb 11;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-16.

Soluble Frizzled-7 receptor inhibits Wnt signaling and sensitizes hepatocellular 
carcinoma cells towards doxorubicin.

Wei W(1), Chua MS, Grepper S, So SK.

Author information: 
(1)Asian Liver Center, Department of Surgery, 1201 Welch Road, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

BACKGROUND: There are limited therapeutic options for hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), the most common liver malignancy worldwide. Recent studies have identified
the Frizzled-7 receptor (FZD7), important for activation of Wnt-mediated
signaling, as a potential therapeutic target for HCC and other cancers.
METHODS: We hypothesized that the extracellular domain of FZD7 (sFZD7) would be a
clinically more relevant therapeutic modality than previously studied approaches 
to target FZD7. We expressed and purified sFZD7 from E. coli, and tested its
functional activity to interact with Wnt3, its ability to inhibit Wnt3-mediated
signaling, and its potential for combinatorial therapy in HCC.
RESULTS: sFZD7 pulled down Wnt3 from Huh7 cells, and decreased ß-catenin/Tcf4
transcriptional activity in HCC cells. In vitro, sFZD7 dose-dependently decreased
viability of three HCC cell lines (HepG2, Hep40, and Huh7, all with high FZD7 and
Wnt3 mRNA), but had little effect on normal hepatocytes from three donors (all
with low level FZD7 and Wnt3 mRNA). When combined with doxorubicin, sFZD7
enhanced the growth inhibitory effects of doxorubicin against HCC cells in vitro,
and against Huh7 xenografts in vivo. Reduced expressions of c-Myc, cyclin D1, and
survivin were observed in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, sFZD7 altered the
levels of phosphorylated AKT and ERK1/2 induced by doxorubicin treatment in
vitro, suggesting that several critical pathways are involved in the
chemosensitizing effect of sFZD7.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that sFZD7 is a feasible therapeutic agent with specific 
activity, which can potentially be combined with other chemotherapeutic agents
for the improved management of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3050858
PMID: 21314951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):411-7. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9837-8. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Genetic variations in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene: association of
TCF7L2 rs12255372(G/T) or rs7903146(C/T) with breast cancer risk and
clinico-pathological parameters.

Naidu R(1), Yip CH, Taib NA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University Sunway Campus, Jalan
Lagoon Selatan, 46150, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
kdrakeshna@hotmail.com

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the association between TCF7L2
rs12255372(G/T) or rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism and breast cancer risk, and
clinico-pathologic characteristics of the patients. Genotyping of these
polymorphisms was performed on 387 breast cancer patients and 252 normal and
healthy women who had no history of any malignancy using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method in a
hospital-based Malaysian population. The allele (P = 0.033) frequency of
rs7903146 (T) polymorphism was significantly higher in the cancer patients than
normal individuals. No significant association was demonstrated between CT
(OR(adj) = 1.386; 95% CI, 0.985-1.949) or TT (OR(adj) = 1.579; 95% CI,
0.869-2.870) genotype and breast cancer risk. However, women who were carriers of
T allele (OR(adj) = 1.316; 95% CI, 1.022-1.695) or T allele genotype (OR(adj) =
1.419; 95% CI, 1.027-1.960) showed significant increased risk of breast cancer.
Women who were GT heterozygotes (OR(adj) = 1.329; 95% CI, 0.948-1.862) or TT
homozygotes (OR(adj) = 1.574; 95% CI, 0.829-2.987), and carriers of T allele
genotype (OR(adj) = 1.365; 95% CI, 0.989-1.883) or T allele (OR(adj) = 1.284; 95%
CI, 0.995-1.657) were not associated with breast cancer risk. The rs7903146(T)
allele genotype was significantly associated with nodal involvement (P = 0.003)
but rs12255372 (T) allele genotype was not associated with the clinico-pathologic
characteristics. In conclusion, our findings suggest that rs7903146 (T) variant
may elevate the risk of breast cancer, thus could be a potential candidate for
breast cancer susceptibility. The variant may also increase the metastatic
potential of the tumor.

PMID: 21301999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 May;43(5):751-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.01.018.
Epub 2011 Feb 1.

The ß-catenin/Tcf4/survivin signaling maintains a less differentiated phenotype
and high proliferative capacity of human corneal epithelial progenitor cells.

Lu R(1), Bian F, Zhang X, Qi H, Chuang EY, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

It is clear that the microenvironment or niche plays an important role in
determining the fate of stem cells: being stem cells or differentiated. However, 
the intrinsic pathways controlling the fate of adult stem cells in different
niches are largely unknown. This study was to explore the role of
ß-catenin/Tcf4/survivin signaling in determining the fate of human corneal
epithelial stem cells in different media. We observed that the low calcium
serum-free media, especially CnT-20, promoted proliferative capacity, colony
forming efficiency and stem cell-like phenotype of human corneal epithelial cells
(HCECs) when compared with the cells cultured in a high calcium serum-containing 
medium SHEM. Three key factors in Wnt signaling, ß-catenin, Tcf4 and survivin,
were found to be expressed higher by HCECs grown in CnT-20 than those cultured in
SHEM, as evaluated by real-time PCR, Western blotting and immunostaining.
Transfection of siRNA-Tcf4 at 10-50nM knocked down Tcf4, and also significantly
suppressed its down stream molecule survivin at both mRNA and protein levels in
HCECs. Furthermore, Tcf4 silencing significantly suppressed the proliferative
capacity of HCECs, measured by WST-1 assay, compared with the control groups,
untreated or transfected with non-coding sequence siRNA-fluorescein. These
findings demonstrate that low calcium serum free media promote ex vivo expansion 
of corneal epithelial progenitor cells that retain a less differentiated
phenotype and high proliferative capacity via ß-catenin/Tcf4/survivin signaling, 
a novel intrinsic pathway. This study may have high impact and clinic implication
on the expansion of corneal epithelial stem cells in regenerative medicine,
especially for ocular surface reconstruction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3131198
PMID: 21292023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cell Div. 2011 Feb 2;6(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-6-3.

Efficient Wnt mediated intestinal hyperproliferation requires the cyclin
D2-CDK4/6 complex.

Myant K(1), Sansom O.

Author information: 
(1)The Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1BD, UK. o.sansom@beatson.gla.ac.uk.

Inactivation of the gene encoding the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumour
suppressor protein is recognized as the key early event in the development of
colorectal cancers (CRC). Apc loss leads to nuclear localization of beta-catenin 
and constitutive activity of the beta-catenin-Tcf4 transcription complex. This
complex drives the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression such as
c-Myc and cyclin D2. Acute loss of Apc in the small intestine leads to
hyperproliferation within the intestinal crypt, increased levels of apoptosis,
and perturbed differentiation and migration. It has been demonstrated that c-Myc 
is a critical mediator of the phenotypic abnormalities that follow Apc loss in
the intestine. As it may be difficult to pharmacologically inhibit transcription 
factors such as c-Myc, investigating more druggable targets of the Wnt-c-Myc
pathway within the intestine may reveal potential therapeutic targets for CRC.
Recent work in our laboratory has shown that the cyclin D2-cyclin-dependent
kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) complex promotes hyperproliferation in Apc deficient
intestinal tissue and ApcMin/+ adenomas. We showed that the hyperproliferative
phenotype associated with Apc loss in vivo was partially dependent on the
expression of cyclin D2. Most importantly, tumour growth and development in
ApcMin/+ mice was strongly perturbed in mice lacking cyclin D2. Furthermore,
pharmacological inhibition of CDK4/6 suppressed the proliferation of adenomatous 
cells. This commentary discusses the significance of this work in providing
evidence for the importance of the cyclin D2-CDK4/6 complex in colorectal adenoma
formation. It also argues that inhibition of this complex may be an effective
chemopreventative strategy in CRC.

PMCID: PMC3040687
PMID: 21288356  [PubMed]


257. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12093-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.185280. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Phosphorylation of TCF proteins by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2.

Hikasa H(1), Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Wnt pathways play essential roles in cell proliferation, morphogenesis, and cell 
fate specification during embryonic development. According to the consensus view,
the Wnt pathway prevents the degradation of the key signaling component ß-catenin
by the protein complex containing the negative regulators Axin and glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). Stabilized ß-catenin associates with TCF proteins and
enters the nucleus to promote target gene expression. This study examines the
involvement of HIPK2 (homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2) in the regulation
of different TCF proteins in Xenopus embryos in vivo. We show that the TCF family
members LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 are phosphorylated in embryonic ectoderm after Wnt8 
stimulation and HIPK2 overexpression. We also find that TCF3 phosphorylation is
triggered by canonical Wnt ligands, LRP6, and dominant negative mutants for Axin 
and GSK3, indicating that this process shares the same upstream regulators with
ß-catenin stabilization. HIPK2-dependent phosphorylation caused the dissociation 
of LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 from a target promoter in vivo. This result provides a
mechanistic explanation for the context-dependent function of HIPK2 in Wnt
signaling; HIPK2 up-regulates transcription by phosphorylating TCF3, a
transcriptional repressor, but inhibits transcription by phosphorylating LEF1, a 
transcriptional activator. Finally, we show that upon HIPK2-mediated
phosphorylation, TCF3 is replaced with positively acting TCF1 at a target
promoter. These observations emphasize a critical role for Wnt/HIPK2-dependent
TCF phosphorylation and suggest that TCF switching is an important mechanism of
Wnt target gene activation in vertebrate embryos.

PMCID: PMC3069413
PMID: 21285352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. APMIS. 2011 Mar;119(3):187-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2010.02709.x. Epub 2011
Jan 18.

Helicobacter pylori induces malignant transformation of gastric epithelial cells 
in vitro.

Yu XW(1), Xu Y, Gong YH, Qian X, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Etiology and Screening Department of Cancer Institute and General
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, China.

Epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that Helicobacter pylori infection is
associated with increased risk for the development of gastric cancer. Animal
studies have also shown that H. pylori infection leads to gastric carcinogenesis,
especially intestinal phenotypes. However, no in vitro study has been carried out
for cell transformation induced by H. pylori. The present study aimed to
investigate whether 'chronic'H. pylori infection induces gastric epithelial cell 
transformation, and elucidate the underlying mechanisms of transformation induced
by H. pylori. The immortalized 'normal' gastric epithelial cell line, GES-1, was 
co-cultured for 45 days with H. pylori strains B975 and L301. The cell
proliferation was measured by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, Ki-67
antigen, and colony formation assay. The cell transformation was determined by
observing cell morphology and measuring the expression of E-cadherin, ß-catenin, 
and transcription factor-4 (TCF-4) at both protein and mRNA levels. H. pylori
induced morphologic changes in GES-1 cells and significantly increased the
proliferation of GES-1 cells. Moreover, H. pylori up-regulated the expression of 
ß-catenin and TCF-4, and also induced the nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin. In
addition, the diffusive gastric cancer-related gene, E-cadherin, was up-regulated
at the protein level, but down-regulated at the mRNA level. H. pylori infection
is capable of inducing GES-1 transformation to present with the characteristics
of intestinal-type gastric cancers in vitro, likely through the ß-catenin/TCF-4
signaling pathway.

© 2011 The 1st Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

PMID: 21284736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 22;108(8):3116-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1009353108. Epub 2011 Jan 31.

Histone H4 Lys 20 monomethylation by histone methylase SET8 mediates Wnt target
gene activation.

Li Z(1), Nie F, Wang S, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 22;108(8):3097-8.

Histone methylation has an important role in transcriptional regulation. However,
unlike H3K4 and H3K9 methylation, the role of H4K20 monomethylation (H4K20me-1)
in transcriptional regulation remains unclear. Here, we show that Wnt3a
specifically stimulates H4K20 monomethylation at the T cell factor (TCF)-binding 
element through the histone methylase SET8. Additionally, SET8 is crucial for
activation of the Wnt reporter gene and target genes in both mammalian cells and 
zebrafish. Furthermore, SET8 interacts with lymphoid enhancing factor-1
(LEF1)/TCF4 directly, and this interaction is regulated by Wnt3a. Therefore, we
conclude that SET8 is a Wnt signaling mediator and is recruited by LEF1/TCF4 to
regulate the transcription of Wnt-activated genes, possibly through H4K20
monomethylation at the target gene promoters. Our findings also indicate that
H4K20me-1 is a marker for gene transcription activation, at least in canonical
Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3044395
PMID: 21282610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 May 6;52(6):2999-3007. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6708.

Role of miR-204 in the regulation of apoptosis, endoplasmic reticulum stress
response, and inflammation in human trabecular meshwork cells.

Li G(1), Luna C, Qiu J, Epstein DL, Gonzalez P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the biological functions of miR-204 in human trabecular
meshwork (HTM) cells.
METHODS: Changes in gene expression induced by miR-204 in HTM cells were
evaluated by gene array analysis using arrays and confirmed by quantitative-PCR
(Q-PCR). Direct targeting of miR-204 to 12 potential novel targets was confirmed 
using a luciferase system, and five of them were verified by Western blot
analysis. Effects of miR-204 on apoptosis, cell viability, and accumulation of
carbonylated proteins were evaluated in HTM cells treated with H(2)O(2).
Induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers by tunicamycin was
analyzed by Q-PCR, and expression of IL-8 and IL-11 was analyzed by ELISA.
RESULTS: MiR-204 decreased the expression of multiple genes in HTM cells. Twelve 
genes (AP1S2, Bcl2l2, BIRC2, EDEM1, EZR, FZD1, M6PR, RAB22A, RAB40B, SERP1,
TCF12, and TCF4) were validated as direct targets of miR-204. Downregulation of
expressions at protein levels of Bcl2l2, BIRC2, EZR, M6PR, and SERP1 were
confirmed by Western blot analysis. HTM cells transfected with miR-204 showed
increased levels of apoptosis, decreased viability, increased accumulation of
oxidized proteins after H(2)O(2) treatment, decreased induction of ER stress
response markers, and reduced expression of inflammatory mediators IL-8 and
IL-11.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-204 potentially plays an important role in the regulation of
multiple functions in HTM cells including apoptosis, accumulation of damaged
proteins, ER stress response, and expression of inflammatory mediators.

PMCID: PMC3109013
PMID: 21282569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Apr 15;317(7):920-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.01.015. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Identification of T-cell factor-4 isoforms that contribute to the malignant
phenotype of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tsedensodnom O(1), Koga H, Rosenberg SA, Nambotin SB, Carroll JJ, Wands JR, Kim
M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is frequently activated in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Downstream signaling events involving the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade 
occur through T-cell factor (TCF) proteins. The human TCF-4 gene is composed of
17 exons with multiple alternative splicing sites. However, the role of different
TCF-4 isoforms in the pathogenesis of HCC is unknown. The purpose of this study
was to identify and characterize TCF-4 isoforms in HCC. We identified 14 novel
TCF-4 isoforms from four HCC cell lines. Functional analysis following
transfection and expression in HCC cells revealed distinct effects on the
phenotype. The TCF-4J isoform expression produced striking features of malignant 
transformation characterized by high cell proliferation rate, migration and
colony formation even though its transcriptional activity was low. In contrast,
the TCF-4K isoform displayed low TCF transcriptional activity; cell proliferation
rate and colony formation were reduced as well. Interestingly, TCF-4J and TCF-4K 
differed by only five amino acids (the SxxSS motif). Thus, these studies suggest 
that conserved splicing motifs may have a major influence on the transcriptional 
activity and functional properties of TCF-4 isoforms and alter the
characteristics of the malignant phenotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3066145
PMID: 21256126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10649-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.169391. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

A WNT/beta-catenin signaling activator, R-spondin, plays positive regulatory
roles during skeletal myogenesis.

Han XH(1), Jin YR, Seto M, Yoon JK.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Biomedical Research Excellence in Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Scarborough, Maine 04074, USA.

R-spondins (RSPOs) are a recently characterized family of secreted proteins that 
activate WNT/ß-catenin signaling. In this study, we investigated the potential
roles of the RSPO proteins during myogenic differentiation. Overexpression of the
Rspo1 gene or administration of recombinant RSPO2 protein enhanced mRNA and
protein expression of a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class myogenic
determination factor, MYF5, in both C2C12 myoblasts and primary satellite cells, 
whereas MYOD or PAX7 expression was not affected. RSPOs also promoted myogenic
differentiation and induced hypertrophic myotube formation in C2C12 cells. In
addition, Rspo2 and Rspo3 gene knockdown by RNA interference significantly
compromised MYF5 expression, myogenic differentiation, and myotube formation.
Furthermore, Myf5 expression was reduced in the developing limbs of mouse embryos
lacking the Rspo2 gene. Finally, we demonstrated that blocking of WNT/ß-catenin
signaling by DKK1 or a dominant-negative form of TCF4 reversed MYF5 expression,
myogenic differentiation, and hypertrophic myotube formation induced by RSPO2,
indicating that RSPO2 exerts its activity through the WNT/ß-catenin signaling
pathway. Our results provide strong evidence that RSPOs are key positive
regulators of skeletal myogenesis acting through the WNT/ß-catenin signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3060516
PMID: 21252233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Apr 27;52(5):2825-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6497.
Print 2011 Apr.

Replication of the TCF4 intronic variant in late-onset Fuchs corneal dystrophy
and evidence of independence from the FCD2 locus.

Riazuddin SA(1), McGlumphy EJ, Yeo WS, Wang J, Katsanis N, Gottsch JD.

Author information: 
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Fuchs corneal dystrophy (FCD) is an autosomal dominant disease of the
corneal endothelium with variable penetrance and expressivity. Recently,
rs613872, an intronic variation of TCF4 associated with late-onset FCD, was
reported. The present study was undertaken to examine this association in our
cohort of FCD patients, to assess the significance of this finding, and to
investigate the candidacy of TCF4 in the context of the mapped FCD2 locus.
METHODS: The authors recruited 170 patients with late-onset FCD and 180
age-matched controls. Blood samples were collected, and genomic DNA was
extracted. A panel of nine SNPs spanning the entire TCF4 locus was genotyped both
on this cohort and on three previously reported FCD2-linked families. The
association of an individual SNP with late-onset FCD was evaluated with the
Fisher exact test, and the coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of TCF4 were
sequenced in 96 affected persons.
RESULTS: The risk allele G of rs613872 is associated significantly with
late-onset FCD (odds ratio, 4.2; P = 4.28 x 10<U+207B>¹5) and was present in male and
female affected persons without any sex bias, replicating recent findings, though
the authors found no apparent correlation with the severity of the disease
phenotype. Moreover, the risk allele did not cosegregate with the disease
phenotype in any of the three FCD2-linked families. The authors did not identify 
any pathogenic variants in the coding region of TCF4.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors report the first independent replication of rs613872
conferring risk of late-onset FCD. Their data suggest that this risk factor is
likely independent of the FCD2 locus, whose causality remains unknown.

PMCID: PMC3088564
PMID: 21245398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011 Mar;21(3):121-9. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283436b45.

Genetic variation associated with bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy.

Favis R(1), Sun Y, van de Velde H, Broderick E, Levey L, Meyers M, Mulligan G,
Harousseau JL, Richardson PG, Ricci DS.

Author information: 
(1)Johnson and Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Raritan, New
Jersey 08869, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a predictive genetic signature for the development of
bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy (PN).
METHODS: Two thousand and sixteen single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
genotyped in 139 samples from myeloma patients treated with
bortezomib-melphalan-prednisone in the VISTA phase 3 trial. Single-marker
association analysis for PN onset and time/cumulative dose to PN onset using the 
Cox proportional hazards model and multiple covariates was performed under
additive, dominant, and recessive genotypic models, followed by correction for
multiplicity. Associations were also pursued in a cohort of 212 samples from
patients treated with bortezomib-dexamethasone in the IFM 2005-01 phase 3 trial.
RESULTS: In the VISTA cohort, after Bonferroni correction, two SNPs significantly
associated with time to onset of PN [CTLA4 rs4553808, false discovery rate
(FDR)=0.002] and time to onset of grade of at least 2 PN (PSMB1 rs1474642,
FDR=0.014). Using FDR less than 0.05 as the threshold, two additional SNPs
significantly associated with time to onset of grade of at least 2 (CTSS
rs12568757, FDR=0.027) or grade of at least 3 PN (GJE1 rs11974610, FDR=0.041).
DYNC1I1 rs916758 significantly associated (FDR=0.012) with cumulative dose to
onset of grade of at least 2 PN. These associations were generally not detected
in the IFM 2005-01 cohort, although CTLA4 rs4553808 showed the same trend in
association with time to onset (P=0.138). In addition, in the IFM 2005-01 cohort,
TCF4 rs1261134 significantly associated with onset of any neurologic event
(FDR=0.048).
CONCLUSION: Genes associated with immune function (CTLA4, CTSS), reflexive
coupling within Schwann cells (GJE1), drug binding (PSMB1), and neuron function
(TCF4, DYNC1I1) associated with bortezomib-induced PN in this study.

PMID: 21228734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neuropsychobiology. 2011;63(3):131-6. doi: 10.1159/000317844. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Novel schizophrenia risk gene TCF4 influences verbal learning and memory
functioning in schizophrenia patients.

Lennertz L(1), Rujescu D, Wagner M, Frommann I, Schulze-Rauschenbach S,
Schuhmacher A, Landsberg MW, Franke P, Möller HJ, Wölwer W, Gaebel W, Häfner H,
Maier W, Mössner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recently, a role of the transcription factor 4 (TCF4) gene in
schizophrenia has been reported in a large genome-wide association study. It has 
been hypothesized that TCF4 affects normal brain development and TCF4 has been
related to different forms of neurodevelopmental disorders. Schizophrenia
patients exhibit strong impairments of verbal declarative memory (VDM) functions.
Thus, we hypothesized that the disease-associated C allele of the rs9960767
polymorphism of the TCF4 gene led to impaired VDM functioning in schizophrenia
patients.
METHOD: The TCF4 variant was genotyped in 401 schizophrenia patients. VDM
functioning was measured using the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT).
RESULTS: Carriers of the C allele were less impaired in recognition compared to
those carrying the AA genotype (13.76 vs. 13.06; p = 0.049). Moreover, a trend
toward higher scores in patients with the risk allele was found for delayed
recall (10.24 vs. 9.41; p = 0.088). The TCF4 genotype did not influence
intelligence or RAVLT immediate recall or total verbal learning.
CONCLUSION: VDM function is influenced by the TCF4 gene in schizophrenia
patients. However, the elevated risk for schizophrenia is not conferred by
TCF4-mediated VDM impairment.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21228604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):371-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.057463.

Connective tissue fibroblasts and Tcf4 regulate myogenesis.

Mathew SJ(1), Hansen JM, Merrell AJ, Murphy MM, Lawson JA, Hutcheson DA, Hansen
MS, Angus-Hill M, Kardon G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 North 2030 East, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Muscle and its connective tissue are intimately linked in the embryo and in the
adult, suggesting that interactions between these tissues are crucial for their
development. However, the study of muscle connective tissue has been hindered by 
the lack of molecular markers and genetic reagents to label connective tissue
fibroblasts. Here, we show that the transcription factor Tcf4 (transcription
factor 7-like 2; Tcf7l2) is strongly expressed in connective tissue fibroblasts
and that Tcf4(GFPCre) mice allow genetic manipulation of these fibroblasts. Using
this new reagent, we find that connective tissue fibroblasts critically regulate 
two aspects of myogenesis: muscle fiber type development and maturation.
Fibroblasts promote (via Tcf4-dependent signals) slow myogenesis by stimulating
the expression of slow myosin heavy chain. Also, fibroblasts promote the switch
from fetal to adult muscle by repressing (via Tcf4-dependent signals) the
expression of developmental embryonic myosin and promoting (via a
Tcf4-independent mechanism) the formation of large multinucleate myofibers. In
addition, our analysis of Tcf4 function unexpectedly reveals a novel mechanism of
intrinsic regulation of muscle fiber type development. Unlike other intrinsic
regulators of fiber type, low levels of Tcf4 in myogenic cells promote both slow 
and fast myogenesis, thereby promoting overall maturation of muscle fiber type.
Thus, we have identified novel extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms regulating
myogenesis. Most significantly, our data demonstrate for the first time that
connective tissue is important not only for adult muscle structure and function, 
but is a vital component of the niche within which muscle progenitors reside and 
is a critical regulator of myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3005608
PMID: 21177349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biochem. 2011 Feb;149(2):117-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq146. Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Roles of old players in the suppression of a new player: networks for the
transcriptional control of angiogenesis.

Watabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. t-watabe@umin.ac.jp

Comment on
    J Biochem. 2009 Feb;145(2):129-35.

During the formation of blood vessels, Id1, a member of the helix-loop-helix
(HLH) family, and TAL1/SCL, a basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factor, play
important roles in the activation of endothelial cells. Recent reports revealed
that E2-2, another bHLH transcription factor, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and 
in vivo by suppressing the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGFR2). Id1 and TAL1/SCL dimerize with E2-2 and relieve the
E2-2-mediated down-regulation of VEGFR2 expression, leading to the activation of 
endothelial cells. These findings reveal a novel interplay between HLH
transcription factors that regulate angiogenesis.

PMID: 21172954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Pathol. 2011 Feb;223(3):378-89. doi: 10.1002/path.2797. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand cooperates with NSAIDs via activated Wnt
signalling in (pre)malignant colon cells.

Heijink DM(1), Jalving M, Oosterhuis D, Sloots IA, Koster R, Hollema H,
Kleibeuker JH, Koornstra JJ, de Vries EG, de Jong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor agonistic agents and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are interesting agents for the
chemoprevention and treatment of colorectal cancer. We investigated whether
NSAIDs sensitize colon cancer and adenoma cell lines and ex vivo cultured human
adenomas to recombinant human (rh)TRAIL. Involvement of the crucial Wnt
signalling pathway in the sensitization of colon cancer cells was examined. Five 
colon cancer and two adenoma cell lines, human ex vivo adenomas and normal
colonic epithelium were treated with aspirin or sulindac combined with rhTRAIL.
Apoptosis levels, expression of intracellular proteins and TRAIL receptor
membrane expression were assessed. Ls174T cells stably transfected with an
inducible dominant negative TCF-4 (dnTCF-4) construct served to analyse the role 
of Wnt pathway activation. Both rhTRAIL-sensitive and -resistant colon cancer
cell lines were strongly sensitized to rhTRAIL by aspirin (maximum enhancement
ratio, 7.1). Remarkably, in adenoma cell lines sulindac enhanced rhTRAIL-induced 
apoptosis most effectively (maximum enhancement ratio, 2.5). Although membrane
TRAIL receptor expression was not affected by NSAIDs, caspase-8 activation was
enhanced by combinational treatment. Several proteins from different biological
pathways were affected by NSAIDs, indicating complex mechanisms of sensitization.
Elimination of TCF-4 completely blocked the sensitizing effect in colon cancer
cells. In ex vivo adenomas the combination of sulindac and rhTRAIL increased
apoptosis from 18.4% (sulindac) and 17.8% (rhTRAIL) to 28.0% (p = 0.003 and p =
0.005, respectively). It was concluded that NSAID-induced sensitization to
rhTRAIL requires TCF-4 activity. Thus, the combination of TRAIL-receptor
agonistic agents and NSAIDs is a potentially attractive treatment option for
(pre)malignant tumours with constitutively active Wnt signalling, such as
colorectal tumours.

Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21171083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E389-93. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1677. Epub 
2010 Dec 15.

Variants and haplotypes of TCF7L2 are associated with ß-cell function in patients
with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: the Verona Newly Diagnosed Type 2 Diabetes 
Study (VNDS) 1.

Bonetti S(1), Trombetta M, Malerba G, Boselli L, Trabetti E, Muggeo M, Stoico V, 
Negri C, Pignatti PF, Bonora E, Bonadonna RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

CONTEXT: Intronic variants of TCF7L2 are confirmed genetic risk factors for type 
2 diabetes and are associated to alterations in beta cell function in nondiabetic
individuals.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to test whether TCF7L2 variability may 
affect ß-cell function also in patients with type 2 diabetes.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional association study.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a university hospital referral center for
diabetes.
PATIENTS: Patients included 464 (315 males and 149 females) glutamic acid
decarboxylase-negative patients [age: median 59 yr (interquartile range: 52-65); 
body mass index: 29.3 kg/m(2) (26.5-32.9); fasting plasma glucose: 7.0 mmol/liter
(6.1-8.0)] with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes.
INTERVENTION(S): Interventions included frequently sampled oral glucose tolerance
test and euglycemic insulin clamp.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): ß-Cell function (derivative control and proportional
control); insulin sensitivity; genotypes of the following TCF7L2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms: rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205, and
rs12255372.
RESULTS: Both rs7901695 and rs7903146 diabetes risk alleles were associated with 
reduced proportional control of ß-cell function (P = 0.019 and P = 0.022,
respectively). Two low-frequency haplotypes were associated with extreme (best
and worst) phenotypes of ß-cell function (P < 0.01). No associations between
TCF7L2 genotypes and insulin sensitivity were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 diabetes risk variants, either as single-nucleotide
polymorphisms or as haplotypes, detrimentally influence ß-cell function and might
play a role in determining the metabolic phenotype of patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 21159844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 15;70(24):10101-11. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0505.

HIF-2alpha enhances beta-catenin/TCF-driven transcription by interacting with
beta-catenin.

Choi H(1), Chun YS, Kim TY, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The tumor-promoting factors ß-catenin and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) are
often found to be coactivated in rapidly growing tumors. Recently, it was shown
that HIF-1a negatively regulates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by sequestering
ß-catenin from ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF). However, no investigation has been 
undertaken on the involvement of HIF-2a in ß-catenin regulation. In this study,
it was found that, like HIF-1a, HIF-2a interacts with ß-catenin, but at a
different site. Furthermore, HIF-2a was found to assemble with ß-catenin/TCF and 
facilitate gene transcription. Mutational analyses revealed that transactivation 
domains of HIF-2a promote p300 coactivator recruitment by ß-catenin. Furthermore,
HIF-2a and ß-catenin were found to associate in the nuclei of 786-0 renal cell
carcinoma cells, and HIF-2a was found to be required for ß-catenin activation in 
these cells and for their proliferation. These results suggest that this
interaction contributes to the unrestrained growth of tumor cells containing
coactivated HIF-2a and ß-catenin. Interestingly, these actions of HIF-2a oppose
those of HIF-1a on ß-catenin and cell growth, and this suggests that
HIF-1a/HIF-2a balance may importantly determine cell growth when hypoxia and Wnt 
stimulation coexist.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 21159632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):563-71. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1977-4. Epub 2010
Dec 12.

Association of indices of liver and adipocyte insulin resistance with 19
confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes in 6,733 non-diabetic Finnish
men.

Vangipurapu J(1), Stancáková A, Pihlajamäki J, Kuulasmaa TM, Kuulasmaa T,
Paananen J, Kuusisto J, Ferrannini E, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio University
Hospital, 70210, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Of the confirmed type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci only a few 
are known to affect insulin sensitivity. We examined the association of indices
of hepatic and adipocyte insulin resistance (IR) with 19 confirmed type 2
diabetes risk loci in a large population-based study.
METHODS: Non-diabetic participants (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8,460, age 57.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.0 years, BMI
26.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.8 kg/m(2); mean ± SD) from a population-based cohort underwent an OGTT. 
Of them, 6,733 non-diabetic men were genotyped for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near PPARG2 (also known as PPARG), KCNJ11, TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8,
THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, MTNR1B and SNP rs7480010. We investigated hepatic 
IR with a new index of liver IR. The adipocyte IR index was defined as a product 
of fasting NEFA and plasma insulin levels.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetes risk SNPs in or near KCNJ11 and HHEX were significantly 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0013), and those in or near CDKN2B, NOTCH2 and MTNR1B were nominally
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), associated with decreased liver IR index. The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 
was significantly associated with a high adipocyte IR index and nominally
associated with high liver IR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 seems to impair insulin's 
antilipolytic effect, leading to high NEFA release in the fasting state and IR.
In addition, the type 2 diabetes risk alleles of KCNJ11 and HHEX, which are known
to impair insulin secretion, were associated with increased hepatic insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 21153532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e15092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015092.

Efficient double fragmentation ChIP-seq provides nucleotide resolution
protein-DNA binding profiles.

Mokry M(1), Hatzis P, de Bruijn E, Koster J, Versteeg R, Schuijers J, van de
Wetering M, Guryev V, Clevers H, Cuppen E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Hubrecht Institute and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Immunoprecipitated crosslinked protein-DNA fragments typically range in size from
several hundred to several thousand base pairs, with a significant part of
chromatin being much longer than the optimal length for next-generation
sequencing (NGS) procedures. Because these larger fragments may be non-random and
represent relevant biology that may otherwise be missed, but also because they
represent a significant fraction of the immunoprecipitated material, we designed 
a double-fragmentation ChIP-seq procedure. After conventional crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation, chromatin is de-crosslinked and sheared a second time to
concentrate fragments in the optimal size range for NGS. Besides the benefits of 
increased chromatin yields, the procedure also eliminates a laborious
size-selection step. We show that the double-fragmentation ChIP-seq approach
allows for the generation of biologically relevant genome-wide protein-DNA
binding profiles from sub-nanogram amounts of TCF7L2/TCF4, TBP and H3K4me3
immunoprecipitated material. Although optimized for the AB/SOLiD platform, the
same approach may be applied to other platforms.

PMCID: PMC2994895
PMID: 21152096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;19(3):341-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.178. Epub 2010 Dec 
8.

Replication of genetic variants from genome-wide association studies with
metabolic traits in an island population of the Adriatic coast of Croatia.

Karns R(1), Zhang G, Jeran N, Havas-Augustin D, Missoni S, Niu W, Indugula SR,
Sun G, Durakovic Z, Narancic NS, Rudan P, Chakraborty R, Deka R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

Twenty-two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 gene regions previously
identified in obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) were evaluated for association with metabolic traits in a sample from an
island population of European descent. We performed a population-based study
using 18 anthropometric and biochemical traits considered as continuous variables
in a sample of 843 unrelated subjects (360 men and 483 women) aged 18-80 years
old from the island of Hvar on the eastern Adriatic coast of Croatia. All eight
GWAS SNPs in FTO were significantly associated with weight, body mass index,
waist circumference and hip circumference; 20 of the 32 nominal P-values remained
significant after permutation testing for multiple corrections. The strongest
associations were found between the two TCF7L2 GWAS SNPs with fasting plasma
glucose and HbA1c levels, all four P-values remained significant after
permutation tests. Nominally significant associations were found between several 
SNPs and other metabolic traits; however, the significance did not hold after
permutation tests. Although the sample size was modest, our study strongly
replicated the association of FTO variants with obesity-related measures and
TCF7L2 variants with T2D-related traits. The estimated effect sizes of these
variants were larger or comparable to published studies. This is likely
attributable to the homogenous genetic background of the relatively isolated
study population.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1018-4813/11

PMCID: PMC3061997
PMID: 21150882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Hepatol. 2011 Jul;55(1):86-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.10.021. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

The transforming growth factor-a and cyclin D1 genes are direct targets of
ß-catenin signaling in hepatocyte proliferation.

Torre C(1), Benhamouche S, Mitchell C, Godard C, Veber P, Letourneur F, Cagnard
N, Jacques S, Finzi L, Perret C, Colnot S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS UMR 8104 Paris, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: ß-Catenin is an oncogene frequently mutated in hepatocellular 
carcinoma. In this study, we investigated target genes of ß-catenin signaling in 
hepatocyte proliferation.
METHODS: We studied transgenic mice displaying either inactivation or activation 
of the ß-catenin pathway, focusing on analysis of liver proliferation due to
aberrant ß-catenin activation, and on the regeneration process during which
ß-catenin signaling is transiently activated. We localized in situ the various
partners involved in proliferation or identified as targets of ß-catenin in these
transgenic and regenerating livers. We also performed comparative transcriptome
analyses, using microarrays. Finally, we extracted, from deep-sequencing data,
both the DNA regulatory elements bound to the ß-catenin/Tcf nuclear complex and
the expression levels of critical targets identified in microarrays.
RESULTS: ß-Catenin activation during liver regeneration occurred during G1/S cell
cycle progression and allowed zonal extension of the normal territory of active
ß-catenin and panlobular proliferation. We found that ß-catenin controlled both
cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous hepatocyte proliferation, through direct 
transcriptional and complex control of cyclin D1 gene expression and of the
expression of a new target gene, Tgfa.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that ß-catenin controls panlobular hepatocyte
proliferation partly by controlling, together with its Tcf4 nuclear partner,
expression of the pro-proliferation cyclin D1 and Tgfa genes. This study
constitutes a first step toward understanding the oncogenic properties of this
prominent signaling pathway in the liver.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):905-16. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.11.023. Epub 2010 
Dec 9.

Continuous expression of the transcription factor e2-2 maintains the cell fate of
mature plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Ghosh HS(1), Cisse B, Bunin A, Lewis KL, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

The interferon-producing plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) share common
progenitors with antigen-presenting classical dendritic cells (cDCs), yet they
possess distinct morphology and molecular features resembling those of
lymphocytes. It is unclear whether the unique cell fate of pDCs is actively
maintained in the steady state. We report that the deletion of transcription
factor E2-2 from mature peripheral pDCs caused their spontaneous differentiation 
into cells with cDC properties. This included the loss of pDC markers, increase
in MHC class II expression and T cell priming capacity, acquisition of dendritic 
morphology, and induction of cDC signature genes. Genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed direct binding of E2-2 to key pDC-specific and
lymphoid genes, as well as to certain genes enriched in cDCs. Thus, E2-2 actively
maintains the cell fate of mature pDCs and opposes the "default" cDC fate, in
part through direct regulation of lineage-specific gene expression programs.

PMCID: PMC3010277
PMID: 21145760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;75(1):10-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00629.x. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

Genome-wide association scan allowing for epistasis in type 2 diabetes.

Bell JT(1), Timpson NJ, Rayner NW, Zeggini E, Frayling TM, Hattersley AT, Morris 
AP, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, UK.
jordana@well.ox.ac.uk

In the presence of epistasis multilocus association tests of human complex traits
can provide powerful methods to detect susceptibility variants. We undertook
multilocus analyses in 1924 type 2 diabetes cases and 2938 controls from the
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC). We performed a two-dimensional
genome-wide association (GWA) scan using joint two-locus tests of association
including main and epistatic effects in 70,236 markers tagging common variants.
We found two-locus association at 79 SNP-pairs at a Bonferroni-corrected P-value 
= 0.05 (uncorrected P-value = 2.14 × 10<U+207B>¹¹). The 79 pair-wise results always
contained rs11196205 in TCF7L2 paired with 79 variants including confirmed
variants in FTO, TSPAN8, and CDKAL1, which are associated in the absence of
epistasis. However, the majority (82%) of the 79 variants did not have compelling
single-locus association signals (P-value = 5 × 10<U+207B>4). Analyses conditional on
the single-locus effects at TCF7L2 established that the joint two-locus results
could be attributed to single-locus association at TCF7L2 alone. Interaction
analyses among the peak 80 regions and among 23 previously established diabetes
candidate genes identified five SNP-pairs with case-control and case-only
epistatic signals. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of systematic scans in
GWA data, but confirm that single-locus association can underlie and obscure
multilocus findings.

© 2010 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2010 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMCID: PMC3430851
PMID: 21133856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Fam Cancer. 2011 Jun;10(2):239-43. doi: 10.1007/s10689-010-9406-x.

Deranged Wnt signaling is frequent in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.

Isinger-Ekstrand A(1), Therkildsen C, Bernstein I, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. anna.ekstrand@med.lu.se

The Wnt signaling pathway is frequently deranged in colorectal cancer and is a
key target for future preventive and therapeutic approaches. Colorectal cancers
associated with the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome
are characterized by wide-spread microsatellite instability, but show few gross
genomic alterations. We characterized expression of the Wnt signaling pathway
markers ß-catenin, E-cadherin, TCF-4, and PTEN using immunohistochemical staining
in colorectal cancers from individuals with HNPCC. Reduced membranous staining
for ß-catenin was found in 64% and for E-cadherin in 80% with strong correlation 
between these markers (P = 0.001). Nuclear ß-catenin staining was detected in 19%
of the tumors. Overexpression of TCF-4, which is activated by ß-catenin, was
found in 89% and downregulation of PTEN, which suppresses nuclear accumulation of
ß-catenin, was present in 54% of the tumors. In summary, altered expression of
target molecules in the Wnt signaling pathway was demonstrated in the vast
majority of the HNPCC-associated tumors, which support deranged Wnt-signaling as 
a central tumorigenic mechanism also in MMR defective colorectal cancer.

PMID: 21132538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Pathol. 2011 Jan;223(1):72-80. doi: 10.1002/path.2802. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Micro-RNA signature of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in endometrial
carcinosarcoma.

Castilla MÁ(1), Moreno-Bueno G, Romero-Pérez L, Van De Vijver K, Biscuola M,
López-García MÁ, Prat J, Matías-Guiu X, Cano A, Oliva E, Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío-IBIS,
Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.

Endometrial carcinosarcomas (ECSs) undergo a true epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The molecular determinants of the EMT in vivo are unclear,
although a role for some miRNAs, mainly involving the miR-200 family, was
recently suggested from in vitro cellular models. We analysed the microRNA
(miRNA) signatures associated to EMT in human carcinosarcomas, and determined
their relationships with EMT markers and repressors of E-cadherin transcription. 
The expression of E-, P- and N-cadherin, cadherin-11, p120, vimentin, SPARC,
fascin and caveolin-1 was studied in a group of 76 ECS by immunohistochemistry.
In addition, real-time PCR was used to measure the differences in the expression 
of 384 miRNAs, E-cadherin, cadherin-11, SPARC, SNAIL, ZEB1, ZEB2, TWIST-1, TCF4, 
TGFß1 and TGFß2 between the epithelial and mesenchymal components of 23 ECSs. A
loss of epithelial characteristics, including cadherin switching and the
acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype, was accompanied by changes in the profile
of miRNA expression and the up-regulation of all the E-cadherin repressors
analysed. A greater than five-fold difference in the expression of 14 miRNAs
between both neoplastic components was seen. Members of the miR-200 family were
down-regulated in the mesenchymal part of the ECS. In addition, miR-23b and
miR-29c, which are involved in the inhibition of mesenchymal markers, and
miR-203, which is involved in the inhibition of cell stemness, were also
down-regulated. Up-regulated miRNAs included miR-155, miR-369-5p, miR-370,
miR-450a and miR-542-5p. These data suggest that in human ECS, the interplay
between transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin and miRNAs provides a link
between EMT-activation and the maintenance of stemness.

Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21125666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Crohns Colitis. 2010 Nov;4(5):523-31. doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2010.05.010. Epub
2010 Jul 6.

Paneth's disease.

Wehkamp J(1), Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus Stuttgart, Auerbachstr 110, 7076 Stuttgart, Germany. 
jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

In about 70% of patients Crohn's disease (CD) affects the small intestine. This
disease location is stable over time and associated with a genetic background
different from isolated colonic disease. A characteristic feature of small
intestinal host defense is the presence of Paneth cells at the bottom of the
crypts of Lieberkühn. These cells produce different broad spectrum antimicrobial 
peptides (AMPs) most abundantly the a-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und DEFA6). In
small intestinal Crohn's disease both these PC products are specifically reduced.
As a functional consequence, ileal extracts from Crohn's disease patients are
compromised in clearing bacteria and enteroadherent E. coli colonize the mucosa. 
Mechanisms for defective antimicrobial Paneth cell function are complex and
include an association with a NOD2 loss of function mutation, a disturbance of
the Wnt pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4), the autophagy
factor ATG16L1, the endosomal stress protein XBP1, the toll-like receptor TLR9,
the calcium mediated potassium channel KCNN4 as well as mutations or inactivation
of HD5. Thus we conclude that small intestinal Crohn's disease is most likely a
complex disease of the Paneth cell: Paneth's disease.

Copyright © 2010 European Crohn's and Colitis Organisation. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21122555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Jan;214(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.10.027. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Pleiotropic effects of TCF7L2 gene variants and its modulation in the metabolic
syndrome: from the LIPGENE study.

Delgado-Lista J(1), Perez-Martinez P, García-Rios A, Phillips CM, Williams CM,
Gulseth HL, Helal O, Blaak EE, Kiec-Wilk B, Basu S, Drevon CA, Defoort C, Saris
WH, Wybranska I, Riserus U, Lovegrove JA, Roche HM, Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Universidad de Córdoba and CIBER
Fisiopatología Obesidad y Nutrición CIBEROBN, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
14004 Córdoba, Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variants of the TCF7L2 gene predict the development of type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). We investigated the associations between gene variants 
of TCF7L2 and clinical features of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) (an entity often
preceding T2DM), and their interaction with non-genetic factors, including plasma
saturated fatty acids (SFA) concentration and insulin resistance (IR).
METHODS: Fasting lipid profiles, insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion,
anthropometrics, blood pressure and 10 gene variations of the TCF7L2 gene were
determined in 450 subjects with MetS.
RESULTS: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) showed phenotypic
associations independent of SFA or IR. Carriers of the rare T allele of
rs7903146, and of three other SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with rs7903146, had 
lower blood pressure and insulin secretion. High IR and the presence of the
T-allele of rs7903146 acted synergistically to define those with reduced insulin 
secretion. Carriers of the minor allele of rs290481 exhibited an altered lipid
profile, with increased plasma levels of apolipoprotein B, non-esterified fatty
acids, cholesterol and apolipoprotein B in triglyceride rich lipoproteins, and
LDL cholesterol. Carriers of the minor allele of rs11196224 that had higher
plasma SFA levels showed elevated procoagulant/proinflammatory biomarkers,
impaired insulin secretion and increased IR, whereas carriers of the minor allele
of rs17685538 with high plasma SFA levels exhibited higher blood pressure.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: SNP in the TCF7L2 gene are associated with
differences in insulin secretion, blood pressure, blood lipids and coagulation in
MetS patients, and may be modulated by SFA in plasma or IR.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21115178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Jan;13(1):89-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01324.x.

Effect of sulphonylurea treatment on glycaemic control is related to TCF7L2
genotype in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Schroner Z(1), Javorsky M, Tkacova R, Klimcakova L, Dobrikova M, Habalova V,
Kozarova M, Zidzik J, Rudikova M, Tkac I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Safarik University, L. Pasteur University
Hospital, Kosice, Slovakia.

The aim of the present study was to analyse effects of sulphonylurea treatment on
parameters of glycaemic control in relation to transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) genotypes. In 87 patients with type 2 diabetes who failed to achieve
glycaemic control on metformin monotherapy, effects of 6-month sulphonylurea in
addition to metformin on reductions in haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) and fasting plasma
glucose (FPG) levels were evaluated. Reduction in HbA1c and FPG in response to
6-month sulphonylurea treatment was significantly higher in patients with CC
genotype compared to those with the CT+TT genotype (1.16 ± 0.07 vs. 0.86 ± 0.07%,
p = 0.003; 1.57 ± 0.12 vs. 1.14 ± 0.14 mmol/l, p = 0.031, respectively). In the
multivariate analysis, baseline HbA1c and the TCF7L2 genotype were the only
significant predictors of HbA1c reduction. In conclusion, the magnitude of HbA1c 
and FPG reductions after 6-month sulphonylurea treatment in addition to metformin
is related to the TCF7L2 gene polymorphism.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21114608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):535-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1982-7. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

Association testing of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in multi-ethnic 
youth.

Dabelea D(1), Dolan LM, D'Agostino R Jr, Hernandez AM, McAteer JB, Hamman RF,
Mayer-Davis EJ, Marcovina S, Lawrence JM, Pihoker C, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of
Colorado Denver, 13001 17th Place, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
dana.dabelea@ucdenver.edu

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene have been associated with type 2 diabetes in adults. However, it is not
known whether TCF7L2 variation increases the risk of early onset type 2 diabetes.
Using a case-control design, we examined whether the reported variants
[rs12255372 (T/G) and rs7903146 (T/C)] are associated with type 2 diabetes in
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study participants.
METHODS: Variants were genotyped in 694 non-Hispanic white (NHW) youth (86 cases,
mean age 15.5 years, mean BMI 34.8; and 608 controls, mean age 14.4 years, mean
BMI 22.3) and 545 African-American (AA) youth (154 cases, mean age 15.9, mean BMI
37; and 391 controls, mean age 14.8, mean BMI 23.8). Logistic regression adjusted
for age, sex, BMI and West African ancestry.
RESULTS: The association of the risk T allele with case/control status was
different in AA and NHW youth (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). Among AA youth, each copy of the T
allele (rs7903146) was associated with a 1.97-fold (1.37, 2.82) increased odds
for type 2 diabetes (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), after adjustment for age, sex, BMI and African 
ancestry. No significant association was detected in NHW youth (adjusted OR,
1.14; 0.73, 1.79).
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 variation is associated with an increased risk 
of early-onset type 2 diabetes among AA youth, and the association appears to be 
stronger in AA than NHW youth. This suggests potential different contributions of
genetic and environmental factors to early-onset type 2 diabetes by race.

PMCID: PMC3766323
PMID: 21109996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS Biol. 2010 Nov 16;8(11):e1000539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000539.

The leukemia-associated Mllt10/Af10-Dot1l are Tcf4/ß-catenin coactivators
essential for intestinal homeostasis.

Mahmoudi T(1), Boj SF, Hatzis P, Li VS, Taouatas N, Vries RG, Teunissen H,
Begthel H, Korving J, Mohammed S, Heck AJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. t.mahmoudi@erasmusmc.nl

Wnt signaling maintains the undifferentiated state of intestinal crypt progenitor
cells by inducing the formation of nuclear TCF4/ß-catenin complexes. In
colorectal cancer, activating mutations in Wnt pathway components cause
inappropriate activation of TCF4/ß-catenin-driven transcription. Despite the
passage of a decade after the discovery of TCF4 and ß-catenin as the molecular
effectors of the Wnt signal, few transcriptional activators essential and unique 
to the regulation of this transcription program have been found. Using
proteomics, we identified the leukemia-associated Mllt10/Af10 and the
methyltransferase Dot1l as Tcf4/ß-catenin interactors in mouse small intestinal
crypts. Mllt10/Af10-Dot1l, essential for transcription elongation, are recruited 
to Wnt target genes in a ß-catenin-dependent manner, resulting in H3K79
methylation over their coding regions in vivo in proliferative crypts of mouse
small intestine in colorectal cancer and Wnt-inducible HEK293T cells. Depletion
of MLLT10/AF10 in colorectal cancer and Wnt-inducible HEK293T cells followed by
expression array analysis identifies MLLT10/AF10 and DOT1L as essential
activators to a large extent dedicated to Wnt target gene regulation. In
contrast, previously published ß-catenin coactivators p300 and BRG1 displayed a
more pleiotropic target gene expression profile controlling Wnt and other
pathways. tcf4, mllt10/af10, and dot1l are co-expressed in Wnt-driven tissues in 
zebrafish and essential for Wnt-reporter activity. Intestinal differentiation
defects in apc-mutant zebrafish can be rescued by depletion of Mllt10 and Dot1l, 
establishing these genes as activators downstream of Apc in Wnt target gene
activation in vivo. Morpholino-depletion of mllt10/af10-dot1l in zebrafish
results in defects in intestinal homeostasis and a significant reduction in the
in vivo expression of direct Wnt target genes and in the number of proliferative 
intestinal epithelial cells. We conclude that Mllt10/Af10-Dot1l are essential,
largely dedicated activators of Wnt-dependent transcription, critical for
maintenance of intestinal proliferation and homeostasis. The methyltransferase
DOT1L may present an attractive candidate for drug targeting in colorectal
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2982801
PMID: 21103407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Transl Med. 2010 Nov 22;8:123. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-8-123.

LEF-1 and TCF4 expression correlate inversely with survival in colorectal cancer.

Kriegl L(1), Horst D, Reiche JA, Engel J, Kirchner T, Jung A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU),
Thalkirchnerstr, 36, 80337, Munich, Germany. Lydia.Kriegl@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Most colorectal carcinomas are driven by an activation of the
canonical Wnt signalling pathway, which promotes the expression of multiple
target genes mediating proliferation inavasion and invasion. Upon activation of
the Wnt signalling pathway its key player ß-catenin translocates from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus and binds to members of the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid
enhancer factor (LEF-1) family namely LEF-1 and TCF4 which are central mediators 
of transcription. In this study we investigated the expression of ß-Catenin, LEF1
and TCF4 in colorectal carcinomas and their prognostic significance.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical analyses of LEF-1, TCF4 and nuclear ß-Catenin were
done using a tissue microarray with 214 colorectal cancer specimens. The
expression patterns were compared with each other and the results were correlated
with clinicopathologic variables and overall survival in univariate and
multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: LEF-1 expression was found in 56 (26%) and TCF4 expression in 99 (46%)
of colorectal carcinomas and both were heterogeneously distributed throughout the
tumours. Comparing LEF-1, TCF4 and ß-catenin expression patterns we found no
correlation. In univariate analysis, TCF4 expression turned out to be a negative 
prognostic factor being associated with shorter overall survival (p = 0.020),
whereas LEF-1 expression as well as a LEF-1/TCF4 ratio were positive prognostic
factors and correlated with longer overall survival (p = 0.015 respectively p =
0.001). In multivariate analysis, LEF-1 and TCF4 expression were confirmed to be 
independent predictors of longer respectively shorter overall survival, when
considered together with tumour stage, gender and age (risk ratio for LEF-1:
2.66; p = 0.027 risk ratio for TCF4: 2.18; p = 0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates different prognostic values of LEF-1 and
TCF4 expression in colorectal cancer patients indicating different regulation of 
these transcription mediators during tumour progression. Moreover both factors
may serve as new potential predictive markers in low stage colon cancer cases in 
advance.

PMCID: PMC2996347
PMID: 21092222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Dec;60(3):143-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.10.008. Epub 
2010 Oct 26.

Small cutaneous wounds induce telogen to anagen transition of murine hair
follicle stem cells.

Jiang S(1), Zhao L, Teklemariam T, Hantash BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305,
United States.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that large (>1 cm) diameter circular cutaneous
wounds induce follicular neogenesis in mice. However, the effects of non-circular
wounds or smaller circular wounds on the hair follicle cycle remain poorly
understood.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether non-circular wounds or smaller (=1 cm)
circular wounds could induce early entry of hair follicle stem cells into anagen.
METHODS: We created different shaped and sized full-thickness incisional wounds
on the dorsal skin of 6-wk old mice (BALB/c, C57BL/6, and CD1), and then assessed
for hair growth, wound contraction rates, and growth factor and/or
immunomodulatory cytokine involvement.
RESULTS: By day 16 and through day 26 post-wounding, we observed hair growth in
the skin around the wound, but not in distant unwounded skin of BALB/c and
C57BL/6 mice. In contrast, CD1 mice showed hair growth in both the wounded and
unwounded skin. In all mice, the hair growth pattern was independent of wound
type. The area of hair growth induced by a 2 cm linear wound was roughly 2-fold
that induced by a 1 cm linear wound and 4-fold that of a 0.5 cm linear wound.
Increased <U+03B3>-glutamyl transpeptidase activity was observed in hair follicles
growing in the wounded area as well as an up to 8-fold upregulation of Wnt- and
Shh-dependent signaling, consistent with anagen growth.
CONCLUSION: Our data strongly support that small cutaneous wounds induce telogen 
to anagen transition of murine hair follicle stem cells.

Copyright © 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21071180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;193(1-2):23-40. doi: 10.1159/000320174. Epub 2010 Nov 
2.

Defining the E-cadherin repressor interactome in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition: the PMC42 model as a case study.

Hugo HJ(1), Kokkinos MI, Blick T, Ackland ML, Thompson EW, Newgreen DF.

Author information: 
(1)VBCRC Invasion and Metastasis Unit, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. hhugo@svi.edu.au

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a feature of migratory cellular
processes in all stages of life, including embryonic development and wound
healing. Importantly, EMT features cluster with disease states such as chronic
fibrosis and cancer. The dissolution of the E-cadherin-mediated adherens junction
(AJ) is a key preliminary step in EMT and may occur early or late in the growing 
epithelial tumour. This is a first step for tumour cells towards stromal
invasion, intravasation, extravasation and distant metastasis. The AJ may be
inactivated in EMT by directed E-cadherin cleavage; however, it is increasingly
evident that the majority of AJ changes are transcriptional and mediated by an
expanding group of transcription factors acting directly or indirectly to repress
E-cadherin expression. A review of the current literature has revealed that these
factors may regulate each other in a hierarchical pattern where Snail1 (formerly 
Snail) and Snail2 (formerly Slug) are initially induced, leading to the
activation of Zeb family members, TCF3, TCF4, Twist, Goosecoid and FOXC2. Within 
this general pathway, many inter-regulatory relationships have been defined which
may be important in maintaining the EMT phenotype. This may be important given
the short half-life of Snail1 protein. We have investigated these
inter-regulatory relationships in the mesenchymal breast carcinoma cell line
PMC42 (also known as PMC42ET) and its epithelial derivative, PMC42LA. This review
also discusses several newly described regulators of E-cadherin repressors
including oestrogen receptor-a and new discoveries in hypoxia- and growth
factor-induced EMT. Finally, we evaluated how these findings may influence
approaches to current cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21051859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 2011 Feb 24;30(8):956-66. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.475. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Diverse mechanisms of Wnt activation and effects of pathway inhibition on
proliferation of human gastric carcinoma cells.

Asciutti S(1), Akiri G, Grumolato L, Vijayakumar S, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA.

Human gastric carcinomas are among the most treatment-refractory epithelial
malignancies. Increased understanding of the underlying molecular aberrations in 
such tumors could provide insights leading to improved therapeutic approaches. In
this study, we characterized diverse genetic aberrations leading to constitutive 
Wnt signaling activation in a series of human gastric carcinoma cell lines.
Downregulation of TCF signaling by stable transduction of dominant negative TCF4 
(DNTCF4) resulted in inhibition of proliferation in Wnt-activated AGS tumor
cells. c-Myc downregulation and the associated upregulation of its repression
target, p21 observed in these tumor cells, as well as the profound growth
inhibition induced by c-Myc small hairpin RNA (shRNA) implied their c-Myc
addiction. In striking contrast, Wnt-activated MKN-28 and MKN-74 tumor cells
appeared refractory to DNTCF4 inhibition of proliferation despite comparably
decreased c-Myc expression levels. The resistance of these same tumor cells to
growth inhibition by c-Myc shRNA established that their refractoriness to DNTCF
was because of their independence from c-Myc for proliferation. There was no
correlation between this resistance phenotype and the presence or absence of
constitutive mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and/or AKT pathway
activation, commonly observed in gastrointestinal tumors. However, in both
DNTCF-sensitive and -resistant tumor cells with MAPK and/or AKT pathway
activation, the ability of small molecule antagonists directed against either
pathway to inhibit tumor cell growth was enhanced by Wnt pathway inhibition.
These findings support the concept that although certain Wnt-activated tumors may
escape c-Myc dependence for proliferation, disruption of other oncogenic pathways
can unmask cooperative antiproliferative effects for Wnt pathway downregulation.

PMCID: PMC3965355
PMID: 21042278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cell Prolif. 2010 Dec;43(6):594-605. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2010.00709.x.

Genistein and daidzein repress adipogenic differentiation of human adipose
tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells via Wnt/ß-catenin signalling or lipolysis.

Kim MH(1), Park JS, Seo MS, Jung JW, Lee YS, Kang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: One aspect of the effects of isoflavones against fat deposition might
be at least associated with the mechanism by which Wnt/ß-catenin signalling
inhibits adipocyte differentiation. However, it remains completely unknown as to 
whether isoflavones might influence Wnt signalling during commitment of
pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to adipose lineages. In the present
study, we have investigated the mechanisms underlying effects of genistein and
daidzein, the major soy isoflavones, on anti-adipogenic Wnt/ß-catenin signalling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adipose tissue-derived (AD) MSCs were exposed continuously
to genistein and daidzein (0.01-100 µm) during adipogenic differentiation (21
days). An oestrogen antagonist, ICI 182,780, was used to determine whether or not
the isoflavones activated Wnt signalling via oestrogen receptors (ERs).
RESULTS: Genistein and daidzein suppressed adipogenic differentiation of AD-MSCs 
in a dose-dependent manner and inhibited expression of adipogenic markers, PPAR<U+03B3>,
SREBP-1c and Glut 4, from mid-phase differentiation. Microarrays showed that
anti-adipogenic effects of genistein were principally attributable to activation 
of Wnt signalling via ERs-dependent pathway, such as Erk/JNK signalling and
LEF/TCF4 co-activators. These findings were supported by evidence that the
effects of genistein were offset by ICI182,780. Unlike genistein, daidzein
inhibited adipogenesis through stimulation of lipolysis, with for example,
PKA-mediated hormone sensitive lipase. This is consistent with the increase in
glycerol released from AD-MSCs. In conclusion, understanding that different sets 
of mechanisms of the two isoflavones on adipogenesis will help the design of
novel strategies to prevent observed current epidemic levels of obesity, using
isoflavones.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21039998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jan 15;20(2):387-91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq471. Epub 2010 Oct
29.

Most genome-wide significant susceptibility loci for schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder reported to date cross-traditional diagnostic boundaries.

Williams HJ(1), Craddock N, Russo G, Hamshere ML, Moskvina V, Dwyer S, Smith RL, 
Green E, Grozeva D, Holmans P, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK.

Recent findings from genetic epidemiology and from genome-wide association
studies point strongly to a partial overlap in the genes that contribute
susceptibility to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (BD). Previous data have
also directly implicated one of the best supported schizophrenia-associated loci,
zinc finger binding protein 804A (ZNF804A), as showing trans-disorder effects,
and the same is true for one of the best supported bipolar loci, calcium channel,
voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1C subunit (CACNA1C) which has also been
associated with schizophrenia. We have undertaken a cross-phenotype study based
upon the remaining variants that show genome-wide evidence for association in
large schizophrenia and BD meta-analyses. These comprise in schizophrenia, SNPs
in or in the vicinity of transcription factor 4 (TCF4), neurogranin (NRGN) and an
extended region covering the MHC locus on chromosome 6. For BD, the strongly
supported variants are in the vicinity of ankyrin 3, node of Ranvier (ANK3) and
polybromo-1 (PBRM1). Using data sets entirely independent of their original
discoveries, we observed strong evidence that the PBRM1 locus is also associated 
with schizophrenia (P = 0.00015) and nominally significant evidence (P < 0.05)
that the NRGN and the extended MHC region are associated with BD. Moreover,
considering this highly restricted set of loci as a group, the evidence for
trans-disorder effects is compelling (P = 4.7 × 10(-5)). Including earlier
reported data for trans-disorder effects for ZNF804A and CACNA1C, six out of
eight of the most robustly associated loci for either disorder show
trans-disorder effects.

PMID: 21037240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Diabetes. 2011 Feb;60(2):662-8. doi: 10.2337/db10-0134. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Resequencing and analysis of variation in the TCF7L2 gene in African Americans
suggests that SNP rs7903146 is the causal diabetes susceptibility variant.

Palmer ND(1), Hester JM, An SS, Adeyemo A, Rotimi C, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI,
Ng MC, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston Salem, North
Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus is
associated with type 2 diabetes across multiple ethnicities. The aim of this
study was to elucidate which variant in TCF7L2 confers diabetes susceptibility in
African Americans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Through the evaluation of tagging single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), type 2 diabetes susceptibility was limited to a 4.3-kb
interval, which contains the YRI (African) linkage disequilibrium (LD) block
containing rs7903146. To better define the relationship between type 2 diabetes
risk and genetic variation we resequenced this 4.3-kb region in 96 African
American DNAs. Thirty-three novel and 13 known SNPs were identified: 20 with
minor allele frequencies (MAF) >0.05 and 12 with MAF >0.10. These polymorphisms
and the previously identified DG10S478 microsatellite were evaluated in African
American type 2 diabetic cases (n = 1,033) and controls (n = 1,106).
RESULTS: Variants identified from direct sequencing and databases were genotyped 
or imputed. Fifteen SNPs showed association with type 2 diabetes (P < 0.05) with 
rs7903146 being the most significant (P = 6.32 × 10(-6)). Results of imputation, 
haplotype, and conditional analysis of SNPs were consistent with rs7903146 being 
the trait-defining SNP. Analysis of the DG10S478 microsatellite, which is outside
the 4.3-kb LD block, revealed consistent association of risk allele 8 with type 2
diabetes (odds ratio [OR] = 1.33; P = 0.022) as reported in European populations;
however, allele 16 (MAF = 0.016 cases and 0.032 controls) was strongly associated
with reduced risk (OR = 0.39; P = 5.02 × 10(-5)) in contrast with previous
studies.
CONCLUSIONS: In African Americans, these observations suggest that rs7903146 is
the trait-defining polymorphism associated with type 2 diabetes risk.
Collectively, these results support ethnic differences in type 2 diabetes
associations.

PMCID: PMC3028368
PMID: 20980453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3973-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.056473. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Role of canonical Wnt signaling/ß-catenin via Dermo1 in cranial dermal cell
development.

Tran TH(1), Jarrell A, Zentner GE, Welsh A, Brownell I, Scacheri PC, Atit R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA.

Cranial dermis develops from cephalic mesoderm and neural crest cells, but what
signal(s) specifies the dermal lineage is unclear. Using genetic tools to fate
map and manipulate a cranial mesenchymal progenitor population in the
supraorbital region, we show that the dermal progenitor cells beneath the surface
ectoderm process canonical Wnt signaling at the time of specification. We show
that Wnt signaling/ß-catenin is absolutely required and sufficient for Dermo1
expression and dermal cell identity in the cranium. The absence of the Wnt
signaling cue leads to formation of cartilage in craniofacial and ventral trunk
regions at the expense of dermal and bone lineages. Dermo1 can be a direct
transcription target and may mediate the functional role of Wnt signaling in
dermal precursors. This study reveals a lineage-specific role of canonical Wnt
signaling/ß-catenin in promoting dermal cell fate in distinct precursor
populations.

PMCID: PMC2976281
PMID: 20980404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;49(6):495-9.

[The role of COX-2 in the regulation of Wnt signal pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Chen H, Ouyang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China. fengyixx@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: Wnt signal is very important to control the gastrointestinal mucosal
proliferation, but its role in the gastric mucosal proliferation after acidified 
ethanol injury is not clear yet, neither is the relationship with cyclooxygenase 
2 (COX-2).
METHODS: X-gal staining was used to measure the expression of Wnt signaling;
Western blot and RT-PCR were used to measure the expression of TCF4 and ß-Catenin
in the gastric mucosa before and after acidified ethanol injury. We also used
TOP/flash plasmid to further identify the relationship between COX-2 and Wnt
signal pathway.
RESULTS: After acidified ethanol injury, the expression of LacZ signal, ß-Catenin
and TCF4 increased only in the wild type mouse. The expression of ß-Catenin and
TCF4 protein increased about (3.52±0.52) times and (3.02±0.62) times separately, 
and the expression of ß-Catenin and TCF4 mRNA increased about (19.85±3.63) times 
and (17.82±4.82) times separately. Without ethanol injury, the expression of
TOP/flash plasmid was inhibited by COX-2 inhibitor (NS398) about 80% and promoted
by prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) about 50%. After 1% ethanol injury, the expression of 
plasmid was inhibited by NS398 about 25%; on the contrary, PGE2 promoted the
expression about 10%.
CONCLUSION: Wnt signal in gastric mucosa is activated after acidified ethanol
injury. COX-2 may work through modulating Wnt signal to control the proliferation
of gastric mucosa.

PMID: 20979737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Dec;14(6):781-5. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0095.
Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Population structure of Aggarwals of north India as revealed by molecular
markers.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease (SANCD), Public Health Foundation of
India, New Delhi, India.

Using molecular genetic data on Aggarwals (Vaish/Vysya), an endogamous population
group of north India, we provide evidence of its homogeneous unstratified
population structure. We found the mean average heterozygosity value of 0.33 for 
14 single nucleotide polymorphisms belonging to four genes (TCF7L2-, HHEX-,
KCNJ11-, and ADIPOQ-) in the Aggarwal population (sample of 184 individuals) and 
tried to evaluate the genomic efficiency of endogamy in this population with the 
help of clan-based stratified analysis. We concluded that the sociocultural
identity of the endogamous population groups could act as a robust proxy maker
for inferring their homogeneity and population structure in India, which is ideal
also for population selection for future genome-wide association studies in the
country.

PMCID: PMC3490109
PMID: 20979565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):103-10. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1940-4. Epub 2010
Oct 19.

Carriers of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 TT genotype have elevated levels of plasma
glucose, serum proinsulin and plasma gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) during 
a meal test.

Gjesing AP(1), Kjems LL, Vestmar MA, Grarup N, Linneberg A, Deacon CF, Holst JJ, 
Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.
apri@hagedorn.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele
associates with type 2 diabetes in several populations, possibly mediated via
decreased incretin secretion and/or action and altered beta and alpha cell
function. We aimed to study circulating levels of glucose, proinsulin, insulin,
C-peptide, glucagon, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucagon-like peptide-2
(GLP-2) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) among individuals carrying the
high-risk rs7903146 TT genotype and low-risk CC genotype following a meal test.
METHODS: A meal challenge was performed in 31 glucose-tolerant men (age 54<U+2009>±<U+2009>7
years and BMI 26<U+2009>±<U+2009>3 kg/m²) with rs7903146 TT genotype and 31 glucose-tolerant
age- and BMI-matched men with CC genotype (age 53<U+2009>±<U+2009>6 years and BMI 26<U+2009>±<U+2009>3
kg/m²). Serum proinsulin, insulin, C-peptide and plasma glucose, glucagon, GLP-1,
GLP-2 and GIP were obtained 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 120, 135, 150, 180,
210, and 240 min after ingestion of a standardised breakfast meal.
RESULTS: An elevated incremental AUC for plasma glucose was observed among TT
genotype carriers (CC carriers 21.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>101.9 mmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers
97.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>89.2 mmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). TT carriers also had increased AUCs for
proinsulin (CC carriers 6,030<U+2009>±<U+2009>3,001 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers 6,917<U+2009>±<U+2009>4,820
pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03), C-peptide (CC carriers 397.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>131.9 nmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT 
carriers 417.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>109.3 nmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04) and GIP (CC carriers
12,310<U+2009>±<U+2009>3,840 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers 14,590<U+2009>±<U+2009>5,910 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Middle-aged normoglycaemic individuals carrying the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 risk TT genotype show early signs of dysregulated glucose
metabolism, decreased processing of proinsulin and elevated GIP secretion
following a meal challenge.

PMID: 20957343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Jan;31(1):110-6. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.212068. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Increased 12/15-lipoxygenase enhances cell growth, fibronectin deposition, and
neointimal formation in response to carotid injury.

Deliri H(1), Meller N, Kadakkal A, Malhotra R, Brewster J, Doran AC, Pei H,
Oldham SN, Skaflen MD, Garmey JC, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22904, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether increased 12/15-lipoxygenase (12/15LO) expression
in vivo enhances neointimal formation in response to injury.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 12/15LO expression in the vessel wall is increased in animal
models of metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus. Increased expression of
12/15LO enhances cultured vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation, an
effect mediated by the helix-loop-helix factor inhibitor of differentiation 3
(Id3). Carotid endothelial denudation was performed on apolipoprotein (Apo)
E(-/-), ApoE(-/-)/12/15LO(-/-), C57BL/6, and 12/15LO-overexpressing transgenic
mice. ApoE(-/-)/12/15LO(-/-) mice had attenuated and 12/15LO-overexpressing
transgenic mice had enhanced neointimal formation compared with control mice.
12/15LO-overexpressing transgenic mice had greater postinjury carotid Id3 and
Ki-67 expression, cell number, and fibronectin deposition compared with C57BL/6
mice. Loss of 12/15LO attenuated proliferation of cultured ApoE(-/-) VSMCs,
whereas 12/15LO overexpression induced VSMC proliferation. Loss of Id3 enhanced
immunoglobulin trascription factor (ITF)-2b binding to and activation of the
p21(cip1) promoter and abrogated 12/15LO-induced VSMC proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, these data are the first demonstration that
increased expression of 12/15LO in the vessel wall enhances Id3-dependent cell
proliferation, fibronectin deposition, and neointimal formation in response to
injury. Results identify p21(cip1) as a potential target of the 12/15LO-Id3
pathway and suggest that modulation of this pathway may have therapeutic
implications for targeting the increased risk of restenosis in patients with
diabetes.

PMID: 20947825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Jan;10(1):M110.002998. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.002998.
Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Alternative splicing of SLC39A14 in colorectal cancer is regulated by the Wnt
pathway.

Thorsen K(1), Mansilla F, Schepeler T, Øster B, Rasmussen MH, Dyrskjøt L, Karni
R, Akerman M, Krainer AR, Laurberg S, Andersen CL, Ørntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, DK-8200 
Aarhus N, Denmark.

Alternative splicing is a crucial step in the generation of protein diversity and
its misregulation is observed in many human cancer types. By analyzing 143
colorectal samples using exon arrays, SLC39A14, a divalent cation transporter,
was identified as being aberrantly spliced in tumor samples. SLC39A14 contains
two mutually exclusive exons 4A and 4B and the exon 4A/4B ratio was significantly
altered in adenomas (p = 3.6 × 10(-10)) and cancers (p = 9.4 × 10(-11)),
independent of microsatellite stability status. The findings were validated in
independent exon array data sets and by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). Aberrant Wnt signaling is a hallmark of
colorectal tumorigenesis and is characterized by nuclear ß-catenin. Experimental 
inactivation of Wnt signaling in DLD1 and Ls174T cells by knockdown of ß-catenin 
or overexpression of dominant negative TCFs (TCF1 and TCF4) altered the 4A/4B
ratio, indicating that SLC39A14 splicing is regulated by the Wnt pathway. An
altered 4A/4B ratio was also observed in gastric and lung cancer where Wnt
signaling is also known to be aberrantly activated. The splicing factor SRSF1 and
its regulator, the kinase SRPK1, were found to be deregulated upon Wnt
inactivation in colorectal carcinoma cells. SRPK1 was also found up-regulated in 
both adenoma samples (p = 1.5 × 10(-5)) and cancer samples (p = 5 × 10(-4)). In
silico splicing factor binding analysis predicted SRSF1 to bind predominantly to 
the cancer associated exon 4B, hence, it was hypothesized that SRPK1 activates
SRSF1 through phosphorylation, followed by SRSF1 binding to exon 4B and
regulation of SLC39A14 splicing. Indeed, siRNA-mediated knockdown of SRPK1 and
SRSF1 in DLD1 and SW480 colorectal cancer cells led to a change in the 4A/4B
isoform ratio, supporting a role of these factors in the regulation of SLC39A14
splicing. In conclusion, alternative splicing of SLC39A14 was identified in
colorectal tumors and found to be regulated by the Wnt pathway, most likely
through regulation of SRPK1 and SRSF1.

PMCID: PMC3013455
PMID: 20938052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2010 Dec;20(6):810-5. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.09.008. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

The neurobiology of schizophrenia: new leads and avenues for treatment.

Bray NJ(1), Leweke FM, Kapur S, Meyer-Lindenberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
UK. nicholas.bray@kcl.ac.uk

Recent large-scale genetic studies have provided robust evidence implicating
several novel susceptibility genes for schizophrenia. These include ZNF804A, TCF4
and NRGN, which contain common variants that weakly increase schizophrenia
susceptibility, and NRXN1, in which rare copy number variants have a greater
impact on schizophrenia risk. Investigation of these and other substantiated
susceptibility genes are providing valuable insight into the primary
neurobiological mechanisms underlying schizophrenia, which may lead to novel
therapeutic interventions for the disorder. In the meantime, several novel
pharmacological strategies, including activation of mGluRs, elevation of synaptic
glycine and inhibition of phosphodiesterase 10A, have recently shown promise for 
the treatment of schizophrenia in clinical trials.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Pathol. 2010 Dec;222(4):410-20. doi: 10.1002/path.2773.

Pin1 acts as a modulator of cell proliferation through alteration in NF-<U+03BA>B but
not ß-catenin/TCF4 signalling in a subset of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Prolyl isomerase Pin1 is frequently up-regulated in a variety of human
malignancies, modulating signalling in several oncogenic pathways, including
those involving NF-<U+03BA>B and ß-catenin. Our previous study provided evidence that
alterations in these signal pathways are essential events during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells. Here we focused on 
the functional roles of Pin1. In normal endometrium, Pin1 expression showed a
stepwise decrease from proliferative to secretory phases during the menstrual
cycle, correlating positively with cell proliferation and expression of several
cell cycle-related molecules including E2F1 and pRb. Transfection of E2F1 caused 
transactivation of Pin1, indicating control by E2F1/Rb pathways. In Em Cas with
morules, Pin1 expression was found to be significantly increased in glandular but
not in morular components, correlating inversely with nuclear accumulation of
ß-catenin. Overexpression also caused an increase in the stability of nuclear
p65, leading to enhancement of NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated transactivation of the cyclin D1
gene, in contrast to minimal inhibition of ß-catenin/TCF4 transcription activity.
These findings indicate that Pin1 may play an important role in preserving cell
proliferative activity in glandular carcinoma components through enhancement of
NF-<U+03BA>B signalling, but its down-regulation may be a key signal for induction of
trans-differentiation of Em Ca cells, contributing to a shift from NF-<U+03BA>B to
ß-catenin/TCF signalling pathways.

Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20922712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 15;108 Suppl 1:4570-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000072107. Epub 2010 Oct 4.

Epithelial cell proliferation in the developing zebrafish intestine is regulated 
by the Wnt pathway and microbial signaling via Myd88.

Cheesman SE(1), Neal JT, Mittge E, Seredick BM, Guillemin K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Rates of cell proliferation in the vertebrate intestinal epithelium are modulated
by intrinsic signaling pathways and extrinsic cues. Here, we report that
epithelial cell proliferation in the developing zebrafish intestine is stimulated
both by the presence of the resident microbiota and by activation of Wnt
signaling. We find that the response to microbial proliferation-promoting signals
requires Myd88 but not TNF receptor, implicating host innate immune pathways but 
not inflammation in the establishment of homeostasis in the developing intestinal
epithelium. We show that loss of axin1, a component of the ß-catenin destruction 
complex, results in greater than WT levels of intestinal epithelial cell
proliferation. Compared with conventionally reared axin1 mutants, germ-free axin1
mutants exhibit decreased intestinal epithelial cell proliferation, whereas
monoassociation with the resident intestinal bacterium Aeromonas veronii results 
in elevated epithelial cell proliferation. Disruption of ß-catenin signaling by
deletion of the ß-catenin coactivator tcf4 partially decreases the
proliferation-promoting capacity of A. veronii. We show that numbers of
intestinal epithelial cells with cytoplasmic ß-catenin are reduced in the absence
of the microbiota in both WT and axin1 mutants and elevated in animals'
monoassociated A. veronii. Collectively, these data demonstrate that resident
intestinal bacteria enhance the stability of ß-catenin in intestinal epithelial
cells and promote cell proliferation in the developing vertebrate intestine.

PMCID: PMC3063593
PMID: 20921418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 3;285(49):38023-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.132209. Epub 2010
Sep 30.

Requirement of TCF7L2 for TGF-beta-dependent transcriptional activation of the
TMEPAI gene.

Nakano N(1), Itoh S, Watanabe Y, Maeyama K, Itoh F, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

The TGF-ß and Wnt pathways are involved in cell fate and tumorigenicity. A recent
report indicated that a TGF-ß target gene, TMEPAI (transmembrane prostate
androgen-induced RNA), is possibly also a downstream target of Wnt signaling.
Although TMEPAI was believed to be involved in tumorigenicity because of its
blockage of TGF-ß signaling, how TGF-ß and Wnt signals affect the activation of
the TMEPAI gene is not well understood. Herein, we show that the TMEPAI promoter 
is regulated synergistically by TGF-ß/Smad and Wnt/ß-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) 
7L2. The critical cis-element for dual signals, termed TGF-ß-responsive
TCF7L2-binding element (TTE), is located in intron 1 of the TMEPAI gene. TCF7L2, 
but not Smad proteins, bound to TTE, whereas the disruption of TTE by mutagenesis
remarkably counteracted both TGF-ß and TCF7L2 responses. The introduction of
mutations in critical Smad-binding elements blocked the activation of the TMEPAI 
promoter by TCF7L2. Furthermore, our DNA-protein interaction experiments revealed
the indirect binding of TCF7L2 to Smad-binding elements via Smad3 upon TGF-ß
stimulation as well as its TGF-ß-dependent association with TTE. We demonstrate
that the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway is preferentially able to alter the
transcriptional regulation of the TGF-ß-target gene, TMEPAI.

PMCID: PMC2992236
PMID: 20889500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Apr;26(4):718-29. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.260.

Conserved regulatory motifs in osteogenic gene promoters integrate cooperative
effects of canonical Wnt and BMP pathways.

Rodríguez-Carballo E(1), Ulsamer A, Susperregui AR, Manzanares-Céspedes C,
Sánchez-García E, Bartrons R, Rosa JL, Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBELL,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

Osteoblast differentiation depends on the coordinated network of evolutionary
conserved transcription factors during bone formation and homeostasis. Evidence
indicates that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt proteins regulate several
steps of skeletal development. Here, we provide a molecular description of the
cooperative effects of BMP and Wnt canonical pathway on the expression of the
early osteogenic genes Dlx5, Msx2, and Runx2 in C2C12 cells, primary cultures of 
bone marrow-mesenchymal stem cells, and organotypic calvarial cultures.
Coordinated regulation of these genes leads to the cooperative activation of
their downstream osteogenic target gene osterix. Induction of these genes is
mediated through enhancer regions with an evolutionary conserved structure
encompassing both Smad and TCF/LEF1 DNA-binding sites. Formation of a cooperative
complex is mediated through DNA binding of Smads and TCF4/ß-catenin to their
cognate sequences, as well as protein-protein interactions between them. The
formation of these cooperative transcriptional complexes results in a more
efficient recruitment of coactivators such as p300. We propose that evolutionary 
conserved regulatory regions in specific osteogenic master genes are key
integrative modules during osteogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 20878775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Curr Diab Rep. 2010 Dec;10(6):444-51. doi: 10.1007/s11892-010-0149-8.

Molecular function of TCF7L2: Consequences of TCF7L2 splicing for molecular
function and risk for type 2 diabetes.

Hansson O(1), Zhou Y, Renström E, Osmark P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Malmö University Hospital, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden. Ola.Hansson@med.lu.se

TCF7L2 harbors the variant with the strongest effect on type 2 diabetes (T2D)
identified to date, yet the molecular mechanism as to how variation in the gene
increases the risk for developing T2D remains elusive. The phenotypic changes
associated with the risk genotype suggest that T2D arises as a consequence of
reduced islet mass and/or impaired function, and it has become clear that TCF7L2 
plays an important role for several vital functions in the pancreatic islet.
TCF7L2 comprises 17 exons, five of which are alternative (ie, exons 4 and 13-16).
In pancreatic islets four splice variants of TCF7L2 are predominantly expressed. 
The regulation of these variants and the functional consequences at the protein
level are still poorly understood. A clear picture of the molecular mechanism
will be necessary to understand how an intronic variation in TCF7L2 can influence
islet function.

PMID: 20878273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genetika. 2010 Aug;46(8):1123-31.

[Polymorphic markers TCF7L2 rs12255372 and SLC30A8 rs13266634 confer
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in a Russian population].

[Article in Russian]

Potapov VA, Shamkhalova MN, Smetanina SA, Bel'chikova LN, Suplotova LA,
Shestakova MV, Nosikov VV.

Genes 7CF7L2 and SLC30A8, encoding transcription factor-4 and transmembrane zinc 
transporter-8, respectively, play an important role in the regulation of
development, proliferation, and pancreatic beta cell function. In the present
study we examined polymorphic markers of genes rs12255372 [NT_03359.12:g33557428G
--> T] of 7CF7L2 gene and rs13266634 [NP_776250.2:p.R325W] of SLC30A8 in groups
of Russians with type 2 diabetes (T2D) (n = 588) and healthy normoglycemic
controles (n = 597). Significant association of allele T(rs12255372) and allele R
(rs13266634) with a higher risk of T2D development has been found (OR = 1.37 and 
1.22, respectively). Adjustment for the effect of potential nongenetic risk
factors resulted in a further increase in the OR values, from 1.54 (P = 0.24) to 
1.89 (P = 0.046) for homozygous carriers of the T allele and from 1.29 (P =
0.035) to 1.35 (P = 0.019) in the individuals homozygous for the R allele. The
patients homozygous for predisposing allele T (rs12255372) or R (rs13266634) had 
significantly lower insulin concentrations in the blood 2 h after glucose
tolerance test (GTT) as well as lower values of HOMA-beta, beta cell homeostasis 
indicator compared to the carriers of other genotypes. Thus, we have shown that
the rs12255372 and rs13266634 markers are independent genetic T2D risk factors in
a Russian population.

PMID: 20873210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Orv Hetil. 2010 Oct 3;151(40):1645-55. doi: 10.1556/OH.2010.28942.

[Barrier- and autophagic functions of the intestinal epithelia: role of
disturbances in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease].

[Article in Hungarian]

Lapis K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar I. Patológiai és Kísérleti
Rákkutató Intézet Budapest. lapkar@t-online.hu

Crohn's disease is a widely known debilitating chronic inflammatory disease,
mostly affecting terminal ileum and/or colon. Epidemiological, familial and twin 
studies suggest that genetic factors play an important role in susceptibility to 
the disease. Clinical observations suggest that ill-defined environmental factors
also play a part. Advances in molecular genotyping technology, statistical
methodologies, bioinformatics and the combined use of them in genome wide
scanning and association studies resulted in the identification of more than 30
susceptibility genes and loci associated with Crohn's disease and revealed and
highlighted a number of new previously unsuspected pathways playing a role in the
pathogenesis of Crohn's disease. Close association of the disease with
polymorphisms in the genes encoding the pattern recognition receptors
particularly the NOD2 protein, the Wnt pathway transcription factor Tcf4 (also
known as TCFL2) and the autophagic regulator ATG16L1 have been found. The
polymorphisms involved are associated with decreased defensin production
(defensin deficiency) which can lead to changes in the composition of the
commensal microbial flora, defects in the intestinal barrier functions and
bacterial invasion of the mucosa. Other recently recognized consequences of the
polymorphisms involving the genes encoding NOD2 and ATG16L1 proteins are that the
truncated NOD2 protein is unable to induce autophagy and this protein, just like 
the ATG16L1 T300A mutant protein, leads to failure adequately to destroy
phagocytosed bacteria. The consequence is persisting low level infection, chronic
intestinal inflammation, tissue injury and the clinical symptoms of the disease. 
Thus, Crohn's disease can be seen to be caused by defects in the innate immune
defense, in particular defects in bacterial processing and clearance. The
accumulated evidence suggests that Crohn's disease is associated with an
exaggerated adaptive immune response to the persisting intestinal microbes in
genetically susceptible hosts. Intervention in these circumstances should
probably be geared to strengthening of the innate immune responses rather than
simple attempts to suppress adaptive immunity.

PMID: 20860961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Brain Res. 2010 Dec 2;1363:20-39. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.024. Epub 2010 
Sep 16.

Developmental changes of gene expression after spinal cord injury in neonatal
opossums.

Mladinic M(1), Lefèvre C, Del Bel E, Nicholls J, Digby M.

Author information: 
(1)SISSA, Department of Neurobiology, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy.
mladinic@sissa.it

Changes in gene expression have been measured 24h after injury to mammalian
spinal cords that can and cannot regenerate. In opossums there is a critical
period of development when regeneration stops being possible: at 9 days postnatal
cervical spinal cords regenerate, at 12 days they do not. By the use of marsupial
cDNA microarrays, we detected 158 genes that respond differentially to injury at 
the two ages critical for regeneration. For selected candidates additional
measurements were made by real-time PCR and sites of their expression were shown 
by immunostaining. Candidate genes have been classified so as to select those
that promote or prevent regeneration. Up-regulated by injury at 8 days and/or
down-regulated by injury at 13 days were genes known to promote growth, such as
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 or transcription factor TCF7L2. By
contrast, at 13 days, up-regulation occurred of inhibitory molecules, including
annexins, ephrins, and genes related to apoptosis and neurodegenerative diseases.
Certain genes such as calmodulin 1 and NOGO, changed expression similarly in
animals that could and could not regenerate without any additional changes in
response to injury. These findings confirmed and extended changes of gene
expression found in earlier screens on 9 and 12 ay preparations without lesions
and provide a comprehensive list of genes that serve as a basis for testing how
identified molecules, singly or in combination, promote and prevent central
nervous system regeneration.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20849836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Nov;74(6):471-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00607.x. Epub 
2010 Sep 16.

The TCF7L2 diabetes risk variant is associated with HbA1(C) levels: a genome-wide
association meta-analysis.

Franklin CS(1), Aulchenko YS, Huffman JE, Vitart V, Hayward C, Polaek O, Knott
S, Zgaga L, Zemunik T, Rudan I, Campbell H, Wright AF, Wild SH, Wilson JF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified around 20 common genetic
variants influencing the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Likewise, a number of
variants have been associated with diabetes-related quantitative glycaemic
traits, but to date the overlap between these genes and variants has been low.
The majority of genetic studies have focused on fasting plasma glucose levels;
however, this measure is highly variable. We have conducted a GWA meta-analysis
of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1(C) ) levels within three healthy nondiabetic
populations. This phenotype provides an estimate of mean glucose levels over 2-3 
months and is a more stable predictor of future diabetes risk. Participants were 
from three isolated populations: the Orkney Isles in the north of Scotland, the
Dalmatian islands of Vis, and Korcula in Croatia (total of 1782 nondiabetic
subjects). Association was tested in each population and results combined by
meta-analysis. The strongest association was with the TCF7L2 gene (rs7903146, P= 
1.48 × 10<U+207B>7). This is also the strongest common genetic risk factor for T2D but
it has not been identified in previous genome-wide studies of glycated
haemoglobin.

© 2010 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2010 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 20849430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Mar;38(3):1929-34. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0313-x. Epub 2010
Sep 17.

Molecular characterization, chromosomal localization, expression profile and
association analysis with carcass traits of the porcine dickkopf homolog1 gene.

Liu C(1), Gao H, Zhai S, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Biology and Animal Breeding, Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

DKK1 (dickkopf homolog 1) is a potent inhibitor of the canonical Wnt/ß-cantenin
signalling pathway, which plays a pivotal role in myogenesis, adipogenesis, and
many other crucial biological processes. In this study, DKK1 was assigned to
porcine 14q25-26 by using the radiation hybrid (IMpRH) panel. A G1757A single
nucleotide polymorphism site by Csp6I PCR-RFLP was identified. Association
analysis showed that different genotypes were associated with loin muscle area (P
= 0.0281). Semi-quantitative-RT-PCR analysis revealed that DKK1 was highly
expressed in spleen and lymph node at two developmental stages, while in skeletal
muscle, further real-time PCR quantified that DKK1 was down-regulated in Large
White pigs compared to Tongcheng pigs, accompanied by the down-regulation of
CTTNB1 and TCF4, the up-regulation of LRP6, suggesting that the phenotypic
difference between lean and obese pigs might be correlated with the activity of
Wnt/ß-cantenin signalling pathway.

PMID: 20848216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Dev Cell. 2010 Sep 14;19(3):413-25. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.08.013.

Functional coupling between the extracellular matrix and nuclear lamina by Wnt
signaling in progeria.

Hernandez L(1), Roux KJ, Wong ES, Mounkes LC, Mutalif R, Navasankari R, Rai B,
Cool S, Jeong JW, Wang H, Lee HS, Kozlov S, Grunert M, Keeble T, Jones CM, Meta
MD, Young SG, Daar IO, Burke B, Perantoni AO, Stewart CL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, NCI, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Sep 14;19(3):355-6.

The segmental premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria (HGPS) is
caused by a truncated and farnesylated form of Lamin A. In a mouse model for
HGPS, a similar Lamin A variant causes the proliferative arrest and death of
postnatal, but not embryonic, fibroblasts. Arrest is due to an inability to
produce a functional extracellular matrix (ECM), because growth on normal ECM
rescues proliferation. The defects are associated with inhibition of canonical
Wnt signaling, due to reduced nuclear localization and transcriptional activity
of Lef1, but not Tcf4, in both mouse and human progeric cells. Defective Wnt
signaling, affecting ECM synthesis, may be critical to the etiology of HGPS
because mice exhibit skeletal defects and apoptosis in major blood vessels
proximal to the heart. These results establish a functional link between the
nuclear envelope/lamina and the cell surface/ECM and may provide insights into
the role of Wnt signaling and the ECM in aging.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2953243
PMID: 20833363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 15;19(22):4490-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq380. Epub 2010 Sep 
9.

Effects of cis-regulatory variation differ across regions of the adult human
brain.

Buonocore F(1), Hill MJ, Campbell CD, Oladimeji PB, Jeffries AR, Troakes C,
Hortobagyi T, Williams BP, Cooper JD, Bray NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Cellular Basis of Behaviour, Department of Neuroscience, The
James Black Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,Kings College London, 125
Coldharbour Lane, London, UK.

Cis-regulatory variation is considered to be an important determinant of human
phenotypic variability, including susceptibility to complex disease. Recent
studies have shown that the effects of cis-regulatory polymorphism on gene
expression can differ widely between tissues. In the present study, we tested
whether the effects of cis-regulatory variation can also differ between regions
of the adult human brain. We used relative allelic expression to measure
cis-effects on the RNA expression of five candidate genes for neuropsychiatric
illness (ZNF804A, NOS1, RGS4, AKT1 and TCF4) across multiple discrete brain
regions within individual subjects. For all five genes, we observed significant
differences in allelic expression between brain regions in several individual
subjects, suggesting regional differences in the effects of cis-regulatory
polymorphism to be a common phenomenon. As well as highlighting an important
caveat for studies of regulatory polymorphism in the brain, our findings indicate
that it is possible to delineate brain areas in which cis-regulatory variants are
active. This may provide important insights into the fundamental biology of
neuropsychiatric phenotypes with which such variants are associated.

PMCID: PMC3298852
PMID: 20829226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1072-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1007495. Epub 2010 Aug
25.

Major progress in Fuchs's corneal dystrophy.

Wright AF, Dhillon B.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1016-24.

PMID: 20825321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1016-24. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1007064. Epub 2010
Aug 25.

E2-2 protein and Fuchs's corneal dystrophy.

Baratz KH(1), Tosakulwong N, Ryu E, Brown WL, Branham K, Chen W, Tran KD,
Schmid-Kubista KE, Heckenlively JR, Swaroop A, Abecasis G, Bailey KR, Edwards AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1072-5.

BACKGROUND: Fuchs's corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a leading cause of corneal
transplantation and affects 5% of persons in the United States who are over the
age of 40 years. Clinically visible deposits called guttae develop under the
corneal endothelium in patients with FCD. A loss of endothelial cells and
deposition of an abnormal extracellular matrix are observed microscopically. In
advanced disease, the cornea swells and becomes cloudy because the remaining
endothelial cells are not sufficient to keep the cornea dehydrated and clear.
Although rare genetic variation that contributes to both early-onset and typical 
late-onset forms of FCD has been identified, to our knowledge, no common variants
have been reported.
METHODS: We performed a genomewide association study and replicated the most
significant observations in a second, independent group of subjects.
RESULTS: Alleles in the transcription factor 4 gene (TCF4), encoding a member of 
the E-protein family (E2-2), were associated with typical FCD (P=2.3x10(-26)).
The association increased the odds of having FCD by a factor of 30 for persons
with two copies of the disease variants (homozygotes) and discriminated between
case subjects and control subjects with about 76% accuracy. At least two regions 
of the TCF4 locus were associated independently with FCD. Alleles in the gene
encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type G (PTPRG) were associated
with FCD (P=4.0x10(-7)), but the association did not reach genomewide
significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in TCF4 contributes to the development of FCD.
(Funded by the National Eye Institute and others.)

PMID: 20825314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 15;70(18):7253-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1108. Epub 
2010 Sep 7.

Colorectal tumors are effectively eradicated by combined inhibition of
{beta}-catenin, KRAS, and the oncogenic transcription factor ITF2.

Mologni L(1), Dekhil H, Ceccon M, Purgante S, Lan C, Cleris L, Magistroni V,
Formelli F, Gambacorti-Passerini CB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy; McGill University, Montreal,
Canada; and National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy.

Colorectal carcinomas (CRC) harbor well-defined genetic abnormalities, including 
aberrant activation of ß-catenin (ß-cat) and KRAS, but independent targeting of
these molecules seems to have limited therapeutic effect. In this study, we
report therapeutic effects of combined targeting of different oncogenes in CRC.
Inducible short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated silencing of ß-cat, ITF2, or KRAS
decreased proliferation by 88%, 72%, and 45%, respectively, with no significant
apoptosis in any case. In contrast, combined blockade of ß-cat and ITF2 inhibited
proliferation by 99% with massive apoptosis. Similar effects occurred after
combined shRNA against ß-cat and KRAS. In vivo, single oncogene blockade
inhibited the growth of established tumors by up to 30%, whereas dual ß-cat and
ITF2 targeting caused 93% inhibition. Similar tumor growth suppression was
achieved by double ß-cat/KRAS shRNA in vivo. Our findings illustrate an effective
therapeutic principle in CRC based on a combination targeting strategy that
includes the ITF2 oncogene, which represents a novel therapeutic target.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20823162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 13;30(2):167-77. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.400. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Epithelial Hic-5/ARA55 expression contributes to prostate tumorigenesis and
castrate responsiveness.

Li X(1), Martinez-Ferrer M, Botta V, Uwamariya C, Banerjee J, Bhowmick NA.

Author information: 
(1)The Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center and Department of Urologic Surgery,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

Stromal-epithelial interactions dictate prostate tumorigenesis and response to
castration. Hydrogen peroxide-inducible clone 5 (Hic-5/ARA55) is a transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-ß)-induced coactivator of androgen receptor (AR)
expressed in the prostate stroma. Interestingly, following castration, we
identified epithelial expression of Hic-5/ARA55 in mouse and human prostate
tissues. To determine the role of epithelial Hic-5 in prostate cancer progression
and castration responsiveness, we compared LNCaP cells having Hic-5 stably
expressed with the parental LNCaP cells following tissue recombination xenografts
with mouse prostate stromal cells. We previously identified knocking out prostate
stromal TGF-ß signaling potentiated castrate-resistant prostate tumors, in a
Wnt-dependent manner. The LNCaP chimeric tumors containing prostate fibroblasts
conditionally knocked out for the TGF-ß type II receptor (Tgfbr2-KO) resulted in 
larger, more invasive, and castration-resistant tumors compared those with floxed
(control) stromal cells. However, the LNCaP-Hic5 associated with Tgfbr2-KO
fibroblasts generated chimeric tumors with reduced tumor volume, lack of invasion
and restored castration dependence. Neutralization of canonical Wnt signaling is 
shown to reduce prostate tumor size and restore regression following castration. 
Thus, we hypothesized that epithelial Hic-5/ARA55 expression negatively regulated
Wnt signaling. The mechanism of the Hic-5/ARA55 effects on castration was
determined by analysis of the c-myc promoter. C-myc luciferase reporter activity 
suggested Hic-5/ARA55 expression inhibited c-myc activity by ß-catenin.
Sequential ChIP analysis indicated ß-catenin and T-cell-specific 4 (TCF4) bound
the endogenous c-myc promoter in the absence of Hic-5 expression. However, the
formation of a TCF4/Hic-5 repressor complex inhibited c-myc promoter activity, by
excluding ß-catenin binding with TCF4 on the promoter. The data indicate
Hic-5/ARA55 expression in response to castration-enabled epithelial regression
through the repression of c-myc gene at the chromatin level.

PMCID: PMC3021901
PMID: 20818421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Nov-Dec;53(6):396-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.08.005. Epub 
2010 Sep 21.

Mosaic microdeletion 18q21 as a cause of mental retardation.

Stavropoulos DJ(1), MacGregor DL, Yoon G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We present the clinical and cytogenetic findings in an 8 year old girl with
mental retardation, acquired microcephaly, delayed motor skills and stereotypical
hand movements. Array comparative genomic hybridization identified a mosaic de
novo deletion of approximately 7.505 Mb in chromosome region 18q21.1q21.31,
resulting in the loss of one copy of the TCF4 gene as well as 29 other RefSeq
genes. The deletion likely occurred early in development as this child has
clinical symptoms affecting multiple organ systems, reminiscent of those observed
in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS; OMIM 610954). This case represents the second
known example of a mosaic deletion resulting in clinical symptoms consistent with
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and illustrates the utility of genomic microarray analysis
in detecting large mosaic imbalances that may otherwise be missed by G-band
analysis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cells. 2010 Sep;30(3):209-18. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0109-9. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) regulates activin receptor-like kinase 1
(ALK1)/Smad1 pathway for development of diabetic nephropathy.

Araoka T(1), Abe H, Tominaga T, Mima A, Matsubara T, Murakami T, Kishi S, Nagai
K, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Deapartment of Nephrology, Graduate School of Medicine, Institute of
Health-Bio-Science, University of Tokushima, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.

Smad1 has previously been shown to play a key role in the development of diabetic
nephropathy (DN), by increasing synthesis of extracellular matrix. However, the
regulatory mechanism of Smad1 in DN is still unclear. This study aims to
elucidate molecular interactions between activin receptor-like kinase 1
(ALK1)/Smad1 signaling pathway and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in the 
progression of DN in vitro and in vivo. The expressions of TCF7L2 and ALK1 were
induced by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in parallel with Smad1,
phosphorylated Smad1 (pSmad1), and alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) through
TGF-ß1 in cultured mesangial cells. Constitutively active ALK1 increased pSmad1
and a-SMA expressions. The binding of TCF7L2 to ALK1 promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, TCF7L2 induced promoter
activity of ALK1. AGEs and TGF-ß1 induced a marked increase in TCF7L2 expression 
in parallel with ALK1. Overexpression of TCF7L2 increased the expressions of ALK1
and Smad1. Inversely, TCF7L2 knockdown by siRNA suppressed a-SMA expression as
well as ALK1 and Smad1. The iNOS transgenic mice (iNOS-Tgm), which developed
diabetic glomerulosclerosis resembling human diabetic nephropathy, exhibited
markedly increased expressions of ALK1, TCF7L2, Smad1, pSmad1, and a-SMA in
glomeruli in association with mesangial matrix expansion. These results provide a
new evidence that the TCF7L2/ALK1/Smad1 pathway plays a key role in the
development of DN.

PMID: 20803090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Diabetes. 2010 Dec;59(12):3247-52. doi: 10.2337/db10-0674. Epub 2010 Aug 29.

Glycemia determines the effect of type 2 diabetes risk genes on insulin
secretion.

Heni M(1), Ketterer C, Thamer C, Herzberg-Schäfer SA, Guthoff M, Stefan N,
Machicao F, Staiger H, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in diabetes risk genes 
reduce glucose- and/or incretin-induced insulin secretion. Here, we investigated 
interactions between glycemia and such diabetes risk polymorphisms.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Insulin secretion was assessed by insulinogenic
index and areas under the curve of C-peptide/glucose in 1,576 subjects using an
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Participants were genotyped for 10 diabetes
risk SNPs associated with ß-cell dysfunction: rs5215 (KCNJ11), rs13266634
(SLC30A8), rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs10830963 (MTNR1B),
rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs10010131 (WFS1), rs7923837 (HHEX), rs151290 (KCNQ1), and
rs4402960 (IGF2BP2). Furthermore, the impact of the interaction between genetic
variation in TCF7L2 and glycemia on changes in insulin secretion was tested in
315 individuals taking part in a lifestyle intervention study.
RESULTS: For the SNPs in TCF7L2 and WFS1, we found a significant interaction
between glucose control and insulin secretion (all P = 0.0018 for glucose ×
genotype). When plotting insulin secretion against glucose at 120 min OGTT, the
compromising SNP effects on insulin secretion are most apparent under high
glucose. In the longitudinal study, rs7903146 in TCF7L2 showed a significant
interaction with baseline glucose tolerance upon change in insulin secretion (P =
0.0027). Increased glucose levels at baseline predicted an increase in insulin
secretion upon improvement of glycemia by lifestyle intervention only in carriers
of the risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: For the diabetes risk genes TCF7L2 and WFS1, which are associated
with impaired incretin signaling, the level of glycemia determines SNP effects on
insulin secretion. This indicates the increasing relevance of these SNPs during
the progression of prediabetes stages toward clinically overt type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2992789
PMID: 20802253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Nov;299(5):L694-710. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00140.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 27.

Sox17 modulates Wnt3A/beta-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation of the
Lef-1 promoter.

Liu X(1), Luo M, Xie W, Wells JM, Goodheart MJ, Engelhardt JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Carver College of Medicine, The
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52240, USA.

Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent activation of lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (Lef-1) plays an
important role in numerous developmental processes. In this context,
transcription of the Lef-1 gene is increased by Wnt-mediated TCF4/ß-catenin
activation on the Lef-1 promoter through mechanisms that remain poorly defined.
In mouse airway submucosal gland progenitor cells, Wnt3A transiently induces
Lef-1 gene expression, and this process is required for epithelial cell
proliferation and glandular morphogenesis. In the present study, we sought to
identify additional candidate transcriptional regulators of the Lef-1 gene during
glandular morphogenesis. To this end, we found that Sox17 expression is
dramatically downregulated in early glandular progenitor cells that induce Lef-1 
expression. Wnt stimulation of undifferentiated primary airway epithelial cells
induced similar changes in Sox17 and Lef-1 expression. Reporter assays revealed
that ectopic expression of Sox17 suppresses Wnt3A/ß-catenin activation of the
Lef-1 promoter in cell lines. EMSA and ChIP analyses defined several Sox17- and
TCF4-binding sites that collaborate in transcriptional control of the Lef-1
promoter. More specifically, Sox17 bound to four sites in the Lef-1 promoter,
either directly or indirectly through TCF complexes. The DNA- or
ß-catenin-binding domains of Sox17 controlled context-specific binding of
Sox17/TCF complexes on the Lef-1 promoter. Combinatorial site-directed
mutagenesis of Sox17- or TCF-binding sites in the Lef-1 promoter demonstrated
that these sites control Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated induction and/or repression.
These findings demonstrate for the first time that Sox17 can directly regulate
Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent transcription of the Lef-1 promoter and reveal new
context-dependent binding sites in the Lef-1 promoter that facilitate
protein-protein interactions between Sox17 and TCF4.

PMCID: PMC2980392
PMID: 20802155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Dec 1;80(11):1641-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.08.011. Epub
2010 Aug 24.

JS-K, a nitric oxide-releasing prodrug, modulates ß-catenin/TCF signaling in
leukemic Jurkat cells: evidence of an S-nitrosylated mechanism.

Nath N(1), Chattopadhyay M, Pospishil L, Cieciura LZ, Goswami S, Kodela R,
Saavedra JE, Keefer LK, Kashfi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical
School, 138th Street and Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, United States.

ß-Catenin is a central player of the Wnt signaling pathway that regulates
cell-cell adhesion and may promote leukemia cell proliferation. We examined
whether JS-K, an NO-donating prodrug, modulates the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signaling
pathway in Jurkat T-Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia cells. JS-K inhibited Jurkat T
cell growth in a concentration and time-dependent manner. The IC(50)s for cell
growth inhibition were 14±0.7 and 9±1.2µM at 24 and 48h, respectively. Treatment 
of the cells with JS-K for 24h, caused a dose-dependent increase in apoptosis
from 16±3.3% at 10µM to 74.8±2% at 100µM and a decrease in proliferation. This
growth inhibition was also due, in part, to alterations in the different phases
of the cell cycle. JS-K exhibited a dose-dependent cytotoxicity as measured by
LDH release at 24h. However, between 2 and 8h, LDH release was less than 20% for 
any indicated JS-K concentration. The ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional inhibitory 
activity was reduced by 32±8, 63±5, and 93±2% at 2, 10, and 25µM JS-K,
respectively, based on luciferase reporter assays. JS-K reduced nuclear ß-catenin
and cyclin D1 protein levels, but cytosolic ß-catenin expression did not change. 
Based on a time-course assay of S-nitrosylation of proteins by a biotin switch
assay, S-nitrsolyation of nuclear ß-catenin was determined to precede its
degradation. A comparison of the S-nitrosylated nuclear ß-catenin to the total
nuclear ß-catenin showed that ß-catenin protein levels were degraded at 24h,
while S-nitrosylation of ß-catenin occurred earlier at 0-6h. The NO scavenger
PTIO abrogated the JS-K mediated degradation of ß-catenin demonstrating the need 
for NO.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20797387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 5;285(45):34621-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148791. Epub 2010
Aug 25.

p15RS attenuates Wnt/{beta}-catenin signaling by disrupting {beta}-catenin·TCF4
Interaction.

Wu Y(1), Zhang Y, Zhang H, Yang X, Wang Y, Ren F, Liu H, Zhai Y, Jia B, Yu J,
Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of
Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, National Engineering Laboratory for
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The formation of a ß-catenin·TCF4 complex in the nucleus of cells is well known
as a prerequisite for the transcription of Wnt target genes. Although many
co-factors have been identified to regulate the activity of the ß-catenin·TCF4
complex, it remains unclear how the complex association is negatively regulated. 
In this study, we report that p15RS, a negative regulator of the cell cycle,
blocks ß-catenin·TCF4 complex formation and inhibits Wnt signaling. We observed
that p15RS interacts with ß-catenin and TCF4. Interestingly, whereas the
interaction of p15RS with ß-catenin is increased, its interaction with TCF4 is
decreased upon Wnt1 stimulation. Moreover, overexpression of p15RS reduces the
interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4, whereas the depletion of p15RS enhances their
interaction. We further demonstrate that overexpression of p15RS suppresses
canonical Wnt signaling and results in retarded cell growth, whereas depletion of
p15RS shows an enhanced effect on Wnt signaling. We analyzed that inhibition of
Wnt signaling by p15RS leads to decreased expression of CYCLIN D1 and c-MYC, two 
Wnt targeted genes critical for cell growth. Our data suggest that p15RS inhibits
Wnt signaling by interrupting ß-catenin·TCF4 complex formation and that Wnt
signaling initiates downstream gene expression by removing p15RS from promoters.

PMCID: PMC2966078
PMID: 20739273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Dyn. 2010 Oct;239(10):2647-58. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22403.

Autotaxin controls caudal diencephalon-mesencephalon development in the chick.

Ohuchi H(1), Fukui H, Matsuyo A, Tomonari S, Tanaka M, Arai H, Noji S, Aoki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Systems, Institute of Technology and Science, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
hohuchi@bio.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The diencephalon is the embryonic anlagen of the higher integration centers of
the brain. Recent studies have elucidated how the cells in the rostral
diencephalon acquire their regional identities. However, the understanding of the
mechanisms under which the caudal diencephalon is formed is still limited. Here
we focus on the role of Autotaxin (ATX), a lysophospholipid-generating exoenzyme,
whose mRNA is detected in the caudal diencephalon. RNA interference against ATX
altered the expression pattern of Pax6-regualted genes, Tcf4, Lim1, and En1,
implying that ATX is required for the maintenance of the regional identity of the
caudal diencephalon and the diencephalon-mesencephalon boundary (DMB).
Furthermore, ATX-RNAi inhibited neuroepithelial cell proliferation on both sides 
of the DMB. We propose a dual role of ATX in chick brain development, in which
ATX not only contributes to the formation of caudal diencephalon as a short-range
signal, but also regulates the growth of mesencephalon as a long-range signal.

PMID: 20737506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Front Cell Neurosci. 2010 May 28;4. pii: 19. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2010.00019.
eCollection 2010.

PAF-AH Catalytic Subunits Modulate the Wnt Pathway in Developing GABAergic
Neurons.

Livnat I(1), Finkelshtein D, Ghosh I, Arai H, Reiner O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot,
Israel.

Platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase 1B (PAF-AH) inactivates the potent
phospholipid platelet-activating factor (PAF) and is composed of two catalytic
subunits (alpha1 and alpha2) and a dimeric regulatory subunit, LIS1. The function
of the catalytic subunits in brain development remains unknown. Here we examined 
their effects on proliferation in the ganglionic eminences and tangential
migration. In alpha1 and alpha2 catalytic subunits knockout mice we noticed an
increase in the size of the ganglionic eminences resulting from increased
proliferation of GABAergic neurons. Our results indicate that the catalytic
subunits act as negative regulators of the Wnt signaling pathway. Overexpression 
of each of the PAF-AH catalytic subunits reduced the amount of nuclear
beta-catenin and provoked a shift of this protein from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. In the double mutant mice, Wnt signaling increased in the ganglionic
eminences and in the dorsal part of the cerebral cortex. In situ hybridization
revealed increased and expanded expression of a downstream target of the Wnt
pathway (Cyclin D1), and of upstream Wnt components (Tcf4, Tcf3 and Wnt7B).
Furthermore, the interneurons in the cerebral cortex were more numerous and in a 
more advanced position. Transplantation assays revealed a non-cell autonomous
component to this phenotype, which may be explained in part by increased and
expanded expression of Sdf1 and Netrin-1. Our findings strongly suggest that
PAF-AH catalytic subunits modulate the Wnt pathway in restricted areas of the
developing cerebral cortex. We hypothesize that modulation of the Wnt pathway is 
the evolutionary conserved activity of the PAF-AH catalytic subunits.

PMCID: PMC2901149
PMID: 20725507  [PubMed]


322. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Nov 1;88(14):3011-23. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22464.

Wnt-3a and Wnt-3 differently stimulate proliferation and neurogenesis of spinal
neural precursors and promote neurite outgrowth by canonical signaling.

David MD(1), Cantí C, Herreros J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori d'Investigació, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova,
Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, IRBLleida-University of Lleida,
Lleida, Spain.

Wnt factors regulate neural stem cell development and neuronal connectivity. Here
we investigated whether Wnt-3a and Wnt-3, expressed in the developing spinal
cord, regulate proliferation and the neuronal differentiation of spinal cord
neural precursors (SCNP). Wnt-3a promoted a sustained increase of SCNP
proliferation and decreased the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors.
In contrast, Wnt-3 transiently enhanced SCNP proliferation and increased
neurogenesis through ß-catenin signaling. Furthermore, both Wnt-3a and Wnt-3
stimulated neurite outgrowth in SCNP-derived neurons through ß-catenin- and
TCF4-dependent transcription. Glycogen synthase kinase-3ß inhibitors mimicked Wnt
signaling and promoted neurite outgrowth in established cultures. We conclude
that Wnt-3a and Wnt-3 factors signal through the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway 
to regulate different aspects of SCNP development. These findings may be of
therapeutic interest for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases and nerve
injury.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20722074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 12;5(8):e12109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012109.

Positive feedback regulation between phospholipase D and Wnt signaling promotes
Wnt-driven anchorage-independent growth of colorectal cancer cells.

Kang DW(1), Min do S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway occurs 
in almost all colorectal cancers and contributes to their growth, invasion and
survival. Phopholipase D (PLD) has been implicated in progression of colorectal
carcinoma However, an understanding of the targets and regulation of this
important pathway remains incomplete and besides, relationship between Wnt
signaling and PLD is not known.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we demonstrate that PLD isozymes, PLD1 and 
PLD2 are direct targets and positive feedback regulators of the Wnt/beta-catenin 
signaling. Wnt3a and Wnt mimetics significantly enhanced the expression of PLDs
at a transcriptional level in HCT116 colorectal cancer cells, whereas silencing
of beta-catenin gene expression or utilization of a dominant negative form of T
cell factor-4 (TCF-4) inhibited expression of PLDs. Moreover, both PLD1 and PLD2 
were highly induced in colon, liver and stomach tissues of mice after injection
of LiCl, a Wnt mimetic. Wnt3a stimulated formation of the beta-catenin/TCF
complexes to two functional TCF-4-binding elements within the PLD2 promoter as
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Suppressing PLD using gene
silencing or selective inhibitor blocked the ability of beta-catenin to
transcriptionally activate PLD and other Wnt target genes by preventing formation
of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex, whereas tactics to elevate intracellular
levels of phosphatidic acid, the product of PLD activity, enhanced these effects.
Here we show that PLD is necessary for Wnt3a-driven invasion and
anchorage-independent growth of colon cancer cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: PLD isozyme acts as a novel transcriptional target and
positive feedback regulator of Wnt signaling, and then promotes Wnt-driven
anchorage-independent growth of colorectal cancer cells. We propose that
therapeutic interventions targeting PLD may confer a clinical benefit in
Wnt/beta-catenin-driven malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2920823
PMID: 20711340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2010 Jul;42(7):450-6. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmq049. Epub 2010 Jun 13.

NGX6 inhibits cell invasion and adhesion through suppression of Wnt/beta-catenin 
signal pathway in colon cancer.

Guo Q(1), Shen S, Liao M, Lian P, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Xiang Ya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

Colon cancer is a common malignant tumor that is associated with increased
morbidity and mortality. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma-associated gene 6 (NGX6) is a
novel candidate suppressor gene of tumor metastasis, which is down-regulated in
colon cancer. This study was designed to investigate the roles of NGX6 on the
growth and invasiveness of human colon cancer cell line, HT-29, and to elucidate 
the molecular mechanism of their action. Results showed that NGX6 could inhibit
the invasiveness and extracellular matrix adhesion of HT-29 cells and restore the
gap junctional intercellular communication of cells. Moreover, NGX6 could
suppress the translocation of beta-catenin from nucleus and cytoplasm to plasma
membrane, inhibit the activity of TCF4 transcript factor, and down-regulate the
expression of Wnt-direct-targeted genes c-myc, cyclin D1 and COX-2. We suggested 
that NGX6 inhibits cell invasion and adhesion through the suppression of Wnt
signal pathway in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2948811
PMID: 20705583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2334-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1861-2. Epub 2010
Aug 12.

Expression analysis of loci associated with type 2 diabetes in human tissues.

Cotsapas C(1), Prokunina-Olsson L, Welch C, Saxena R, Weaver C, Usher N, Guiducci
C, Bonakdar S, Turner N, LaCroix B, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):209.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic mapping has identified over 20 loci contributing to
genetic risk of type 2 diabetes. The next step is to identify the genes and
mechanisms regulating the contributions of genetic risk to disease. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the effect of age, height, weight and risk alleles on 
expression of candidate genes in diabetes-associated regions in three relevant
human tissues.
METHODS: We measured transcript abundance for WFS1, KCNJ11, TCF2 (also known as
HNF1B), PPARG, HHEX, IDE, CDKAL1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 by 
quantitative RT-PCR in human pancreas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50), colon (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>195) and liver
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50). Tissue samples were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes. The effects of age, height, weight,
tissue and SNP on RNA expression were tested by linear modelling.
RESULTS: Expression of all genes exhibited tissue bias. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed the findings for HHEX, IDE and SLC30A8, which showed strongest
tissue-specific mRNA expression bias. Neither age, height nor weight were
associated with gene expression. We found no evidence that type 2
diabetes-associated SNPs affect neighbouring gene expression (cis-expression
quantitative trait loci) in colon, pancreas and liver.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides new evidence that tissue-type,
but not age, height, weight or SNPs in or near candidate genes associated with
increased risk of type 2 diabetes are strong contributors to differential gene
expression in the genes and tissues examined.

PMID: 20703447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 24;107(34):15157-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003822107. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

TCF4 and CDX2, major transcription factors for intestinal function, converge on
the same cis-regulatory regions.

Verzi MP(1), Hatzis P, Sulahian R, Philips J, Schuijers J, Shin H, Freed E, Lynch
JP, Dang DT, Brown M, Clevers H, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Surprisingly few pathways signal between cells, raising questions about
mechanisms for tissue-specific responses. In particular, Wnt ligands signal in
many mammalian tissues, including the intestinal epithelium, where constitutive
signaling causes cancer. Genome-wide analysis of DNA cis-regulatory regions bound
by the intestine-restricted transcription factor CDX2 in colonic cells uncovered 
highly significant overrepresentation of sequences that bind TCF4, a
transcriptional effector of intestinal Wnt signaling. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed TCF4 occupancy at most such sites and co-occupancy 
of CDX2 and TCF4 across short distances. A region spanning the single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs6983267, which lies within a MYC enhancer and confers colorectal
cancer risk in humans, represented one of many co-occupied sites. Co-occupancy
correlated with intestine-specific gene expression and CDX2 loss reduced TCF4
binding. These results implicate CDX2 in directing TCF4 binding in intestinal
cells. Co-occupancy of regulatory regions by signal-effector and
tissue-restricted transcription factors may represent a general mechanism for
ubiquitous signaling pathways to achieve tissue-specific outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2930576
PMID: 20696899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31164-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149195. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

N-glycosylation gene DPAGT1 is a target of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway.

Sengupta PK(1), Bouchie MP, Kukuruzinska MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University Medical Campus,
Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Protein N-glycosylation and the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathways play critical
roles in development and cancer. Although N-glycosylation has been shown to
influence Wnt signaling through its effects on Wnt ligands, it is unclear whether
the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway impacts protein N-glycosylation. In this study, we show
that promoters of the first N-glycosylation gene, DPAGT1, from Chinese hamster
ovary (CHO), Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK), and human epidermoid carcinoma
(A253) cells contain the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (TCF/LEF)
consensus sequence. Treatment of cells with a Wnt activator, lithium chloride,
up-regulated DPAGT1 transcript levels that correlated with an increase in the
ß-catenin abundance. Furthermore, exposure of cells to a Wnt receptor ligand,
Wnt3a, resulted in an increase in the DPAGT1 transcript levels that was abrogated
by the Wnt inhibitor, Dickkopf-1. DNA mobility shift assays revealed specific
protein complexes at the DPAGT1 TCF/LEF binding region that were competed off
with antibodies to either Tcf3/4 or ß-catenin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis confirmed the presence of ß-catenin at the DPAGT1 promoter in vivo. In
addition, the DPAGT1 TCF/LEF sequence drove the expression of the luciferase
reporter gene. Furthermore, up-regulation of DPAGT1 transcripts by Wnt3a led to
altered N-glycosylation of E-cadherin. Interestingly, the DPAGT1 TCF/LEF sequence
also interacted with <U+03B3>-catenin, a close homologue of ß-catenin, although not in a
lithium chloride-dependent manner. Our results provide the first evidence that
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway regulates the metabolic pathway of protein
N-glycosylation by targeting DPAGT1 expression. Moreover, they suggest the
existence of another regulatory mechanism involving the interaction of Tcf with
<U+03B3>-catenin at the DPAGT1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2951190
PMID: 20693288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cancer Invest. 2010 Oct;28(8):797-805. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2010.494318.

CRH and SRIF have opposite effects on the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway
through PKA/GSK-3ß in corticotroph pituitary cells.

Khattak MN(1), Buchfelder M, Kleindienst A, Schöfl C, Kremenevskaja N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,
Germany.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway is involved in tumorigenesis including
endocrine tumors. We investigated the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway's modulation by
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and somatostatin or somatotropin
release-inhibiting factor (SRIF) in mouse pituitary AtT-20 corticotroph cells.
The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway was activated by CRH and inhibited by SRIF. 
We provide evidence that cAMP/PKA signalling is involved affecting the GSK-3ß
phosphorylation status at phospho-GSK-3ß (Ser9), thereby altering ß-catenin
degradation downstream. Furthermore, CRH and SRIF showed concordant effects on
cell proliferation. Our data demonstrate an important role of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway in the proliferative control of pituitary corticotroph cells and describe
a mechanism for its regulation by CRH and SRIF.

PMID: 20690801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Sep 15;10(6):615-6. doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.6.12906. Epub 2010
Sep 7.

CXCR4 signaling identifies a role for IFT2 in ER-negative breast cancers.

Brody JR(1), Witkiewicz AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Jefferson Pancreas, Biliary and Related Cancer Center, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Jonathan.Brody@jefferson.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Sep 15;10(6):600-14.

PMID: 20686361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Diabetes. 2010 Oct;59(10):2682-9. doi: 10.2337/db10-0177. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study: common genetic variants
in GCK and TCF7L2 are associated with fasting and postchallenge glucose levels in
pregnancy and with the new consensus definition of gestational diabetes mellitus 
from the International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups.

Freathy RM(1), Hayes MG, Urbanek M, Lowe LP, Lee H, Ackerman C, Frayling TM, Cox 
NJ, Dunger DB, Dyer AR, Hattersley AT, Metzger BE, Lowe WL Jr; HAPO Study
Cooperative Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Common genetic variants in GCK and TCF7L2 are associated with higher
fasting glucose and type 2 diabetes in nonpregnant populations. However, their
associations with glucose levels from oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs) in
pregnancy have not been assessed in a large sample. We hypothesized that these
variants are associated with quantitative measures of glycemia in pregnancy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the associations between variants
rs1799884 (GCK) and rs7903146 (TCF7L2) and OGTT outcomes at 24-32 weeks'
gestation in 3,811 mothers of European (U.K. and Australia) and 1,706 mothers of 
Asian (Thailand) ancestry from the HAPO cohort. We also tested associations with 
offspring birth anthropometrics.
RESULTS: The maternal GCK variant was associated with higher fasting glucose in
Europeans (P = 0.001) and Thais (P < 0.0001), 1-h glucose in Europeans (P =
0.001), and 2-h glucose in Thais (P = 0.005). It was also associated with higher 
European offspring birth weight, fat mass, and skinfold thicknesses (P < 0.05).
The TCF7L2 variant was associated with all three maternal glucose outcomes (P =
0.03, P < 0.0001, and P < 0.0001 for fasting and 1-h and 2-h glucose,
respectively) in the Europeans but not in the Thais (P > 0.05). In both
populations, both variants were associated with higher odds of gestational
diabetes mellitus according to the new International Association of Diabetes and 
Pregnancy Study Groups recommendations (P = 0.001-0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal GCK and TCF7L2 variants are associated with glucose levels 
known to carry an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcome in women without
overt diabetes. Further studies will be important to determine the variance in
maternal glucose explained by all known genetic variants.

PMCID: PMC3083839
PMID: 20682688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Sep;134(3):285-95. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0729-3. Epub
2010 Jul 31.

Beta-catenin signaling involves HGF-enhanced HepG2 scattering through activating 
MMP-7 transcription.

Pan FY(1), Zhang SZ, Xu N, Meng FL, Zhang HX, Xue B, Han X, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology, College of
Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210046, China.

It is well accepted that cell scattering (dispersion of clustered cells into
single cells) is the initial step of tumor metastasis, and the downregulation of 
E-cadherin is associated with metastatic potential of tumor cells; however, the
molecular mechanisms underlying loss of E-cadherin during tumor development are
still poorly understood. Here, we report that hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
induced E-cadherin downregulation and cell scattering are attributed to the
activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and transcriptional activation of matrix
metalloproteinase MMP-7. Furthermore, the increased MMP-7 is secreted into the
medium and cleaves the ectodomain of E-cadherin. Inhibition of HGF signal by
siRNA of c-Met, blocking the beta-catenin transcriptional activity through a
dominant negative form of TCF4, MMP-7 knockdown by siRNA or suppression of MMP-7 
enzymatic activity with a neutralization antibody allowed inhibition of
HGF-induced loss of E-cadherin and HepG2 scattering. Our data presented here
revealed the intrinsic mechanism of HGF activated Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
regulation of HepG2 cell scattering through MMP-7 transcription activation and
E-cadherin degradation. The results suggest that the blocking of
HGF/c-Met/beta-catenin/MMP-7/E-cadherin signaling pathway might present a
practical therapeutic target for interference with hepatocellular carcinoma
metastasis.

PMID: 20677010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;207(1):77-86. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0044. Epub 2010 Jul 30.

Insulin treatment and high-fat diet feeding reduces the expression of three Tcf
genes in rodent pancreas.

Columbus J(1), Chiang Y, Shao W, Zhang N, Wang D, Gaisano HY, Wang Q, Irwin DM,
Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms in intronic regions of human TCF7L2 are 
associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Whether Tcf7l2 is
expressed in pancreatic islets of rodent species at a considerable level,
however, remains controversial. We used RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR to examine
Tcf7l2 expression in rodent gut, pancreas, isolated pancreatic islets, and
cultured cell lines. The expression level of Tcf7l2 was relatively lower in the
pancreas compared to the gut or the pancreatic ß-cell line Ins-1. Immunostaining 
did not detect a Tcf7l2 signal in mouse pancreatic islets. Endogenous canonical
Wnt activity was not appreciable in the pancreas of TOPGAL transgenic mice. Both 
Tcf7 and Tcf7l1, but not Lef1, were expressed in the pancreas. The expression of 
the three Tcf genes (Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and Tcf7l2) in the pancreas was reduced by
treatment with insulin or high-fat diet feeding, in contrast to the stimulation
of Tcf7l2 expression by insulin in the gut. We suggest that hyperinsulinemia
represses Tcf gene expression in the pancreas. Whether and how this reduction
alters the function of pancreatic ß cells during hyperinsulinemia deserves
further investigation.

PMID: 20675304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Oct 1;68(7):671-3. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.06.014.
Epub 2010 Jul 31.

Common variants in major histocompatibility complex region and TCF4 gene are
significantly associated with schizophrenia in Han Chinese.

Li T(1), Li Z, Chen P, Zhao Q, Wang T, Huang K, Li J, Li Y, Liu J, Zeng Z, Feng
G, He L, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Bio-X Center, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental
and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a complex major psychiatric disorder affecting ~1%
of the world population. Recently, in a genome-wide association study and a
follow-up in Caucasians, Stefansson et al. examined 7662 schizophrenic cases and 
29053 normal control subjects and reported seven common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that were significantly (>10(-8)) associated with
schizophrenia.
METHODS: To investigate whether these risk SNPs were significantly associated in 
Han Chinese, we analyzed the seven SNPs in 2496 schizophrenia patients and 5184
normal control subjects. Because only three of the seven SNPs were polymorphic in
Han Chinese, we genotyped two additional common SNPs from the same risk regions.
RESULTS: Three SNPs, rs6932590 (p = .00096), rs3131296 (p = 1.29 × 10(-6)), and
rs3130375 (p = 1.76 × 10(-5)), mapping to the major histocompatibility complex
region and one SNP rs2958182 (p = 3.64 × 10(-6)) located in the TCF4 gene were
significant in our sample set. A meta-analysis using published genome-wide
association study results also supported our findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm that common risk factors in the major
histocompatibility complex region and TCF4 gene are associated with schizophrenia
in Han Chinese, but our results fail to show an association with SNP rs12807809
in the NRGN gene.

Copyright © 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20673877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 20;399(2):245-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.062. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

The balance of TCF7L2 variants with differential activities in Wnt-signaling is
regulated by lithium in a GSK3beta-independent manner.

Struewing I(1), Boyechko T, Barnett C, Beildeck M, Byers SW, Mao CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.

TCF7L2 transcription factor is a downstream effector of the canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which controls cell fate and homeostasis. However,
the complexity of TCF7L2 expression with numerous mRNA isoforms coding for
proteins with distinct N- and C-termini allows variability in TCF7L2 functions
and regulations. Here, we show that although TCF7L2 mRNA isoforms distinguish
fetal, immortalized and adult differentiated endothelial cells (EC), they cannot 
explain the lack of significant beta-catenin/TCF7 activities in ECs. Lithium, a
Wnt-signaling activator, increases TCF7L2 mRNA levels and induces an RNA isoform 
switch favoring the expression of TCF7L2-short forms lacking the C-termini
domains. Although the latter occurs in different cell types, its extent depends
on the overall increase of TCF7L2 transcription, which correlates with cell
responsiveness to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. While GSK3beta down-regulation
increases TCF7L2 expression, there is no concomitant change in TCF7L2 mRNA
isoforms, which demonstrate the dual effects of lithium on TCF7L2 expression via 
a GSK3beta-dependent up-regulation and a GSK3beta-independent modulation of RNA
splicing. TCF7L2E-long forms display a repressor activity on TCF7L2-promoter
reporters and lithium induces a decrease of the endogenous TCF7L2 forms bound to 
native TCF7L2-promoter chromatin at two novel distal TCF7-binding sites.
Altogether our data reveal a lithium-induced RNA switch favoring the expression
of TCF7L2-short forms, which results in a transcriptional de-repression of
lithium target genes negatively regulated by TCF7L2-long forms, like TCF7L2, and 
thus to an amplification of Wnt-signaling in responsive cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2926262
PMID: 20654575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Oct;225(1):92-105. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22200.

Disabled-2 is required for mesoderm differentiation of murine embryonic stem
cells.

Huang CL(1), Cheng JC, Kitajima K, Nakano T, Yeh CF, Chong KY, Tseng CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

A variety of signaling networks are implicated in the control of mesoderm
differentiation. Previous studies demonstrated that Disabled-2 (DAB2) is a
multifunctional protein involved in growth factor signaling and embryonic
development. In this study, we investigated DAB2 expression and function during
in vitro mesoderm differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We found
that DAB2 was up-regulated when ESCs were co-cultured with OP9 stromal cells for 
mesoderm differentiation. DAB2 was also up-regulated when ESCs were induced for
embryoid body formation. Expression of DAB2 short hairpin small interfering RNA
(shDAB2) did not alter the puripotency of ESCs. However, shDAB2 disrupted ESCs
cell-cell adhesion and affected embryoid body and colony formation that
subsequently impeded mesoderm differentiation of ESCs. Immunofluorescent staining
revealed that disorganization of beta-catenin and plakoglobin cellular
distribution may account for the aberrant cell-cell adhesion in DAB2-deficient
cells. Accordingly, DAB2 was identified as a plakoglobin-binding partner with the
interaction mediated by the phosphotyrosine binding domain of DAB2 and the
Asn-Pro-Asp-Tyr (NPDY) motif of plakoglobin. Molecular analysis and transcriptome
profiling also revealed that DAB2 was involved in the regulation of insulin-like 
growth factor 2-mediated signaling and in the expression of p53, asparagine
synthetase and glutathione peroxidase 2. Expression screening of 52 ESCs-related 
miRNAs further unveiled the interplay between DAB2 and the signaling networks
associated with cell death, differentiation and development. This study thereby
defines a role of DAB2 in fate determination of ESCs and suggests the presence of
a DAB2-associated regulatory circuit in the control of mesoderm differentiation.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20648627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec;18(12):1333-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.117. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Potential role of TCF7L2 gene variants on cardiac sympathetic/parasympathetic
activity.

Boccardi V(1), Ambrosino I, Papa M, Fiore D, Rizzo MR, Paolisso G, Barbieri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Second University of 
Naples, Naples, Italy.

Variants in transcription factor 7-like 2
(266096218TCF7L2266096218USuser266096218Gene names have been italicized per house
style. Please check and confirm whether there are other instances that need to be
italicized or instances where italics have been inappropriately applied.) gene
have been found strongly associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes, as
well as with an impairment of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) signalling chain.
In rats, stimulation of central GLP-1 receptors increases heart rate and
activates autonomic regulatory neurons. We aimed to evaluate the potential role
of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms on sympathovagal response in relation to changes in 
plasma insulin and/or GLP-1 concentration after glucose ingestion. Genotyping was
performed for rs12255372 and rs7903146 TCF7L2 gene variants in 250 non-related
healthy volunteers (mean age 27±3 years). Consistent with previous reports, both 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were in strong linkage disequilibrium (D'=0.87,
r(2)=0.76). A subset of 167 patients underwent an oral glucose tolerance test
while a continuous recording of heart rate variability was performed. At
baseline, no differences in fasting plasma insulin, in GLP-1 levels and in LF/HF 
(low frequency/high frequency) ratio between the three genotypes were found.
Along with glucose ingestion TT subjects had lower INS(AUC) (insulin area under
curve), as well as higher LF/HF(AUC) (LF/HF area under curve) values. No
difference in GLP-1(AUC) (GLP-1 area under curve) between TCF7L2 gene variants
was found. A multivariate analysis including multiple covariates showed that only
INS(AUC,) GLP-1(AUC) and TCF7L2 gene variants were independently associated with 
LF/HF(AUC). In conclusion, TT genotype of rs12255372 and rs7903146 TCF7L2 gene
variants is associated with lower insulin secretion and higher cardiosympathetic 
activity. Moreover, such effect is independent of GLP-1 and insulin plasma
concentrations suggesting a potential role of such gene variants in increasing
cardiovascular risk through enhanced sympathetic nervous system activity.

PMCID: PMC3002850
PMID: 20648057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2340-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1852-3. Epub 2010
Jul 17.

Disease-associated loci are significantly over-represented among genes bound by
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in vivo.

Zhao J(1), Schug J, Li M, Kaestner KH, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been strongly
implicated in type 2 diabetes and cancer. Our goal was to identify the DNA
sequences bound by this transcription factor in vivo.
METHODS: We applied chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing to globally
identify and map human DNA sequences bound by TCF7L2 in the colorectal carcinoma 
cell line, HCT116, where it is abundantly expressed.
RESULTS: We identified 1,095 discrete binding sites across the genome, of which a
subset were within 5 kb of 548 annotated NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq) genes. 
Despite using a cancer cell line, the most significant functions represented
using pathway analysis software were related to diabetes, genetic disorders and
coronary artery disease. As one of the enriched categories was related to genetic
disorders, we queried our results against all published genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) and found a highly significant over-representation of reported
loci from among the genes bound by TCF7L2 within 5 kb (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.50<U+2009>×<U+2009>10<U+207B>¹5). This
observation was primarily driven by excess loci revealed from GWAS of metabolic
and cardiovascular traits; however, there was no or only minor enrichment of
GWAS-derived loci for cancer, and inflammatory or neurological diseases. Of the
specific traits, the most enriched loci were for type 2 diabetes and height. When
defining the distance from genes at 50 kb or 500 kb, this enrichment pattern
persisted, with some additional evidence for enrichment of cancer-related loci.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: A highly significant proportion of genes bound by
TCF7L2 are known disease-associated loci. These findings suggest that TCF7L2 is a
central node in the regulation of human diabetes and other disease-associated
genes.

PMID: 20640398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 15;345(2):191-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.009. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Pinin modulates expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, Cdx2, and plays an
essential role for small intestinal morphogenesis.

Joo JH(1), Taxter TJ, Munguba GC, Kim YH, Dhaduvai K, Dunn NW, Degan WJ, Oh SP,
Sugrue SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Pinin (Pnn), a nuclear speckle-associated protein, has been shown to function in 
maintenance of epithelial integrity through altering expression of several key
adhesion molecules. Here we demonstrate that Pnn plays a crucial role in small
intestinal development by influencing expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, 
Cdx2. Conditional inactivation of Pnn within intestinal epithelia resulted in
significant downregulation of a caudal type homeobox gene, Cdx2, leading to
obvious villus dysmorphogenesis and severely disrupted epithelial
differentiation. Additionally, in Pnn-deficient small intestine, we observed
upregulated Tcf/Lef reporter activity, as well as misregulated
expression/distribution of beta-catenin and Tcf4. Since regulation of Cdx gene
expression has been closely linked to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activity, we
explored the possibility of Pnn's interaction with beta-catenin, a major effector
of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that Pnn, together with its interaction partner CtBP2, a transcriptional
co-repressor, was in a complex with beta-catenin. Moreover, both of these
proteins were found to be recruited to the proximal promoter area of Cdx2. Taken 
together, our results suggest that Pnn is essential for tight regulation of Wnt
signaling and Cdx2 expression during small intestinal development.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2949054
PMID: 20637749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2013-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902572. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Beta-catenin signaling mediates CD4 expression on mature CD8+ T cells.

Schenkel JM(1), Zloza A, Li W, Narasipura SD, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Upon activation, a subset of mature human CD8(+) T cells re-expresses CD4 dimly. 
This CD4(dim)CD8(bright) T cell population is genuine and enriched in antiviral
CD8(+) T cell responses. The signaling pathway that leads to CD4 re-expression on
mature CD8(+) T cells is not clear. Given that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays a
critical role in the transition of CD4(-)CD8(-) to CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, we
determined whether beta-catenin mediates CD4 expression on mature CD8(+) T cells.
We demonstrate that active beta-catenin expression is 20-fold higher on
CD4(dim)CD8(bright) than CD4(-)CD8(+) T cells. Activation of beta-catenin
signaling, through LiCl or transfection with a constitutively active construct of
beta-catenin, induced CD4 on CD8(+) T cells by approximately 10-fold. Conversely,
inhibition of beta-catenin signaling through transfection with a
dominant-negative construct for T cell factor-4, a downstream effector of
beta-catenin signaling, diminished CD4 expression on CD8(+) T cells by 50% in
response to T cell activation. Beta-catenin-mediated induction of CD4 on CD8(+) T
cells is transcriptionally regulated, as it induced CD4 mRNA, and T cell
factor/lymphoid enhancer factor sites were identified within the human CD4
promoter. Further, beta-catenin expression induced the antiapoptotic factor
BcL-xL, suggesting that beta-catenin may mediate protection against
activation-induced cell death. Collectively, these data demonstrate that
beta-catenin is critical in inducing CD4 expression on mature CD8(+) T cells,
suggesting that it is a common pathway for CD4 upregulation among thymocytes and 
mature CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC3963465
PMID: 20631314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Glia. 2010 Aug 15;58(11):1384-93. doi: 10.1002/glia.21014.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) participates in
p38 MAPK regulated control of oligodendrocyte differentiation.

Haines JD(1), Fang J, Mushynski WE, Almazan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Promenade
Sir William Osler, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38 MAPKs) are a family of kinases
that regulate a number of cellular functions including cell migration,
proliferation, and differentiation. We have previously reported a role for p38
MAPK in the regulation of oligodendrocyte (OLG) differentiation and Schwann cell 
myelination. Here, we extend our previous findings by showing that a p38
substrate, mitogen-activated protein kinase activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) is a
downstream element of the p38 signaling pathway responsible for effecting OLG
differentiation. Inhibition of MK2 activity in oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs)
using CMPD1 [4-(2'-fluorobiphenyl-4-yl)-N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-butyramide] blocked
the activation of MK2 and resulted in decreased accumulation of
myelin-differentiation markers, including myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG)
and myelin basic protein (MBP). We corroborated these findings using a
small-interfering RNA to MK2, which decreased the myelin-specific lipid
galactosylceramide and MAG. Treatment of cultures with CMPD1 decreased the steady
state levels of mRNA encoding myelin transcription factor 1 (Myt1), MAG, MBP, and
Opalin, a transmembrane sialylglycoprotein expressed in oligodendrocytes. In
contrast, increases were observed in the mRNA levels of OLG transcriptional
repressors, including transcription factor 4 (Tcf4), Notch1, and inhibitor of
differentiation 2 (Id2). Furthermore, we found that the predominantly expressed
isoform of p38 in OLGs, p38alpha, and MK2 can form coimmunoprecipitable complexes
in OLPs and OLGs. Our results demonstrate that the p38-MK2 pathway is a component
of the signaling cascade regulating OLG differentiation.

PMID: 20607863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Sep 15;10(6):600-14. Epub 2010 Sep 4.

ITF2 is a target of CXCR4 in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and is associated
with reduced survival in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer.

Appaiah H(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Mehta R, Thorat M, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Sep 15;10(6):615-6.

CXCR4, a chemokine receptor, plays an important role in breast cancer growth,
invasion, and metastasis. The transcriptional targets of CXCR4 signaling are not 
known. Microarray analysis of CXCR4-enriched and CXCR4-low subpopulations of the 
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, which has a constitutively active CXCR4
signaling network, revealed differential expression of ~ 200 genes in the
CXCR4-enriched subpopulation. ITF2, upregulated in CXCR4-enriched cells, was
investigated further. Expression array datasets of primary breast tumors revealed
higher ITF2 expression in estrogen receptor negative tumors, which correlated
with reduced progression free and overall survival and suggested its relevance in
breast cancer progression. CXCL12, a CXCR4 ligand, increased ITF2 expression in
MDA-MB-231 cells. ITF2 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that
controls the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and the function of the ID
family (inhibitor-of-differentiation) of transcription factors, such as ID2. ID2 
promotes differentiation of breast epithelial cells and its reduced expression in
breast cancer is associated with an unfavorable prognosis. Both CXCR4 and ITF2
repressed ID2 expression. In xenograft studies, CXCR4-enriched cells formed large
tumors and exhibited significantly elevated lung metastasis. Short interfering
RNA against ITF2 reduced invasion of the CXCR4-enriched MDA-MB-231 subpopulation,
whereas ITF2 overexpression restored the invasive capacity of MDA-MB-231 cells
expressing CXCR4shRNA. Furthermore, overexpression of ITF2 in these cells
enhanced tumor growth. We propose that ITF2 is one of the CXCR4 targets, which is
involved in CXCR4-dependent tumor growth and invasion of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3040950
PMID: 20603605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Cell Signal. 2010 Nov;22(11):1753-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.06.016. Epub
2010 Jul 22.

Dishevelled-DEP domain interacting protein (DDIP) inhibits Wnt signaling by
promoting TCF4 degradation and disrupting the TCF4/beta-catenin complex.

Zhang H(1), Zhang H, Zhang Y, Ng SS, Ren F, Wang Y, Duan Y, Chen L, Zhai Y, Guo
Q, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

The TCF4/beta-catenin complex, the executor of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling, is regulated by a variety of factors. Among these, Dishevelled (Dvl)
is a critical regulator that releases beta-catenin from degradation and
stabilizes TCF4/beta-catenin complex. Here, we report that DDIP (Dishevelled-DEP 
domain Interacting Protein, also named as Spats1, spermatogenesis associated,
serine-rich 1), a novel protein that interacts with Dvl, regulates Wnt signaling.
We provide evidence that DDIP suppresses Lef-1 luciferase reporter activity
stimulated by Wnt1, Dvl2 or beta-catenin, interacts with the TCF4/beta-catenin
complex, and disrupts the interaction of TCF4 and beta-catenin by promoting TCF4 
degradation through the proteasome pathway. Our results indicate that DDIP is a
negative regulator of the canonical Wnt signaling.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20603214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;74(4):361-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00580.x.

A validation study of type 2 diabetes-related variants of the TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ genes in one endogamous ethnic group of north India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Aggarwal A, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
Delhi-110016.

The aim of this study was to validate the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of four candidate genes (TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ) related to type 2
diabetes (T2D) in an endogamous population of north India; the Aggarwal
population, having 18-clans. This endogamous population model was heavily
supported by recent land mark work and we also verified the homogeneity of this
population by clan-based stratification analysis. Two SNPs (rs4506565; rs7903146)
in TCF7L2 were found to be significant (p-value = 0.00191; p-value = 0.00179,
respectively), and odds ratios of 2.1 (dominant-model) and 2.0 (recessive-model) 
respectively, were obtained for this population. The TTT haplotype in the TCF7L2 
gene was significantly associated with T2D. Waist-Hip ratio (WHR), systolic blood
pressure (SBP), and age were significant covariates for increasing risk of T2D.
Single-SNP, combined-SNPs and haplotype analysis provides clear evidence that the
causal mutation is near to or within the significant haplotype (TTT) of the
TCF7L2 gene. In spite of a culturally-learned sedentary lifestyle and
fat-enriched dietary habits, WHR rather than body-mass-index emerged as a robust 
predictor of risk for T2D in this population.

PMID: 20597906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Oct;16(10):3185-97. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2010.0133.

Opposite spectrum of activity of canonical Wnt signaling in the osteogenic
context of undifferentiated and differentiated mesenchymal cells: implications
for tissue engineering.

Quarto N(1), Behr B, Longaker MT.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Surgical Research Program, Department of Surgery, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5148, USA.

To delineate the competence window in which canonical wingless (Wnt)-signaling
can either inhibit or promote osteogenic differentiation, we have analyzed cells 
with different status, specifically undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, such as
adipose-derived stem cells and embryonic calvarial mesenchymal cells, and
differentiated mesenchymal cells such as juvenile immature calvarial osteoblasts 
and adult calvarial osteoblasts. Our analysis indicated that undifferentiated
mesenchymal cells and juvenile calvarial osteoblasts are endowed with higher
levels of endogenous canonical Wnt signaling compared to fully differentiated
adult calvarial osteoblasts, and that different levels of activation inversely
correlated with expression levels of several Wnt antagonists. We have observed
that activation of canonical Wnt signaling may elicit opposite biological
activity in the context of osteogenic differentiation depending on the status of 
cell, the threshold levels of its activation, and Wnt ligands concentration. The 
results presented in this study indicate that treatment with Wnt3 and/or
expression of constitutively activated &#x03B2;-catenin inhibits osteogenic
differentiation of undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, whereas expression of
dominant negative transcription factor 4 (Tcf4) and/or secreted frizzled related 
protein 1 treatment enhances their osteogenic differentiation. Wnt3a treatment
also inhibits osteogenesis in juvenile calvarial osteoblasts in a dose-dependent 
fashion. Conversely, Wnt3a treatment strongly induces osteogenesis in mature
calvarial osteoblasts in a dose-dependent manner. Importantly, in vitro data
correlated with in vivo results showing that Wnt3a treatment of calvarial
defects, created in juvenile mice, promotes calvarial healing and bone
regeneration only at low doses, whereas high doses of Wnt3a impairs tissue
regeneration. In contrast, high doses of Wnt3a enhance bony tissue regeneration
and calvarial healing in adult mice. Therefore, the knowledge of both endogenous 
activity of canonical Wnt signaling and appropriate concentrations of Wnt3a
treatment may lead to significant improvement for bony tissue engineering, as
well as for the efficient implement of adipose-derived stem cells in bone
regeneration. Indeed, this study has important potential implications for tissue 
engineering, specifically for repair of juvenile bone defects.

PMCID: PMC2947420
PMID: 20590472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;225(3):810-21. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22292.

Regulation of MT1-MMP activity by ß-catenin in MDCK non-cancer and HT1080 cancer 
cells.

Liu P(1), Yang J, Pei J, Pei D, Wilson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA.

Past studies on ß-catenin in cancer cells focused on nuclear localized ß-catenin 
and its involvement in the Wnt pathway. Our goal here was to investigate the
function of ß-catenin in both the cytoplasm and nucleus on the regulation of
MT1-MMP expression and activity. We found that ß-catenin in MDCK non-cancer cells
inhibited the cell surface localization of MT1-MMP, and thus its proteolytic
activity on pro-MMP2 activation, via direct interaction with the 18-amino-acid
cytoplasmic tail of MT1-MMP in the cytoplasm. In contrast, ß-catenin in HT1080
cancer cells enhanced the activity of MT1-MMP by entering the nucleus and
activating transcription factor Tcf-4/Lef, and elevating the level of MT1-MMP
protein. We also found that enhancement of cell growth in three-dimensional
(3-D)/two-dimensional (2-D) type I collagen gels and of cell migration by MT1-MMP
were inhibited by ß-catenin in MDCK cells, whereas these functions were enhanced 
in HT1080 cells. In addition, regulation of MT1-MMP by ß-catenin involved
E-cadherin in MDCK cells and Wnt-3a in HT1080 cells. Taken together, our results 
present a differential effect of cytoplasmic and nuclear ß-catenin on MT1-MMP
activity in non-cancer cells versus cancer cells. These differences were most
probably due to different subcellular locations and different involved pathways
of ß-catenin in these cells.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2939945
PMID: 20589835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Dec;17(12):3344-53. doi: 10.1245/s10434-010-1131-z. Epub
2010 Jun 29.

CpG methylation of transcription factor 4 in gastric carcinoma.

Joo JK(1), Kim SH, Kim HG, Kim DY, Ryu SY, Lee KH, Lee JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Chonnam National
University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of tumor-related genes by CpG island methylation
is an important mechanism for the development of many tumors, including gastric
carcinoma. Deregulation of transcription factor 4 (TCF4) by promoter methylation 
was recently shown to play a key role in gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The extent of methylation in the TCF4 promoter was assessed using
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) and pyrosequencing (PS) in
120 gastric carcinoma (GC) samples collected during gastrectomy, and in 40 normal
gastric mucosa samples.
RESULTS: The PS analysis of GCs revealed a higher frequency of TCF4 methylation
(75.8%; 91/120). The methylation frequency for TCF4 by both MSP and PS techniques
was significantly higher in advanced (75.0 and 91.7%, respectively) compared with
early (60.0 and 60.0%, respectively, p < 0.05) GCs. There was a significant
difference in TCF4 methylation between GCs and normal gastric mucosa (67.5 vs.
40.0%, respectively, by MSP and 75.8 vs. 30.0%, respectively, by PS; p < 0.05).
There was significant correlation between TCF4 methylation status by PS and tumor
size (p = 0.004), Lauren classification (p = 0.043), depth of invasion (p <
0.001), nodal metastasis (p = 0.021), and tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stage (p = 
0.045).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that inactivation of TCF4 by promoter
methylation may play a role in the early stage of gastric carcinoma progression. 
Furthermore, standard polymerase chain reaction followed by PS may provide a more
specific and quantitative diagnostic alternative to MSP, which may be of benefit 
in oncology research.

PMID: 20585880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2010 Jul;26(5):371-7. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1087.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and context-specific risk of 
impaired fasting glucose in African American and Caucasian adults: the
atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study.

Yan Y(1), North KE, Heiss G, Klein R, Girman CJ, Lange EM, Pankow JS, Brancati
FL, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-8050, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene 
are consistently associated with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) in Caucasians,
data from large population-based studies of African Americans are lacking.
Moreover, few studies have investigated the effects of TCF7L2 on IFG in the
context of metabolic risk factors for diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated the association between the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and incident IFG defined as fasting serum glucose levels of 100-125 
mg/dL (5.6-6.9 mmol/L) in 1377 African American and 5152 Caucasian participants
without diabetes and IFG at intake who participated in the Atherosclerosis Risk
in Communities (ARIC) Study from 1987 to 1989 and were followed for 9 years.
RESULTS: Incident IFG was identified in 810 (58.8%) African American and 2652
(51.5%) Caucasian participants. Compared to homozygous CC Caucasian individuals, 
heterozygous CT [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.09 (95% CI = 1.03-1.15)] and homozygous TT
[1.18 (1.05-1.33)] individuals had significantly higher risk of developing IFG
over 9-year follow-up. The association between rs7903146 and IFG risk was
stronger in Caucasians with obesity [HR(CTvs.CC) = 1.28 (1.12, 1.47); HR(TTvs.CC)
= 1.65 (1.25, 2.17)] or high triglycerides [HR(CTvs.CC) = 1.31(1.10, 1.56);
HR(TTvs.CC) = 1.72 (1.21, 2.43)]. No association of the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and incident IFG was noted in African Americans.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicates the association between rs7903146 and IFG risk 
in a population-based, longitudinal cohort of Caucasians but not in African
Americans. For the first time, our study provides evidence for interactions
between TCF7L2 and metabolic risk factors on the occurrence of IFG in Caucasians.

Copyright (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2990965
PMID: 20578204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 20;285(34):26289-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.090597. Epub
2010 Jun 21.

Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase is essential for canonical Wnt signaling in
Xenopus axis formation.

Satow R(1), Shitashige M, Jigami T, Honda K, Ono M, Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. resato@ncc.go.jp

Wnt signaling pathways play important roles in various stages of developmental
events and several aspects of adult homeostasis. Aberrant activation of Wnt
signaling has also been associated with several types of cancer. We have recently
identified Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) as a novel activator of Wnt
signaling through a comprehensive proteomic approach in human colorectal cancer
cell lines. TNIK is an activating kinase for T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) and essential
for the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation and colorectal cancer growth. Here, we 
report the essential role of TNIK in Wnt signaling during Xenopus development. We
found that Xenopus TNIK (XTNIK) was expressed maternally and that the functional 
knockdown of XTNIK by catalytically inactive XTNIK (K54R) or antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides resulted in significant malformations with a complete loss of
head and axis structures. XTNIK enhanced beta-catenin-induced axis duplication
and the expression of beta-catenin-TCF target genes, whereas knockdown of XTNIK
inhibited it. XTNIK was recruited to the promoter region of beta-catenin-TCF
target genes in a beta-catenin-dependent manner. These results demonstrate that
XTNIK is an essential factor for the transcriptional activity of the
beta-catenin-TCF complex and dorsal axis determination in Xenopus embryos.

PMCID: PMC2924048
PMID: 20566648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jun 15;11:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-97.

Association study of genetic variants in eight genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in
a Han Chinese population.

Lin Y(1), Li P, Cai L, Zhang B, Tang X, Zhang X, Li Y, Xian Y, Yang Y, Wang L, Lu
F, Liu X, Rao S, Chen M, Ma S, Shi Y, Bao M, Wu J, Yang Y, Yang J, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Molecular Biology & Genetics, Sichuan Academy of Medical
Sciences & Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: At least twenty genes/loci were shown to be associated with type
2diabetes in European original populations. Five of these genes were shown to be 
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Chinese populations. The purpose of this
study was to replicate the association of genetic vairants in the eight
diabetes-related genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in a Han Chinese cohort from
western part of China. Nineteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the
eight genes/loci including TCF7L2, HHEX, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, PPARG, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
and CDKN2A/CDKN2B were genotyped in 1,529 cases and 1,439 controls in a Han
Chinese population using the ABI SNaPshot method. The meta-analysis of the
association between rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene and T2D in the Han Chinese was
performed.
RESULTS: Among the eight genes/loci examined, we found that four were
significantly associated with T2D. Although previous studies showed that the
association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D was
controversial within the Han Chinese population, we have confirmed the
significant association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D in
both this study and the meta-analysis in the population. In addition, we also
confirmed that three SNPs (rs1111875, rs7923837 and rs5015480) in HHEX , one SNP 
(rs10946398) in CDKAL1, and three SNPs (rs13266634, rs3802177 and rs11558471) in 
SLC30A8 were significantly associated with T2D in the population being studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and
SLC30A8 genes are associated with T2D in a Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC2894791
PMID: 20550665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Diabet Med. 2010 Jun;27(6):701-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.02997.x.

Association of TCF7L2 gene variants with low GAD autoantibody titre in LADA
subjects (NIRAD Study 5).

Zampetti S(1), Spoletini M, Petrone A, Capizzi M, Arpi ML, Tiberti C, Di Pietro
S, Bosi E, Pozzilli P, Giorgino F, Buzzetti R; Nirad Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

AIMS: We previously demonstrated the presence of two different populations among 
adult-onset autoimmune diabetes (latent autoimmume diabetes of adults; LADA)
having high or low titre of antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GADA). The
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been recognized as the major gene
associated with Type 2 diabetes. The aim of the present study was to evaluate
whether the phenotypic heterogeneity of LADA based on GADA titre is associated
with TCF7L2 polymorphisms.
METHODS: Two hundred and fifty patients identified as LADA, divided into two
subgroups with low (< or = 32 arbitrary units) or high (> 32 units) GADA titre,
620 subjects with Type 2 diabetes [from the Non-Insulin Requiring Autoimmune
Diabetes (NIRAD) study cohort of 5330 subjects] in addition to 551 consecutive
cases of Type 1 diabetes and 545 normoglycaemic subjects were analysed for the
rs12255372 and rs7903146 polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene using Taqman.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele distributions of the two polymorphisms revealed 
similar frequencies in subjects with low GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes. High
GADA titre, Type 1 diabetes and controls also showed comparable frequencies. A
significant increase of GT/TT genotypes of the rs12255372 single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) and CT/TT genotypes of the rs7903146 SNP was observed in low
GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes compared with high GADA titre, Type 1 diabetes and
controls (P < or = 0.04 for both comparisons). The risk alleles of both variants 
were increased in low GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes compared with high GADA
titre, Type 1 diabetes and control subjects (P < 0.02 for all comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 common genetic variants of susceptibility are associated only
with low GADA antibody titre in LADA patients.

PMID: 20546291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;27(4):267-72. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2010.490609.
Epub 2010 Jun 14.

Gestational diabetes mellitus shares polymorphisms of genes associated with
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in the Greek population.

Pappa KI(1), Gazouli M, Economou K, Daskalakis G, Anastasiou E, Anagnou NP,
Antsaklis A.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, School of
Medicine, Athens, Greece. kpappa@med.uoa.gr

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) share common
pathophysiological features, including ß-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance.
In this study, we investigated the association between GDM and five recently
identified T2D susceptibility loci, in a Greek population. We studied 148 women
with GDM and 107 non-diabetic unrelated pregnant Greek women, for polymorphisms
in the TCF7L2 gene (rs7903146 C/T), the PPARG gene (Pro12Ala), the KCNJ11 gene
(E23K), the IRS1 gene (G972R) and in the FOXC2 gene (-512C>T). The T-allele of
the TCF7L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism was found to be significantly associated 
with an increased risk of GDM [p = 0.0003; odds ratio (OR) 2.04 (95%CI
1.38-3.00)]. Additionally, CT and TT genotypes were significantly overrepresented
in women with GDM compared to controls (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.0148, respectively).
Analysis of the IRS1 G972R polymorphism showed that the R-allele frequency was
increased in women with GDM [(p = 0.009; OR 1.67 (95%CI 1.14-2.47)]. The
genotypes and allele frequencies of the other polymorphisms studied did not
statistically differ between the GDM and the control women. Thus, our data
suggest that the common T2D susceptibility polymorphism of TCF7L2 (rs7903146 C/T)
gene, and the G972R polymorphism of the IRS1 gene, seem to predispose to GDM in
Greek women.

PMID: 20540670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cell Signal. 2010 Oct;22(10):1523-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.05.021. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

Analysis of the Wnt/B-catenin/TCF4 pathway using SAGE, genome-wide microarray and
promoter analysis: Identification of BRI3 and HSF2 as novel targets.

Kavak E(1), Najafov A, Ozturk N, Seker T, Cavusoglu K, Aslan T, Duru AD, Saygili 
T, Hoxhaj G, Hiz MC, Unal DO, Birgül-Iyison N, Ozturk M, Koman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici University, Istanbul,
Turkey. ersen.kavak@ki.se

The Wnt signaling pathway is involved in many differentiation events during
embryonic development and can lead to tumor formation after aberrant activation
of its components. beta-catenin, a cytoplasmic component, plays a major role in
the transduction of canonical Wnt signaling. The aim of this study was to
identify novel genes that are regulated by active beta-catenin/TCF signaling in
hepatocellular carcinoma-derived Huh7 cells with high (transfected) and low
beta-catenin/TCF activities. High TCF activity Huh7 cells led to earlier and
larger tumor formation when xenografted into nude mice. SAGE (Serial Analysis of 
Gene Expression), genome-wide microarray and in silico promoter analysis were
performed in parallel, to compare gene expression between low and high
beta-catenin/TCF activity clones, and also those that had been rescued from the
xenograft tumors. SAGE and genome-wide microarray data were compared and
contrasted. BRI3 and HSF2 were identified as novel targets of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling after combined analysis and confirming experiments including qRT-PCR,
ChIP, luciferase assay and lithium treatment.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20538055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2010 Aug;25(8):931-9. doi: 10.1007/s00384-010-0959-9. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

TCF-3, 4 protein expression correlates with beta-catenin expression in MSS and
MSI-H colorectal cancer from HNPCC patients but not in sporadic colorectal
cancers.

Balaz P(1), Plaschke J, Krüger S, Görgens H, Schackert HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Research, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

PURPOSE: The beta-catenin-T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) complex is the main control
switch of cell proliferation and differentiation of normal and malignant
intestinal cells. The aim of our study was to analyze the protein expression of
components of the Wnt pathway in microsatellite stable (MSS) and highly unstable 
(MSI-H) sporadic and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) in human
colorectal cancers.
METHODS: Sixty seven colorectal tumors comprising of 15 sporadic MSS, 12 sporadic
microsatellite instability colorectal tumors and 40 tumors from HNPCC patients,
of which 20 were MSS and 20 MSI-H, were analyzed for the expression of APC,
beta-catenin, and TCF-3, 4 proteins by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in cytoplasmic APC expression
frequency between sporadic MSS (52%) and HNPCC tumors (78%), whereas no
difference was detected between MSI-H and MSS or HNPCC tumors. All tumor groups
showed a similar pattern of decreased membranous staining and increased
cytoplasmic and nuclear staining for beta-catenin compared to normal cells.
Moreover, the TCF-3, 4 protein expression was higher (43%) in HNPCC-associated
MSS tumors compared to sporadic tumors (14%; analysis of variance (ANOVA) p <
0.05). For HNPCC tumors, the subcellular beta-catenin expression (membranous,
cytoplasmic, and nuclear) correlated with the nuclear TCF-3, 4 signal in MSS
tumors (Spearman correlation p < 0.0007) and MSI-H tumors (Spearman correlation p
< 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: We have shown a previously unknown difference in TCF-3, 4 protein
expression between sporadic and HNPCC MSS tumors. In addition, we found no
difference in nuclear beta-catenin signal intensity, which may be caused by an
alteration in Wnt pathway in MSS sporadic tumors by unknown mechanisms leading to
lower TCF-3, 4 protein expression. This hypothesis has to be tested in future
investigations.

PMID: 20532534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 15;70(12):5024-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0306. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase is essential for Wnt signaling and colorectal
cancer growth.

Shitashige M(1), Satow R, Jigami T, Aoki K, Honda K, Shibata T, Ono M, Hirohashi 
S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) is a transcription factor essential for maintaining the
undifferentiated status and self-renewal of intestinal epithelial cells. It has
therefore been considered that constitutive activation of TCF4 by aberrant Wnt
signaling is a major force driving colorectal carcinogenesis. We previously
identified Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) as one of the proteins that
interact with TCF4 in colorectal cancer cells, but its functional significance
has not been elucidated. Here, we report that TNIK is an activating kinase for
TCF4 and essential for colorectal cancer growth. TNIK, but not its catalytically 
inactive mutant, phosphorylated the conserved serine 154 residue of TCF4. Small
interfering RNA targeting TNIK inhibited the proliferation of colorectal cancer
cells and the growth of tumors produced by injecting colorectal cancer cells s.c.
into immunodeficient mice. The growth inhibition was abolished by restoring the
catalytic domain of TNIK, thus confirming that its enzyme activity is essential
for the maintenance of colorectal cancer growth. Several ATP-competing kinase
inhibitors have been applied to cancer treatment and have shown significant
activity. Our findings suggest TNIK as a feasible target for pharmacologic
intervention to ablate aberrant Wnt signaling in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 20530691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Diabetes. 2010 Jun;59(6):e4; author reply e5-6. doi: 10.2337/db10-0236.

Comment on: Villareal et al. (2009) TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 affects the risk of 
type 2 diabetes by modulating incretin action. Diabetes;59:479-485.

Knop FK.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):479-85.

PMID: 20508220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Hum Genet. 2010 Aug;128(2):155-64. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0839-y. Epub 2010 May 
25.

Genetic determinants of autism in individuals with deletions of 18q.

O'Donnell L(1), Soileau B, Heard P, Carter E, Sebold C, Gelfond J, Hale DE, Cody 
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd 
Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Previous research has suggested that individuals with constitutional hemizygosity
of 18q have a higher risk of autistic-like behaviors. We sought to identify
genomic factors located on chromosome 18 as well as other loci that correlate
with autistic behaviors. One hundred and five individuals with 18q- were assessed
by high-resolution oligo aCGH and by parental ratings of behavior on the Gilliam 
Autism Rating Scale. Forty-five individuals (43%) had scores within the
"possibly" or "very likely" categories of risk for an autism diagnosis. We
searched for genetic determinants of autism by (1) identifying additional
chromosome copy number changes (2) Identifying common regions of hemizygosity on 
18q, and (3) evaluating four regions containing candidate genes located on 18q
(MBD1, TCF4, NETO1, FBXO15). Three individuals with a "very likely" probability
of autism had a captured 17p telomere in addition to the 18q deletion suggesting 
a possible synergy between hemizygosity of 18q and trigosity of 17p. In addition,
two of the individuals with an 18q deletion and a "very likely" probability of
autism rating had a duplication of the entire short arm of chromosome 18.
Although no common region of hemizygosity on 18q was identified, analysis of four
regions containing candidate genes suggested that individuals were significantly 
more likely to exhibit autistic-like behaviors if their region of hemizygosity
included TCF4, NETO1, and FBXO15 than if they had any other combination of
hemizygosity of the candidate genes. Taken together, these findings identify
several new potential candidate genes or regions for autistic behaviors.

PMID: 20499253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 23;11:320. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-320.

A deep investigation into the adipogenesis mechanism: profile of microRNAs
regulating adipogenesis by modulating the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway.

Qin L(1), Chen Y, Niu Y, Chen W, Wang Q, Xiao S, Li A, Xie Y, Li J, Zhao X, He Z,
Mo D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Science, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a large class of tiny non-coding RNAs
(approximately 22-24 nt) that regulate diverse biological processes at the
posttranscriptional level by controlling mRNA stability or translation. As a
molecular switch, the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway should be
suppressed during the adipogenesis; However, activation of this pathway leads to 
the inhibition of lipid depots formation. The aim of our studies was to identify 
miRNAs that might be involved in adipogenesis by modulating WNT signaling
pathway. Here we established two types of cell model, activation and repression
of WNT signaling, and investigated the expression profile of microRNAs using
microarray assay.
RESULTS: The high throughput microarray data revealed 18 miRNAs that might
promote adipogenesis by repressing WNT signaling: miR-210, miR-148a, miR-194,
miR-322 etc. Meanwhile, we also identified 29 miRNAs that might have negative
effect on adipogenesis by activating WNT signaling: miR-344, miR-27 and miR-181
etc. The targets of these miRNAs were also analysed by bioinformatics. To
validate the predicted targets and the potential functions of these identified
miRNAs, the mimics of miR-210 were transfected into 3T3-L1 cells and enlarged
cells with distinct lipid droplets were observed; Meanwhile, transfection with
the inhibitor of miR-210 could markedly decrease differentiation-specific factors
at the transcription level, which suggested the specific role of miR-210 in
promoting adipogenesis. Tcf7l2, the predicted target of miR-210, is a
transcription factor triggering the downstream responsive genes of WNT signaling,
was blocked at transcription level. Furthermore, the activity of luciferase
reporter bearing Tcf7l2 mRNA 3' UTR was decreased after co-transfection with
miR-210 in HEK-293FT cells. Last but not least, the protein expression level of
beta-catenin was increased in the lithium (LiCl) treated 3T3-L1 cells after
transfection with miR-210. These findings suggested that miR-210 could promote
adipogenesis by repressing WNT signaling through targeting Tcf7l2.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest the presence of miRNAs in two cell models,
providing insights into WNT pathway-specific miRNAs that can be further
characterized for their potential roles in adipogenesis. To our knowledge,
present study represents the first attempt to unveil the profile of miRNAs
involved in adipogenesis by modulating WNT signaling pathway, which contributed
to deeper investigation of the mechanism of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2895628
PMID: 20492721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Front Behav Neurosci. 2010 May 11;4:23. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00023.
eCollection 2010.

New Genetic Findings in Schizophrenia: Is there Still Room for the Dopamine
Hypothesis of Schizophrenia?

Nieratschker V(1), Nöthen MM, Rietschel M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental
Health Mannheim, Germany.

Schizophrenia is a highly heritable disorder, but the identification of specific 
genes has proven to be a difficult endeavor. Genes involved in the dopaminergic
system are considered to be major candidates since the "dopamine hypothesis" of
impairment in dopaminergic neurotransmission is one of the most widely accepted
hypotheses of the etiology of schizophrenia. The overall findings from candidate 
studies do provide some support for the "dopamine hypothesis." However, results
from the first systematic genome-wide association (GWA) studies have implicated
variants within ZNF804A, NRGN, TCF4, and variants in the MHC region on chromosome
6p22.1. Although these genes may not immediately impact on dopaminergic
neurotransmission, it remains possible that downstream impairments in
dopaminergic function are caused. Furthermore, only a very small fraction of all 
truly associated genetic variants have been detected and many more associated
variants will be identified in the future by GWA studies and alternative
approaches. The results of these studies may allow a more comprehensive
re-evaluation of the dopamine hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC2871716
PMID: 20485477  [PubMed]


359. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Aug;299(2):L204-14. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00020.2010. Epub 2010 May 14.

{beta}-Catenin regulates airway smooth muscle contraction.

Jansen SR(1), Van Ziel AM, Baarsma HA, Gosens R.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Pharmacology, Univ. of Groningen, The Netherlands.

beta-Catenin is an 88-kDa member of the armadillo family of proteins that is
associated with the cadherin-catenin complex in the plasma membrane. This complex
interacts dynamically with the actin cytoskeleton to stabilize adherens
junctions, which play a central role in force transmission by smooth muscle
cells. Therefore, in the present study, we hypothesized a role for beta-catenin
in the regulation of smooth muscle force production. beta-Catenin colocalized
with smooth muscle alpha-actin (sm-alpha-actin) and N-cadherin in plasma membrane
fractions and coimmunoprecipitated with sm-alpha-actin and N-cadherin in lysates 
of bovine tracheal smooth muscle (BTSM) strips. Moreover, immunocytochemistry of 
cultured BTSM cells revealed clear and specific colocalization of sm-alpha-actin 
and beta-catenin at the sites of cell-cell contact. Treatment of BTSM strips with
the pharmacological beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (TCF4) inhibitor PKF115-584 (100
nM) reduced beta-catenin expression in BTSM whole tissue lysates and in plasma
membrane fractions and reduced maximal KCl- and methacholine-induced force
production. These changes in force production were not accompanied by changes in 
the expression of sm-alpha-actin or sm-myosin heavy chain (MHC). Likewise, small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of beta-catenin in BTSM strips reduced
beta-catenin expression and attenuated maximal KCl- and methacholine-induced
contractions without affecting sm-alpha-actin or sm-MHC expression. Conversely,
pharmacological (SB-216763, LiCl) or insulin-induced inhibition of glycogen
synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) enhanced the expression of beta-catenin and augmented
maximal KCl- and methacholine-induced contractions. We conclude that beta-catenin
is a plasma membrane-associated protein in airway smooth muscle that regulates
active tension development, presumably by stabilizing cell-cell contacts and
thereby supporting force transmission between neighboring cells.

PMID: 20472712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Sep;38(17):5735-45. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq363. Epub 2010
May 11.

Identification of {beta}-catenin binding regions in colon cancer cells using
ChIP-Seq.

Bottomly D(1), Kyler SL, McWeeney SK, Yochum GS.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute, Oregon Health and
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

Deregulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is a hallmark of colon
cancer. Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene occur in the vast 
majority of colorectal cancers and are an initiating event in cellular
transformation. Cells harboring mutant APC contain elevated levels of the
ß-catenin transcription coactivator in the nucleus which leads to abnormal
expression of genes controlled by ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) complexes.
Here, we use chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively parallel
sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to identify ß-catenin binding regions in HCT116 human colon
cancer cells. We localized 2168 ß-catenin enriched regions using a concordance
approach for integrating the output from multiple peak alignment algorithms.
Motif discovery algorithms found a core TCF4 motif (T/A-T/A-C-A-A-A-G), an
extended TCF4 motif (A/T/G-C/G-T/A-T/A-C-A-A-A-G) and an AP-1 motif
(T-G-A-C/T-T-C-A) to be significantly represented in ß-catenin enriched regions. 
Furthermore, 417 regions contained both TCF4 and AP-1 motifs. Genes associated
with TCF4 and AP-1 motifs bound ß-catenin, TCF4 and c-Jun in vivo and were
activated by Wnt signaling and serum growth factors. Our work provides evidence
that Wnt/ß-catenin and mitogen signaling pathways intersect directly to regulate 
a defined set of target genes.

PMCID: PMC2943592
PMID: 20460455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 11;9:104. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-104.

The promoter for intestinal cell kinase is head-to-head with F-Box 9 and contains
functional sites for TCF7L2 and FOXA factors.

Sturgill TW(1), Stoddard PB, Cohn SM, Mayo MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, University of Virginia,
1300 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
tws7w@virginia.edu

BACKGROUND: Intestinal cell kinase (ICK; GeneID 22858) is a conserved MAPK and
CDK-like kinase that is widely expressed in human tissues. Data from the Cancer
Genome Anatomy Project indicated ICK mRNA is increased in cancer, and that its
expression correlated with expression of mRNA for an uncharacterized F-box
protein, FBX9 (GeneID: 26268). ICK and FBX9 genes are arranged head-to-head on
opposite strands, with start sites for transcription separated by approximately
3.3 kb. We hypothesized ICK and FBX9 are potentially important genes in cancer
controlled by a bidirectional promoter.
RESULTS: We assessed promoter activity of the intergenic region in both
orientations in cancer cell lines derived from breast (AU565, SKBR3), colon
(HCT-15, KM12), and stomach (AGS) cancers, as well as in embryonic human kidney
(HEK293T) cells. The intergenic segment was active in both orientations in all of
these lines, and ICK promoter activity was greater than FBX9 promoter activity.
Results from deletions and truncations defined a minimal promoter for ICK, and
revealed that repressors and enhancers differentially regulate ICK versus FBX9
promoter activity. The ICK promoter contains consensus motifs for several
FOX-family transcription factors that align when mouse and human are compared
using EMBOSS. FOXA1 and FOXA2 increase luciferase activity of a minimal promoter 
10-20 fold in HEK293T cells. Consensus sites for TCF7L2 (TCF4) (Gene Id: 6934)
are also present in both mouse and human. The expression of beta-catenin
increased activity of the minimal promoter approximately 10 fold. ICK reference
mRNAs (NM_014920.3, NM_016513) are expressed in low copy number and increased in 
some breast cancers, using a ten base tag 5'-TCAACCTTAT-3' specific for both ICK 
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: ICK and FBX9 are divergently transcribed from a bidirectional
promoter that is GC-rich and contains a CpG island. A minimal promoter for ICK
contains functional sites for beta-catenin/TCF7L2 and FOXA. These data are
consistent with functions that have been proposed for ICK in development and in
proliferation or survival of some breast and colon cancers.

PMCID: PMC2876993
PMID: 20459822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 8;9:102. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-102.

Cadmium induces Wnt signaling to upregulate proliferation and survival genes in
sub-confluent kidney proximal tubule cells.

Chakraborty PK(1), Lee WK, Molitor M, Wolff NA, Thévenod F.

Author information: 
(1)ZBAF, Department of Physiology & Pathophysiology, University of
Witten/Herdecke, Stockumer Strasse 12, D-58453 Witten, Germany.
Prabir.Chakraborty@uni-wh.de

BACKGROUND: The class 1 carcinogen cadmium (Cd2+) disrupts the
E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex of epithelial adherens junctions (AJs) and causes
renal cancer. Deregulation of E-cadherin adhesion and changes in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling are known to contribute to carcinogenesis.
RESULTS: We investigated Wnt signaling after Cd2+-induced E-cadherin disruption
in sub-confluent cultured kidney proximal tubule cells (PTC). Cd2+ (25 microM,
3-9 h) caused nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and triggered a Wnt response 
measured by TOPflash reporter assays. Cd2+ reduced the interaction of
beta-catenin with AJ components (E-cadherin, alpha-catenin) and increased binding
to the transcription factor TCF4 of the Wnt pathway, which was upregulated and
translocated to the nucleus. While Wnt target genes (c-Myc, cyclin D1 and ABCB1) 
were up-regulated by Cd2+, electromobility shift assays showed increased TCF4
binding to cyclin D1 and ABCB1 promoter sequences with Cd2+. Overexpression of
wild-type and mutant TCF4 confirmed Cd2+-induced Wnt signaling. Wnt signaling
elicited by Cd2+ was not observed in confluent non-proliferating cells, which
showed increased E-cadherin expression. Overexpression of E-cadherin reduced Wnt 
signaling, PTC proliferation and Cd2+ toxicity. Cd2+ also induced reactive oxygen
species dependent expression of the pro-apoptotic ER stress marker and Wnt
suppressor CHOP/GADD153 which, however, did not abolish Wnt response and cell
viability.
CONCLUSIONS: Cd2+ induces Wnt signaling in PTC. Hence, Cd2+ may facilitate
carcinogenesis of PTC by promoting Wnt pathway-mediated proliferation and
survival of pre-neoplastic cells.

PMCID: PMC2873433
PMID: 20459685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 15;19(14):2841-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq184. Epub 2010 May
10.

SMARCA2 and other genome-wide supported schizophrenia-associated genes:
regulation by REST/NRSF, network organization and primate-specific evolution.

Loe-Mie Y(1), Lepagnol-Bestel AM, Maussion G, Doron-Faigenboim A, Imbeaud S,
Delacroix H, Aggerbeck L, Pupko T, Gorwood P, Simonneau M, Moalic JM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U675/U894, Centre Psychiatrie & Neurosciences, Université
Paris-Descartes, 75014 Paris, France.

The SMARCA2 gene, which encodes BRM in the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, 
was recently identified as being associated with schizophrenia (SZ) in a
genome-wide approach. Polymorphisms in SMARCA2, associated with the disease,
produce changes in the expression of the gene and/or in the encoded amino acid
sequence. We show here that an SWI/SNF-centered network including the Smarca2
gene is modified by the down-regulation of REST/NRSF in a mouse neuronal cell
line. REST/NRSF down-regulation also modifies the levels of Smarce1, Smarcd3 and 
SWI/SNF interactors (Hdac1, RcoR1 and Mecp2). Smarca2 down-regulation generates
an abnormal dendritic spine morphology that is an intermediate phenotype of SZ.
We further found that 8 (CSF2RA, HIST1H2BJ, NOTCH4, NRGN, SHOX, SMARCA2, TCF4 and
ZNF804A) out of 10 genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are part of an
interacting network (including SMARCA2), 5 members of which encode transcription 
regulators. The expression of 3 (TCF4, SMARCA2 and CSF2RA) of the 10 genome-wide 
supported SZ-associated genes is modified when the REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex is experimentally manipulated in mouse cell lines
and in transgenic mouse models. The REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF deregulation also results
in the differential expression of genes that are clustered in chromosomes
suggesting the induction of genome-wide epigenetic changes. Finally, we found
that SMARCA2 interactors and the genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are
considerably enriched in genes displaying positive selection in primates and in
the human lineage which suggests the occurrence of novel protein interactions in 
primates. Altogether, these data identify the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex as a key component of the genetic architecture of SZ.

PMID: 20457675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Curr Mol Med. 2010 Jun;10(4):387-404.

The role of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in renal carcinogenesis: lessons from
cadmium toxicity studies.

Thévenod F(1), Chakraborty PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Pathophysiology, University of Witten/Herdecke,
D-58453 Witten, Germany. frank.thevenod@uni-wh.de

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays a crucial role during embryogenesis. However,
this signaling pathway also plays a role in normal adult tissues and in
carcinogenesis, including cadmium (Cd2+) induced nephrocarcinogenesis, which is
the topic of this review. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is tightly regulated in
mature epithelia to balance cell proliferation, differentiation and death. This
is accomplished by modulating phosphorylation of the multifunctional protein
beta-catenin which in turn determines its preference for a particular fate, i.e. 
cell-cell adhesion by binding to E-cadherin, proteasomal degradation, or
co-activation of the transcription factor Tcf/Lef. The pivotal role of
beta-catenin is not limited to Wnt signaling, but can be challenged by other
transcription factors under stress conditions (e.g. FOXO, HIF-1alpha, NF-kappaB, 
c-jun), where beta-catenin acts as a molecular switch in response to the cellular
redox status. Aberrant Wnt/beta-catenin signaling can contribute to
carcinogenesis of intestinal, lung or kidney epithelia, either by mutations of
its signaling components and/or disruption of linked signaling networks. The
nephrotoxic metal Cd2+ causes renal cancer in humans. Because it is not genotoxic
Cd2+ is thought to induce mutations and carcinomas indirectly: Possible
mechanisms include oxidative stress, inhibition of DNA repair, aberrant gene
expression, deregulation of cell proliferation, resistance to apoptosis, and/or
disruption of cell adhesion. Wnt signaling may contribute to Cd2+ carcinogenesis 
because Cd2+ disrupts the junctional E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex, resulting
in excessive nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and activation of Tcf4.
Up-regulation of target genes of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex, such as c-myc,
cyclin D1 and the multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein (MDR1/ABCB1), leads to
increased proliferation, evasion of apoptosis, adaptation to Cd2+ toxicity and
thereby promotes the selection of mutated and pre-neoplastic cells.

PMID: 20455852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):4233-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3470. Epub 
2010 May 4.

Phospholipase D1 drives a positive feedback loop to reinforce the
Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF signaling axis.

Kang DW(1), Lee SH, Yoon JW, Park WS, Choi KY, Min do S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway occurs frequently in human cancers, but
an understanding of the targets and regulation of this important pathway remains 
incomplete. In this study, we report that phospholipase D (PLD), a cell survival 
mediator that is upregulated in cancer, is an important target of the Wnt
signaling pathway that functions in a positive feedback loop to reinforce pathway
output. PLD1 expression and activity was enhanced by treatment with Wnt3a and
glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibitors, and the Wnt pathway-regulated
transcription factors beta-catenin and TCF-4 were required for this effect. Three
functional TCF-4-binding sites were identified within the PLD1 promoter.
Interestingly, suppressing PLD1 blocked the ability of beta-catenin to
transcriptionally activate PLD1 and other Wnt target genes by preventing
beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex formation. Conversely, tactics to elevate
intracellular levels of phosphatidic acid, the product of PLD1 enzyme activity,
enhanced beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex formation as well as beta-catenin-dependent
TCF transcriptional activity. In cell-based assays, PLD1 was necessary for the
anchorage-independent growth driven by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, whereas
beta-catenin/TCF-4 was necessary for the anchorage-independent growth driven by
PLD1 activation. Taken together, our findings define a function for PLD1 in a
positive feedback loop of Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling that provides new
mechanistic insights into cancer, with implications of novel strategies to
disrupt Wnt signaling in cancer.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20442281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Jul 1;68(1):33-40. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.03.015.

Cognitive and sensorimotor gating impairments in transgenic mice overexpressing
the schizophrenia susceptibility gene Tcf4 in the brain.

Brzózka MM(1), Radyushkin K, Wichert SP, Ehrenreich H, Rossner MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The combined analysis of several large genome-wide association
studies identified the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TCF4 as
one of the most significant schizophrenia susceptibility genes. Its function in
the adult brain, however, is not known. TCF4 belongs to the E-protein subfamily
known to be involved in neurodevelopment. The messenger RNA expression of Tcf4 is
sustained in the adult mouse brain, suggesting a function in the adult nervous
system. Tcf4 null mutant mice die perinatally, and haploinsufficiency of TCF4 in 
humans causes severe mental retardation.
METHODS: To investigate the possible function of TCF4 in the adult central
nervous system, we generated transgenic mice that moderately overexpress TCF4
postnatally in the brain to reduce the risk of developmental effects possibly
interfering with adult brain functions. Tcf4 transgenic mice were characterized
with molecular, histological, and behavioral methods.
RESULTS: Tcf4 transgenic mice display profound deficits in contextual and cued
fear conditioning and sensorimotor gating. Furthermore, we show that TCF4
interacts with the neurogenic bHLH factors NEUROD and NDRF in vivo. Molecular
analyses revealed the dynamic circadian deregulation of neuronal bHLH factors in 
the adult hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that TCF4 likely acts in concert with other neuronal
bHLH transcription factors contributing to higher-order cognitive processing.
Moderate transcriptional deregulation of Tcf4 in the brain interferes with
cognitive functions and might alter circadian processes in mice. These
observations provide insight for the first time into the physiological function
of TCF4 in the adult brain and its possible contributions to neuropsychiatric
disease conditions.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20434134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jun;36(6):1573-80.

Effects of potential calcium sensing receptor inducers on promoting
chemosensitivity of human colon carcinoma cells.

Wang X(1), Chen W, Singh N, Promkan M, Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery and Department of Experimental Medicine,
Liaoning Northern Hospital, Shenyang 110016, Liaoning, P.R. China.

We have previously reported that by inducing calcium sensing receptor (CaSR),
calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D, promoted the sensitivity of the human
colon carcinoma cells to anticancer drugs. In the current study we tested several
other potential CaSR modulators, calcipotriol and the effective components of
Chinese herbal medicine lentinan, for their functions in inducing CaSR expression
in human colon carcinoma cell line CBS, Moser, Fet, and SW480 cells and
subsequently promoting sensitivity of the cells to anticancer drugs. Calcipotriol
and lentinan suppressed invasion of the colon carcinoma cells and enhanced the
cytotoxicity of anticancer regimen FOLFIRI to cells in culture or in
anchorage-independent growth. In the mechanism study we found that calcipotriol
and lentinan suppressed protein expression and gene transcriptional activities of
survivin and thymidylate synthase, increased E-cadherin cell membrane
localization and complex formation of E-cadherin and beta-catenin, and repressed 
TCF4 transcriptional activation. These effects were attenuated, however, in CaSR 
knocked-down cells, indicating that CaSR was required in the pathway. We
concluded that calcipotriol and lentinan are efficient in promoting
chemosensitivity in colon carcinoma cells. Since both compounds have much less
side effects than calcitriol in clinic, they have greater potential to be applied
as supplements of colon cancer therapy.

PMID: 20428782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2068-74. doi: 10.2337/db09-1386. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Impact of common variants of PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 on the risk of type 2 diabetes in 5,164 Indians.

Chauhan G(1), Spurgeon CJ, Tabassum R, Bhaskar S, Kulkarni SR, Mahajan A, Chavali
S, Kumar MV, Prakash S, Dwivedi OP, Ghosh S, Yajnik CS, Tandon N, Bharadwaj D,
Chandak GR.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
(CSIR), Delhi, India.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Sep;59(9):e15; author reply e16.

OBJECTIVE: Common variants in PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 genes have been shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes
in European populations by genome-wide association studies. We have studied the
association of common variants in these eight genes with type 2 diabetes and
related traits in Indians by combining the data from two independent case-control
studies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped eight single nucleotide polymorphisms
(PPARG-rs1801282, KCNJ11-rs5219, TCF7L2-rs7903146, SLC30A8-rs13266634,
HHEX-rs1111875, CDKN2A-rs10811661, IGF2BP2-rs4402960, and CDKAL1-rs10946398) in
5,164 unrelated Indians of Indo-European ethnicity, including 2,486 type 2
diabetic patients and 2,678 ethnically matched control subjects.
RESULTS: We confirmed the association of all eight loci with type 2 diabetes with
odds ratio (OR) ranging from 1.18 to 1.89 (P = 1.6 x 10(-3) to 4.6 x 10(-34)).
The strongest association with the highest effect size was observed for TCF7L2
(OR 1.89 [95% CI 1.71-2.09], P = 4.6 x 10(-34)). We also found significant
association of PPARG and TCF7L2 with homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell
function (P = 6.9 x 10(-8) and 3 x 10(-4), respectively), which looked consistent
with recessive and under-dominant models, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicates the association of well-established common
variants with type 2 diabetes in Indians and shows larger effect size for most of
them than those reported in Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2911051
PMID: 20424228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Schizophr Bull. 2010 May;36(3):443-7. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbq035. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

TCF4, schizophrenia, and Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome.

Blake DJ(1), Forrest M, Chapman RM, Tinsley CL, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine and Neurology, Medical Research Council
Center for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, Henry
Wellcome Building, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. blakedj@cardiff.ac.uk

Genome-wide association studies allied with the identification of rare copy
number variants have provided important insights into the genetic risk factors
for schizophrenia. Recently, a meta-analysis of several genome-wide association
studies found, in addition to several other markers, a single nucleotide
polymorphism in intron 4 of the TCF4 gene that was associated with schizophrenia.
TCF4 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that interacts with
other transcription factors to activate or repress gene expression. TCF4
mutations also cause Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome, an autosomal-dominant
neurodevelopmental disorder associated with severe mental retardation. Variants
in the TCF4 gene may therefore be associated with a range of neuropsychiatric
phenotypes, including schizophrenia. Recessive forms of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome are
caused by mutations in NRXN1 and CNTNAP2. Interestingly, NRXN1 deletions have
been reported in schizophrenia, whereas CNTNAP2 variants are associated with
several neuropsychiatric phenotypes. These data suggest that TCF4, NRXN1, and
CNTNAP2 may participate in a biological pathway that is altered in patients with 
schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC2879683
PMID: 20421335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Chem Commun (Camb). 2010 Jun 21;46(23):4021-42. doi: 10.1039/c000603c. Epub 2010 
Apr 19.

Total synthesis of (+)-A83586C, (+)-kettapeptin and (+)-azinothricin: powerful
new inhibitors of beta-catenin/TCF4- and E2F-mediated gene transcription.

Hale KJ(1), Manaviazar S, George J.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, and the Centre for Cancer
Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen 's University Belfast, Stranmillis Road,
Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK BT9 5AG. k.j.hale@qub.ac.uk

Herein we describe our asymmetric total syntheses of (+)-A83586C, (+)-kettapeptin
and (+)-azinothricin. We also demonstrate that molecules of this class powerfully
inhibit beta-catenin/TCF4- and E2F-mediated gene transcription within malignant
human colon cancer cells at low drug concentrations.

PMID: 20405066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Jul 15;182(2):207-19. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200909-1414OC. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Epithelial stress and apoptosis underlie Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome-associated
interstitial pneumonia.

Mahavadi P(1), Korfei M, Henneke I, Liebisch G, Schmitz G, Gochuico BR, Markart
P, Bellusci S, Seeger W, Ruppert C, Guenther A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Giessen Lung Center (UGLC), 
Klinikstrasse 36, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

RATIONALE: The molecular mechanisms underlying Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome-associated interstitial pneumonia (HPSIP) are poorly understood but, as 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, may be linked to chronic alveolar epithelial
type II cell (AECII) injury.
OBJECTIVES: We studied the development of fibrosis and the role of AECII injury
in various murine models of HPS.
METHODS: HPS1, HPS2, and HPS6 monomutant mice, and HPS1/2 and HPS1/6
double-mutant and genetic background mice, were killed at 3 and 9 months of age. 
Quantitative morphometry was undertaken in lung sections stained with
hemalaun-eosin. The extent of lung fibrosis was assessed by trichrome staining
and hydroxyproline measurement. Surfactant lipids were analyzed by electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry. Surfactant proteins, apoptosis, and lysosomal and
endoplasmic reticulum stress markers were studied by Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. Cell proliferation was measured by water-soluble
tetrazolium salt-1 and bromodeoxyuridine assays.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Spontaneous and slowly progressive HPSIP was
observed in HPS1/2 double mutants, but not in other HPS mutants, with subpleural 
onset at 3 months and full-blown fibrosis at 9 months. In these mice, extensive
surfactant abnormalities were encountered in AECII and were paralleled by early
lysosomal stress (cathepsin D induction), late endoplasmic reticulum stress
(activating transcription factor-4 [ATF4], C/EBP homologous protein [CHOP]
induction), and marked apoptosis. These findings were fully corroborated in human
HPSIP. In addition, cathepsin D overexpression resulted in apoptosis of MLE-12
cells and increased proliferation of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts incubated with
conditioned medium of the transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Extensively impaired surfactant trafficking and secretion underlie
lysosomal and endoplasmic reticulum stress with apoptosis of AECII in HPSIP,
thereby causing the development of HPSIP.

PMCID: PMC2913235
PMID: 20378731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Sep;67(17):2969-78. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0366-y. Epub 
2010 Apr 8.

Beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivates miR-30e during intestinal cell differentiation.

Liao Y(1), Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, One Shields Ave., Davis,
CA, 95616, USA.

The Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway plays critical roles in the maintenance of
small intestinal epithelium; however, downstream targets of the beta-catenin/TCF4
complex are not extensively characterized. We identified miR-30e as an immediate 
target activated by the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex. miR-30e was detected in the
peri-nuclear region of the intestinal crypt IEC-6 cells. Bioinformatics analysis 
revealed clustered beta-catenin/TCF4 binding sites within the miR-30e promoter
region. This promoter region was cloned into pGL3-control luciferase reporter
vector, with the enhancer region removed. Transfection of
pCMV-SPORT6-beta-catenin expression vector dose-dependently increased luciferase 
activity, and co-transfection of pCMV-SPORT6-TCF4 expression vector further
enhanced the promoter activity. Dexamethasone-induced IEC-6 cells differentiation
caused a 2.5-fold increase in miR-30e expression, and upon beta-catenin siRNA
transfection, miR-30e increased 1.3-fold. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the binding between
beta-catenin/TCF4 complexes from IEC-6 nuclear extracts and the putative
sequences in the miR-30e promoter. These results demonstrate that
beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivates miR-30e during intestinal cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2921486
PMID: 20372961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;42(7):1142-53. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.03.022. Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Molecular signatures and biological pathway profiles of human corneal epithelial 
progenitor cells.

Bian F(1), Liu W, Yoon KC, Lu R, Zhou N, Ma P, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Identification and isolation of adult stem cells are still challenging for stem
cell biologists. For example, no consensus exists yet regarding definitive
markers for corneal epithelial stem cells, which have been identified to reside
in the limbus for two decades. This study characterized the molecular signatures 
and biological pathways of limbal epithelial progenitors, the rapid adherent
cells (RAC) isolated by adhesion on collagen IV, using human genome microarrays, 
real-time PCR and immunofluorescent staining. The microarrays produced highly
reproducible data not only for all gene transcripts, but also for significantly
changed genes, although the total 12 samples of 3 cell populations in 2 arrays
were isolated from 4 separate experiments at different time period. The
hierarchical clustering heatmap visually revealed that RAC progenitor population 
displayed distinguishably characteristic gene expression profile. With
verification of 27 important genes by quantitative real-time PCR, the microarray 
data not only confirm the expression patterns of 15 known genes as stem cell
associated markers representing limbal stem cell phenotype, but also identified
many significantly regulated genes expressed by limbal progenitor cells.
Transcription factor TCF4 and cell surface protein SPRRs were identified as
potentially positive or negative markers, respectively, for corneal epithelial
progenitor cells. Using GenMAPP and MAPPFinder, we have identified three patterns
of biological pathway profiles, overexpressed, underexpressed and balanced, by
RAC progenitors based on gene ontology categories. These genes and related
pathways are interesting targets for further identification and isolation of
limbal stem cells as well as other tissue-specific adult stem cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2939451
PMID: 20363357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Sci. 2010 May;101(5):1156-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01528.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 11.

Inhibition of ErbB2 by Herceptin reduces survivin expression via the
ErbB2-beta-catenin/TCF4-survivin pathway in ErbB2-overexpressed breast cancer
cells.

Zhu H(1), Zhang G, Wang Y, Xu N, He S, Zhang W, Chen M, Liu M, Quan L, Bai J, Xu 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, State Key Laboratory of Molecular
Oncology, Beijing, China.

Overexpression of ErbB2 is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer.
Targeting of ErbB2 is a very common therapeutic strategy in ErbB2-overexpressed
breast cancer. Herceptin is the first approved and most widely used agent for
ErbB2-targeting therapy in breast cancer. Even though the clinical application
has been performed for more than 10 years, the exact mechanism underlying how
Herceptin exhibits its effects has not been fully elucidated. In this study, we
found that Herceptin could inhibit the expression of survivin in
ErbB2-overexpressed cell lines. Overexpression of survivin could abrogate the
inhibition of cell growth induced by Herceptin. Herceptin could reduce survivin
expression at the transcriptional level. The beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)
pathway played a very crucial role in this cascade. We found that Herceptin could
reduce tyrosine phosphorylation levels of ErbB2 and beta-catenin. Herceptin
treatment induced degradation of beta-catenin protein, resulting in reduced
binding affinity of beta-catenin/TCF4 to the promoter region of survivin. When we
cross-mutated the TCF4 binding sites in the promoter region of survivin, the
reduction of survivin promoter activity almost diminished. Taken together, we
showed that Herceptin could inhibit survivin expression through the
ErbB2-beta-catenin/TCF4-survivin pathway in ErbB2-overexpressed breast cancer
cells. This indicates that there may be a new cascade axis from ErbB2 to
survivin.

PMID: 20331626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabetes Care. 2010 Jun;33(6):1233-5. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1690. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and hyperglycemia in an adult
Italian population-based cohort.

Gambino R(1), Bo S, Gentile L, Musso G, Pagano G, Cavallo-Perin P, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.
roberto.gambino@unito.it

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether TCF7L2 polymorphism has a role in the deterioration 
of glycemic control.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Metabolic variables were evaluated at baseline and
after 6-year follow-up in 1,480 Caucasian subjects from a population-based
cohort.
RESULTS: At baseline, T-allele carriers showed significantly lower BMI and
homeostasis model assessment for beta-cell function (HOMA-B) values and higher
fasting glycemia and diabetes prevalence. At follow-up, fasting glucose and
HOMA-B index were increased and reduced, respectively, in carriers of the
T-allele. Incident impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and incident diabetes were 5.7,
10.7, 16.9% and 1.6, 1.7, 3.0% in the CC, CT, and TT genotypes, respectively. In 
a multiple logistic regression model, the association between incident IFG and
the T-allele was significant (odds ratio [OR] 2.08 [95% CI 1.35-3.20] and 3.56
[2.11-5.98] in CT and TT genotypes, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was independently
associated with increasing fasting glucose values toward hyperglycemia in the
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC2875429
PMID: 20299486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Blood. 2010 May 20;115(20):4138-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-223057. Epub 2010 
Mar 15.

Inhibition of endothelial cell activation by bHLH protein E2-2 and its impairment
of angiogenesis.

Tanaka A(1), Itoh F, Nishiyama K, Takezawa T, Kurihara H, Itoh S, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba;

E2-2 belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription
factors. E2-2 associates with inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) 1, which is involved 
in angiogenesis. In this paper, we demonstrate that E2-2 interacts with Id1 and
provide evidence that this interaction potentiates angiogenesis. Mutational
analysis revealed that the HLH domain of E2-2 is required for the interaction
with Id1 and vice versa. In addition, Id1 interfered with E2-2-mediated effects
on luciferase reporter activities. Interestingly, injection of E2-2-expressing
adenoviruses into Matrigel plugs implanted under the skin blocked in vivo
angiogenesis. In contrast, the injection of Id1-expressing adenoviruses rescued
E2-2-mediated inhibition of in vivo angiogenic reaction. Consistent with the
results of the Matrigel plug assay, E2-2 could inhibit endothelial cell (EC)
migration, network formation, and proliferation. On the other hand, knockdown of 
E2-2 in ECs increased EC migration. The blockade of EC migration by E2-2 was
relieved by exogenous expression of Id1. We also demonstrated that E2-2 can
perturb VEGFR2 expression via inhibition of VEGFR2 promoter activity. This study 
suggests that E2-2 can maintain EC quiescence and that Id1 can counter this
effect.

PMID: 20231428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;654:391-419. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-3271-3_17.

Wnt signaling in pancreatic islets.

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA 02114, USA. zlieu4@partners.org

The Wnt signaling pathway is critically important not only for stem cell
amplification, differentiation, and migration, but also is important for
organogenesis and the development of the body plan. Beta-catenin/TCF7L2-dependent
Wnt signaling (the canonical pathway) is involved in pancreas development, islet 
function, and insulin production and secretion. The glucoincretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 and the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 modulate 
canonical Wnt signaling in beta-cells which is obligatory for their mitogenic and
cytoprotective actions. Genome-wide association studies have uncovered 19 gene
loci that confer susceptibility for the development of type 2 diabetes. At least 
14 of these diabetes risk alleles encode proteins that are implicated in islet
growth and functioning. Seven of them are either components of, or known target
genes for, Wnt signaling. The transcription factor TCF7L2 is particularly
strongly associated with risk for diabetes and appears to be fundamentally
important in both canonical Wnt signaling and beta-cell functioning. Experimental
loss of TCF7L2 function in islets and polymorphisms in TCF7L2 alleles in humans
impair glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, suggesting that perturbations in the
Wnt signaling pathway may contribute substantially to the susceptibility for, and
pathogenesis of, type 2 diabetes. This review focuses on considerations of the
hormonal regulation of Wnt signaling in islets and implications for mutations in 
components of the Wnt signaling pathway as a source for risk-associated alleles
for type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 20217507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Ital J Pediatr. 2010 Feb 2;36:12. doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-36-12.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: report of a case with a TCF4 gene mutation.

Taddeucci G(1), Bonuccelli A, Mantellassi I, Orsini A, Tarantino E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Procreation Medicine and Developmental Age, Section of
Paediatric Neurology, University of Pisa, Italy. g.taddeucci@clp.med.unipi.it

AIMS: We will discuss the clinical and genetic diagnosis of a child with severe
psychomotor delay, who at 3 years of age presented with paroxysms of
hyperpnea-apnea and seizures unrelated to breathing anomalies.
METHODS: The child underwent genetic (karyotype, FISH telomeres) and
neuroradiological (cranial CT and MRI) tests, which proved to be normal. He came 
under our clinical observation at 3 years and 5 months of age. Due to severe
psychomotor delay and facial dysmorphisms we completed the genetic investigations
based on his clinical feature and analysis of the available literature.
RESULTS: The presence of severe mental retardation associated with anomalous
breathing pattern may suggest the Joubert and Rett syndrome, however these were
excluded on the basis of clinical and genetic examination. Angelman syndrome,
suspected for facial dysmorphisms and absent language, was also excluded because 
of the presence of a normal pattern of methylation at SNRPN locus. Another
possible diagnosis was the Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome (PHS), characterized by severe
mental retardation, breathing anomalies (paroxisms of hyperpnea-apnea),
dysmorphisms and sometimes epilepsy. Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 gene located at
18q21.2 region has been recently identified as causative of this syndrome. In our
patient the research of TCF4 mutation by the Institute of Human Genetics,
University Hospital Erlangen (Germany), showed a de novo mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, an underdiagnosed cause of
mental retardation, was based on clinical and genetic findings. Searching for
TCF4 mutations is highly recommended when others overlapping syndromes was
excluded. At our knowledge our patient is the first italian case of PHS diagnosed
at molecular level.

PMCID: PMC2827426
PMID: 20205897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 23;5(2):e9370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009370.

Lentiviral vectors to probe and manipulate the Wnt signaling pathway.

Fuerer C(1), Nusse R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt signaling pathway plays key roles in development, adult
tissue homeostasis and stem cell maintenance. Further understanding of the
function of Wnt signaling in specific cell types could benefit from lentiviral
vectors expressing reporters for the Wnt pathway or vectors interfering with
signaling.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have developed a set of fluorescent and
luminescent lentiviral vectors that report Wnt signaling activity and
discriminate between negative and uninfected cells. These vectors possess a
7xTcf-eGFP or 7xTcf-FFluc (Firefly Luciferase) reporter cassette followed by
either an SV40-mCherry or SV40-Puro(R) (puromycin N-acetyltransferase) selection 
cassette. We have also constructed a vector that allows drug-based selection of
cells with activated Wnt signaling by placing Puro(R) under the control of the
7xTcf promoter. Lastly, we have expressed dominant-negative Tcf4 (dnTcf4) or
constitutively active beta-catenin (beta-catenin(4A)) from the hEF1alpha promoter
in a SV40-Puro(R) or SV40-mCherry backbone to create vectors that inhibit or
activate the Wnt signaling pathway. These vectors will be made available to the
scientific community through Addgene.
CONCLUSIONS: These novel lentiviruses are efficient tools to probe and manipulate
Wnt signaling. The use of a selection cassette in Wnt-reporter viruses enables
discriminating between uninfected and non-responsive cells, an important
requirement for experiments where selection of clones is not possible. The use of
a chemiluminescent readout enables quantification of signaling. Finally,
selectable vectors can be used to either inhibit or activate the Wnt signaling
pathway. Altogether, these vectors can probe and modulate the Wnt signaling
pathway in experimental settings where persistence of the transgene or gene
transfer cannot be accomplished by non-viral techniques.

PMCID: PMC2826402
PMID: 20186325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Diabetes. 2010 May;59(5):1266-75. doi: 10.2337/db09-1568. Epub 2010 Feb 25.

Detailed physiologic characterization reveals diverse mechanisms for novel
genetic Loci regulating glucose and insulin metabolism in humans.

Ingelsson E(1), Langenberg C, Hivert MF, Prokopenko I, Lyssenko V, Dupuis J, Mägi
R, Sharp S, Jackson AU, Assimes TL, Shrader P, Knowles JW, Zethelius B, Abbasi
FA, Bergman RN, Bergmann A, Berne C, Boehnke M, Bonnycastle LL, Bornstein SR,
Buchanan TA, Bumpstead SJ, Böttcher Y, Chines P, Collins FS, Cooper CC, Dennison 
EM, Erdos MR, Ferrannini E, Fox CS, Graessler J, Hao K, Isomaa B, Jameson KA,
Kovacs P, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Ladenvall C, Mohlke KL, Morken MA, Narisu N,
Nathan DM, Pascoe L, Payne F, Petrie JR, Sayer AA, Schwarz PE, Scott LJ,
Stringham HM, Stumvoll M, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tuomi T, Tuomilehto J, Tönjes A, 
Valle TT, Williams GH, Lind L, Barroso I, Quertermous T, Walker M, Wareham NJ,
Meigs JB, McCarthy MI, Groop L, Watanabe RM, Florez JC; MAGIC investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. erik.ingelsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVE Recent genome-wide association studies have revealed loci associated
with glucose and insulin-related traits. We aimed to characterize 19 such loci
using detailed measures of insulin processing, secretion, and sensitivity to help
elucidate their role in regulation of glucose control, insulin secretion and/or
action. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS We investigated associations of loci
identified by the Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related traits Consortium 
(MAGIC) with circulating proinsulin, measures of insulin secretion and
sensitivity from oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs), euglycemic clamps, insulin
suppression tests, or frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance tests in
nondiabetic humans (n = 29,084). RESULTS The glucose-raising allele in MADD was
associated with abnormal insulin processing (a dramatic effect on higher
proinsulin levels, but no association with insulinogenic index) at extremely
persuasive levels of statistical significance (P = 2.1 x 10(-71)). Defects in
insulin processing and insulin secretion were seen in glucose-raising allele
carriers at TCF7L2, SCL30A8, GIPR, and C2CD4B. Abnormalities in early insulin
secretion were suggested in glucose-raising allele carriers at MTNR1B, GCK,
FADS1, DGKB, and PROX1 (lower insulinogenic index; no association with proinsulin
or insulin sensitivity). Two loci previously associated with fasting insulin
(GCKR and IGF1) were associated with OGTT-derived insulin sensitivity indices in 
a consistent direction. CONCLUSIONS Genetic loci identified through their effect 
on hyperglycemia and/or hyperinsulinemia demonstrate considerable heterogeneity
in associations with measures of insulin processing, secretion, and sensitivity. 
Our findings emphasize the importance of detailed physiological characterization 
of such loci for improved understanding of pathways associated with alterations
in glucose homeostasis and eventually type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2857908
PMID: 20185807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Clin Genet. 2010 Sep;78(3):282-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01380.x. Epub
2010 Feb 10.

Two percent of patients suspected of having Angelman syndrome have TCF4
mutations.

Takano K(1), Lyons M, Moyes C, Jones J, Schwartz CE.

Author information: 
(1)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.

The TCF4 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor which 
belongs to the family of E-proteins. E-proteins form homo- and heterodimers with 
other members of the HLH family and bind to the common DNA sequence called E-box.
Haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 gene has been found to be associated with the
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS). PTHS is characterized by severe mental retardation,
a wide mouth plus other distinctive facial features (fleshy lips, beaked nose,
broad nasal bridge) and breathing abnormalities. Because of some phenotypical
overlap with Angelman syndrome (AS), it has been suggested that PTHS be
considered in its differential diagnosis. To explore this possibility, we
screened 86 patients who were suspected of having AS. All the patients were
negative for UBE3A testing, and 53 were known to be negative for methylation
analysis. We identified two TCF4 mutations in this cohort. The p.S384Tfsx7
mutation lacks the bHLH domain. The p.R582P mutation lies within the bHLH domain 
in which seven other missense mutations have been reported. Both mutations most
likely affect the critical function of the bHLH domain of the TCF4 protein. In
summary, we found two TCF4 mutations in 86 patients (2%) suspected to have AS.
Screening for mutations in this gene should be considered in patients who present
with findings of AS but who have been negative for methylation and UBE3A testing.

PMID: 20184619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):190-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0310-190.

Open chromatin and diabetes risk.

Groop L.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):255-9.

PMID: 20179731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Neurosci. 2010 Feb 17;30(7):2582-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3971-09.2010.

eIF2alpha Phosphorylation-dependent translation in CA1 pyramidal cells impairs
hippocampal memory consolidation without affecting general translation.

Jiang Z(1), Belforte JE, Lu Y, Yabe Y, Pickel J, Smith CB, Je HS, Lu B, Nakazawa 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on the Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Program, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotics are widely used to produce amnesia, and
have been recognized to inhibit general or global mRNA translation in the basic
translational machinery. For instance, anisomycin interferes with protein
synthesis by inhibiting peptidyl transferase or the 80S ribosomal function.
Therefore, de novo general or global protein synthesis has been thought to be
necessary for long-term memory formation. However, it is unclear which mode of
translation-gene-specific translation or general/global translation-is actually
crucial for the memory consolidation process in mammalian brains. Here, we
generated a conditional transgenic mouse strain in which double-strand
RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR)-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, a key
translation initiation protein, was specifically increased in hippocampal CA1
pyramidal cells by the chemical inducer AP20187. Administration of AP20187
significantly increased activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) translation and 
concomitantly suppressed CREB-dependent pathways in CA1 cells; this led to
impaired hippocampal late-phase LTP and memory consolidation, with no obvious
reduction in general translation. Conversely, inhibition of general translation
by low-dose anisomycin failed to block hippocampal-dependent memory
consolidation. Together, these results indicated that CA1-restricted genetic
manipulation of particular mRNA translations is sufficient to impair the
consolidation and that consolidation of memories in CA1 pyramidal cells through
eIF2alpha dephosphorylation depends more on transcription/translation of
particular genes than on overall levels of general translation. The present study
sheds light on the critical importance of gene-specific translations for
hippocampal memory consolidation.

PMCID: PMC2836228
PMID: 20164343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 10;5(2):e9153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009153.

Investigation of type 2 diabetes risk alleles support CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1, and
TCF7L2 as susceptibility genes in a Han Chinese cohort.

Wen J(1), Rönn T, Olsson A, Yang Z, Lu B, Du Y, Groop L, Ling C, Hu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Medical College Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have reported several 
genetic variants to be reproducibly associated with type 2 diabetes. Additional
variants have also been detected from a metaanalysis of three GWASs, performed in
populations of European ancestry. In the present study, we evaluated the
influence of 17 genetic variants from 15 candidate loci, identified in type 2
diabetes GWASs and the metaanalysis, in a Han Chinese cohort.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Selected type 2 diabetes-associated genetic
variants were genotyped in 1,165 type 2 diabetic patients and 1,136 normoglycemic
control individuals of Southern Han Chinese ancestry. The OR for risk of
developing type 2 diabetes was calculated using a logistic regression model
adjusted for age, sex, and BMI. Genotype-phenotype associations were tested using
a multivariate linear regression model. Genetic variants in CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1,
TCF7L2, TCF2, MC4R, and PPARG showed a nominal association with type 2 diabetes
(P<or=0.05), of whom the three first would stand correction for multiple testing:
CDKN2A/B rs10811661, OR: 1.26 (1.12-1.43) P = 1.8*10(-4); CDKAL1 rs10946398, OR: 
1.23 (1.09-1.39); P = 7.1*10(-4), and TCF7L2 rs7903146, OR: 1.61 (1.19-2.18) P = 
2.3 * 10(-3). Only nominal phenotype associations were observed, notably for
rs8050136 in FTO and fasting plasma glucose (P = 0.002), postprandial plasma
glucose (P = 0.002), and fasting C-peptide levels (P = 0.006) in the diabetic
patients, and with BMI in controls (P = 0.033).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have identified significant association between
variants in CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1 and TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in a Han Chinese
cohort, indicating these genes as strong candidates conferring susceptibility to 
type 2 diabetes across different ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC2818850
PMID: 20161779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 29;29(17):2540-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.20. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

NF2-deficient cells depend on the Rac1-canonical Wnt signaling pathway to promote
the loss of contact inhibition of proliferation.

Bosco EE(1), Nakai Y, Hennigan RF, Ratner N, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor gene encodes merlin, a
membrane/cytoskeleton protein necessary for the maintenance of contact inhibition
of growth in cells. Bi-allelic inactivation of NF2 is known to cause multiple
cancers in both humans and mice. However, the mechanism through which merlin
exerts its tumor-suppressive function remains obscure. In this report, we show
that NF2 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts lost contact inhibition of cell
proliferation and contained significantly increased canonical Wnt signaling.
Inhibition of Rac1, the activity of which is inversely regulated by NF2, through 
the use of a dominant-negative mutant, small hairpin RNA or a small molecule
inhibitor in NF2-deficient cells, was able to suppress elevated Wnt signals as
shown by reduced activity of the T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) transcription factor.
Dominant-negative TCF4 or Rac1 mutant, as well as a small molecule inhibition of 
Wnt, were able to curb NF2 deficiency-elicited cell proliferation at the
confluent state. Thus, Rac1-mediated canonical Wnt signaling is essential for the
loss of contact inhibition in NF2-deficient cells.

PMCID: PMC2861729
PMID: 20154721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Apr;22(2):206-11. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.01.005. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Regulation of plasmacytoid dendritic cell development.

Reizis B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA. bvr2101@columbia.edu

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC) represent a distinct immune cell type
specialized in direct virus recognition and rapid secretion of type I interferon.
The origin and lineage affiliation of PDC have been controversial, partly because
PDC show features of both lymphocytes and dendritic cells (DC). Recent studies
helped elucidate the cellular and molecular basis of PDC development. In
particular, the common developmental origin and genetic similarity of PDC and
classical antigen-presenting DC have been established. In addition, E protein
transcription factor E2-2 was shown to control lineage commitment and gene
expression program of PDC. Because E proteins are essential regulators of
lymphocyte development, E2-2 activity may underlie the distinct 'lymphoid'
features of PDC.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854232
PMID: 20144853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Feb;19(2):558-65. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0902.

Diabetes genes and prostate cancer in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study.

Meyer TE(1), Boerwinkle E, Morrison AC, Volcik KA, Sanderson M, Coker AL, Pankow 
JS, Folsom AR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center and Division of Epidemiology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

There is a known inverse association between type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prostate
cancer (PrCa) that is poorly understood. Genetic studies of the T2D-PrCa
association may provide insight into the underlying mechanisms of this
association. We evaluated associations in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study between PrCa and nine T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from genome-wide 
association studies of T2D (in CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
PPARG, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2) and four T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from
pre-genome-wide association studies (in ADRB2, CAPN10, SLC2A2, and UCP2). From
1987 to 2000, there were 397 incident PrCa cases among 6,642 men ages 45 to 64
years at baseline. We used race-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate associations between PrCa and increasing number of T2D risk-raising
alleles. PrCa was positively associated with the CAPN10 rs3792267 G allele
[hazard ratio (HR) 1.20; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.00-1.44] and inversely
associated with the SLC2A2 rs5400 Thr110 allele (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.72, 1.00),
the UCP2 rs660339 Val55 allele (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.73, 0.97) and the IGF2BP2
rs4402960 T allele (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.61-1.02; blacks only). The TCF7L2
rs7903146 T allele was inversely associated with PrCa using a dominant genetic
model (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.65-0.97). Further knowledge of T2D gene-PrCa
mechanisms may improve understanding of PrCa etiology.

PMCID: PMC2820124
PMID: 20142250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Aug;13(8B):1886-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00682.x.

The ubiquitin specific protease 4 (USP4) is a new player in the Wnt signalling
pathway.

Zhao B(1), Schlesiger C, Masucci MG, Lindsten K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The canonical Wnt signalling pathway is essential for cell fate determination
during embryonic development and for the maintenance of adult tissue homeostasis.
Deregulation of Wnt signalling leads to developmental defects and is associated
with various types of cancer. Here we have used an RNA interference (RNAi)
library specifically targeting human deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) to screen
for new regulators of the canonical Wnt signalling pathway. We found that
suppression of the ubiquitin specific protease 4 (USP4) activates beta-catenin
dependent transcription. We also show that USP4 is a DUB with dual hydrolysing
activity for K(48)- and K(63)-conjugated polyubiquitin chains and interacts with 
two known Wnt signalling components: the Nemo like kinase (Nlk) and the
transcription factor (T-cell factor 4 [TCF4]). Overexpression of a catalytically 
active Nlk promotes nuclear accumulation of USP4 whereas a subpopulation of TCF4 
is a substrate of USP4-dependent deubiquitination. Thus, modulation of USP4
expression may provide a new means to interfere with canonical Wnt signalling in 
a variety of physiological and pathological conditions.

PMID: 20141612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 Feb;31(2):202-10. doi: 10.1038/aps.2009.200.

Downregulation of Dickkopf-1 is responsible for high proliferation of breast
cancer cells via losing control of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Zhou XL(1), Qin XR, Zhang XD, Ye LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Molecular Biology, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of DKK-1/Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in high
proliferation of LM-MCF-7 breast cancer cells, a sub-clone of MCF-7 cell line.
METHODS: Two cell lines (MCF-7 and LM-MCF-7) with different proliferation
abilities were used. LM-MCF-7 cells were transiently transfected with the
pcDNA3-DKK-1 plasmid encoding the DKK-1 gene (or MCF-7 cells were transfected
siRNA targeting DKK-1 mRNA). Flow cytometry analysis and 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine 
(BrdU) incorporation assay were applied to detect the cell proliferation. The
expression levels of beta-catenin, phosphorylated beta-catenin, c-Myc, cyclin D1 
and Survivin were examined by Western blot analysis. The regulation of Survivin
was investigated by Luciferase reporter gene assay.
RESULTS: Western blot and RT-PCR analysis showed that the expression level of
DKK-1 was downregulated in LM-MCF-7 relative to MCF-7 cells. Flow cytometry and
BrdU incorporation assay showed DKK-1 could suppress growth of breast cancer
cells. Overexpression of DKK-1 was able to accelerate phosphorylation-dependent
degradation of beta-catenin and downregulate the expression of beta-catenin,
c-Myc, cyclin D1 and Survivin. Luciferase reporter gene assay demonstrated that
Survivin could be regulated by beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the downregulation of DKK-1 is responsible for the
high proliferation ability of LM-MCF-7 breast cancer cells via losing control of 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, in which c-Myc, cyclinD1 and Survivin serve
as essential downstream effectors. Our finding provides a new insight into the
mechanism of breast cancer cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4002845
PMID: 20139903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 16;107(7):3001-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906067107. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Long-range enhancers on 8q24 regulate c-Myc.

Sotelo J(1), Esposito D, Duhagon MA, Banfield K, Mehalko J, Liao H, Stephens RM, 
Harris TJ, Munroe DJ, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Technology, National Cancer Institute-Frederick,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Recent genomewide association studies have found multiple genetic variants on
chromosome 8q24 that are significantly associated with an increased
susceptibility to prostate, colorectal, and breast cancer. These risk loci are
located in a "gene desert," a few hundred kilobases telomeric to the Myc gene. To
date, the biological mechanism(s) underlying these associations remain unclear.
It has been speculated that these 8q24 genetic variant(s) might affect Myc
expression by altering its regulation or amplification status. Here, we show that
multiple enhancer elements are present within this region and that they can
regulate transcription of Myc. We also demonstrate that one such enhancer element
physically interacts with the Myc promoter via transcription factor Tcf-4 binding
and acts in an allele specific manner to regulate Myc expression.

PMCID: PMC2840341
PMID: 20133699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Feb 3;11:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-13.

SLUG: a new target of lymphoid enhancer factor-1 in human osteoblasts.

Lambertini E(1), Franceschetti T, Torreggiani E, Penolazzi L, Pastore A, Pelucchi
S, Gambari R, Piva R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Section,
University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara, 74, 44100 Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Lymphoid Enhancer Factor-1 (Lef-1) is a member of a transcription
factor family that acts as downstream mediator of the Wnt/beta-catenin signalling
pathway which plays a critical role in osteoblast proliferation and
differentiation. In a search for Lef-1 responsive genes in human osteoblasts, we 
focused on the transcriptional regulation of the SLUG, a zinc finger
transcription factor belonging to the Snail family of developmental proteins.
Although the role of SLUG in epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell motility 
during embryogenesis is well documented, the functions of this factor in most
normal adult human tissues are largely unknown. In this study we investigated
SLUG expression in normal human osteoblasts and their mesenchymal precursors, and
its possible correlation with Lef-1 and Wnt/beta-catenin signalling.
RESULTS: The experiments were performed on normal human primary osteoblasts
obtained from bone fragments, cultured in osteogenic conditions in presence of
Lef-1 expression vector or GSK-3beta inhibitor, SB216763. We demonstrated that
the transcription factor SLUG is present in osteoblasts as well as in their
mesenchymal precursors obtained from Wharton's Jelly of human umbilical cord and 
induced to osteoblastic differentiation. We found that SLUG is positively
correlated with RUNX2 expression and deposition of mineralized matrix, and is
regulated by Lef-1 and beta-catenin. Consistently, Chromatin Immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assay, used to detect the direct Lef/Tcf factors that are responsible for 
the promoter activity of SLUG gene, demonstrated that Lef-1, TCF-1 and TCF4 are
recruited to the SLUG gene promoter "in vivo".
CONCLUSION: These studies provide, for the first time, the evidence that SLUG
expression is correlated with osteogenic commitment, and is positively regulated 
by Lef-1 signal in normal human osteoblasts. These findings will help to further 
understand the regulation of the human SLUG gene and reveal the biological
functions of SLUG in the context of bone tissue.

PMCID: PMC2834684
PMID: 20128911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 2;9:25. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-25.

Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin, but not p53, and
inhibits the proliferation and invasion of lung cancer cells.

Yang LH(1), Xu HT, Han Y, Li QC, Liu Y, Zhao Y, Yang ZQ, Dong QZ, Miao Y, Dai SD,
Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that overexpression of Axin downregulates T
cell factor-4 (TCF-4) transcription. However, the mechanism(s) by which Axin
downregulates the transcription and expression of TCF-4 is not clear. It has been
reported that beta-catenin promotes and p53 inhibits TCF-4 transcription,
respectively. The aim of this study was to investigate whether beta-catenin
and/or p53 is required for Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4.
RESULTS: Axin mutants that lack p53/HIPK2 and/or beta-catenin binding domains
were expressed in lung cancer cells, BE1 (mutant p53) and A549 (wild type p53).
Expression of Axin or AxinDeltap53 downregulates beta-catenin and TCF-4, and
knock-down of beta-catenin upregulates TCF-4 in BE1 cells. However, expression of
AxinDeltabeta-ca into BE1 cells did not downregulate TCF-4 expression. These
results indicate that Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin.
Although overexpression of wild-type p53 also downregulates TCF-4 in BE1 cells,
cotransfection of p53 and AxinDeltabeta-ca did not downregulate TCF-4 further.
These results suggest that Axin does not promote p53-mediated downregulation of
TCF-4. Axin, AxinDeltap53, and AxinDeltabeta-ca all downregulated beta-catenin
and TCF-4 in A549 cells. Knock-down of p53 upregulated beta-catenin and TCF-4,
but cotransfection of AxinDeltabeta-ca and p53 siRNA resulted in downregulation
of beta-catenin and TCF-4. These results indicate that p53 is not required for
Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4. Knock-down or inhibition of GSK-3beta
prevented Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4. Furthermore, expression of Axin 
and AxinDeltap53, prevented the proliferative and invasive ability of BE1 and
A549, expression of AxinDeltabeta-ca could only prevented the proliferative and
invasive ability effectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin and
independently of p53. Axin may also inhibits the proliferation and invasion of
lung cancer cells via beta-catenin and p53.

PMCID: PMC2827467
PMID: 20122174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):255-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.530. Epub 2010 Jan 31.

A map of open chromatin in human pancreatic islets.

Gaulton KJ(1), Nammo T, Pasquali L, Simon JM, Giresi PG, Fogarty MP, Panhuis TM, 
Mieczkowski P, Secchi A, Bosco D, Berney T, Montanya E, Mohlke KL, Lieb JD,
Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):190-2.

Tissue-specific transcriptional regulation is central to human disease. To
identify regulatory DNA active in human pancreatic islets, we profiled chromatin 
by formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements coupled with
high-throughput sequencing (FAIRE-seq). We identified approximately 80,000 open
chromatin sites. Comparison of FAIRE-seq data from islets to that from five
non-islet cell lines revealed approximately 3,300 physically linked clusters of
islet-selective open chromatin sites, which typically encompassed single genes
that have islet-specific expression. We mapped sequence variants to open
chromatin sites and found that rs7903146, a TCF7L2 intronic variant strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes, is located in islet-selective open chromatin. We
found that human islet samples heterozygous for rs7903146 showed allelic
imbalance in islet FAIRE signals and that the variant alters enhancer activity,
indicating that genetic variation at this locus acts in cis with local chromatin 
and regulatory changes. These findings illuminate the tissue-specific
organization of cis-regulatory elements and show that FAIRE-seq can guide the
identification of regulatory variants underlying disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2828505
PMID: 20118932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Gastroenterology. 2010 May;138(5):1863-74. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.01.041.
Epub 2010 Jan 28.

Cooperation between the thyroid hormone receptor TRalpha1 and the WNT pathway in 
the induction of intestinal tumorigenesis.

Kress E(1), Skah S, Sirakov M, Nadjar J, Gadot N, Scoazec JY, Samarut J,
Plateroti M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université
Lyon 1, CNRS, INRA, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Colorectal tumorigenesis is a multistep process involving the 
alteration of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, leading to the deregulation
of molecular pathways that govern intestinal homeostasis. We have previously
shown that the thyroid hormone receptor alpha1 (TRalpha1) controls intestinal
development and homeostasis through the WNT pathway. More precisely, TRalpha1
directly enhances the transcription of several components of this pathway,
allowing increased expression of beta-catenin/Tcf4 target genes and stimulation
of cell proliferation. Because the WNT pathway is a major player in controlling
intestinal homeostasis, we addressed whether the TRalpha1 receptor has
tumor-inducing potential.
METHODS: We generated mice overexpressing TRalpha1 specifically in the intestinal
epithelium in a wild-type (vil-TRalpha1) or a WNT-activated
(vil-TRalpha1/Apc(+/1638N)) genetic background.
RESULTS: The intestine of vil-TRalpha1 mice presents aberrant intestinal mucosal 
architecture and increased cell proliferation and develops adenoma at a low rate.
However, TRalpha1 overexpression is unable to induce cancer development. On the
contrary, we observed accelerated tumorigenesis in vil-TRalpha1/Apc(+/1638N) mice
compared with the Apc(+/1638N) mutants.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that this phenotype is due to cooperation between
the activated TRalpha1 and WNT pathways. This is the first report describing the 
tumor-inducing function of TRalpha1 in the intestine.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20114049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Genes Cancer. 2010 Feb;1(2):164-76. doi: 10.1177/1947601910362446.

Wnt/ß-catenin Pathway Modulates the Sensitivity of the Mutant FLT3 Receptor
Kinase Inhibitors in a GSK-3ß Dependent Manner.

Jiang J(1), Griffin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

The FLT3 tyrosine kinase receptor is involved in both hematopoiesis and
hematological malignancies. The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway has been shown to
participate in the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells and to cooperate with
the mutant FLT3 receptors in leukemic transformation. However, the detailed
biological impact of such a constitutively activated Wnt pathway remains to be
further explored. Here, the authors report that activating mutations of FLT3
constitutively activate ß-catenin by inhibition of GSK-3ß in a PI3 kinase
pathway-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of a dominant negative form of
GSK-3ß in FLT3-ITD-expressing cells activated ß-catenin and blocked the
downregulation of the TCF/ß-catenin transcriptional activity induced by
inhibition of FLT3 kinase. Furthermore, inhibition of cell proliferation and
colony formation induced by such suppression of FLT3 kinase activity could be
partially reversed by knockdown of GSK-3ß and restored by knockdown of either
TCF4 or ß-catenin. Moreover, exogenous activation of the Wnt pathway also
attenuated such inhibitory effect. These findings indicate that the potencies of 
the inhibitors of FLT3 kinase activity could be modulated by the activity of the 
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in the cells harboring FLT3-ITD mutations, and FLT3-ITDs
signal through GSK-3ß to activate ß-catenin that this is likely to directly
contribute to the leukemic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3092187
PMID: 21779446  [PubMed]


396. Diabetes. 2010 Apr;59(4):836-43. doi: 10.2337/db09-0918. Epub 2010 Jan 27.

The T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 associates with a reduced compensation of
insulin secretion for insulin resistance induced by 9 days of bed rest.

Alibegovic AC(1), Sonne MP, Højbjerre L, Hansen T, Pedersen O, van Hall G, Holst 
JJ, Stallknecht B, Dela F, Vaag A.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Centre, Gentofte, Denmark. aagv@steno.dk

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether the type 2
diabetes-associated T-allele of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 
associates with impaired insulin secretion to compensate for insulin resistance
induced by bed rest.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 38 healthy young Caucasian men were
studied before and after bed rest using the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp
technique combined with indirect calorimetry preceded by an intravenous glucose
tolerance test. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 was genotyped using allelic discrimination
performed with an ABI 7900 system. The genetic analyses were done assuming a
dominant model of inheritance.
RESULTS: The first-phase insulin response (FPIR) was significantly lower in
carriers of the T-allele compared with carriers of the CC genotype before bed
rest, with and without correction for insulin resistance. The incremental rise of
FPIR in response to insulin resistance induced by bed rest was lower in carriers 
of the T-allele (P < 0.001). Fasting plasma glucagon levels were significantly
lower in carriers of the T-allele before and after bed rest. While carriers of
the CC genotype developed increased hepatic insulin resistance, the TCF7L2
rs7903146 did not influence peripheral insulin action or the rate of lipolysis
before or after bed rest.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthy carriers of the T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 exhibit a
diminished increase of insulin secretion in response to intravenous glucose to
compensate for insulin resistance as induced by bed rest. Reduced paracrine
glucagon stimulation may contribute to the impairment of beta-cell function in
the carriers TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-allele associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2844831
PMID: 20107109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Mar;95(3):1450-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2064. Epub
2010 Jan 22.

Genotype and tissue-specific effects on alternative splicing of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 gene in humans.

Mondal AK(1), Das SK, Baldini G, Chu WS, Sharma NK, Hackney OG, Zhao J, Grant SF,
Elbein SC.

Author information: 
(1)or Swapan K. Das, Section on Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of
Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

CONTEXT: Noncoding single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the TCF7L2 gene 
are confirmed risk factors for type 2 diabetes, but the mechanism by which they
increase risk is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that associated SNPs alter TCF7L2 splicing and that
splice forms have altered biological roles.
DESIGN: Splice forms and 5' and 3' untranslated regions were characterized in sc 
adipose, muscle, liver, HepG2 cells, pancreas, and islet. Isoform-specific
transcript levels were quantified in sc adipose. Alternative splice forms were
characterized in HepG2 liver cells under glucose and insulin conditions and in
SGBS cells with differentiation. Major isoforms were characterized by
transfection.
SETTING: The study was conducted at an ambulatory general clinical research
center.
PATIENTS: PATIENTS included 78 healthy, nondiabetic study subjects characterized 
for insulin sensitivity and secretion.
RESULTS: We identified 32 alternatively spliced transcripts and multiple-length
3' untranslated region transcripts in adipose, muscle, islet, and pancreas.
Alternative exons 3a, 12, 13, and 13a were observed in all tissues, whereas exon 
13b was islet specific. Transcripts retaining exons 13 and 13a but not total
TCF7L2 transcripts were significantly correlated with both obesity measures (P < 
0.01) and rs7903146 genotype (P < 0.026) in sc adipose. Insulin (5-10 nm)
suppressed all TCF7L2 isoforms in SGBS cells but suppressed exon 13a-containing
isoforms most significantly (P < 0.001). The isoform distribution differed
throughout SGBS cell differentiation. Isoforms with predicted early stop codons
yielded stable proteins of the predicted size, bound beta-catenin, and targeted
correctly to the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Intronic TCF7L2 variants may regulate alternative transcript
isoforms, which in turn may have distinct physiologic roles.

PMCID: PMC2841530
PMID: 20097709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Int J Exp Pathol. 2010 Feb;91(1):44-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2009.00698.x.

Expression profiles of proliferative and antiapoptotic genes in sporadic and
colitis-related mouse colon cancer models.

Svec J(1), Ergang P, Mandys V, Kment M, Pácha J.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Elevated levels of survivin, telomerase catalytic subunit (TERT), integrin-linked
kinase (ILK), cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
and the regulatory factors c-MYB and Tcf-4 are often found in human cancers
including colorectal cancer (CRC) and have been implicated in the development and
progression of tumorigenesis. The aim of this study was to determine the
expression of these genes in mouse models of sporadic and colitis-associated CRC.
To address these issues, we used qRT-PCR approach to determine changes in gene
expression patterns of neoplastic cells (high-grade dysplasia/intramucosal
carcinoma) and surrounding normal epithelial cells in A/J and ICR mouse strains
using laser microdissection. Both strains were injected with azoxymethane and ICR
mice were also given drinking water that contained 2% dextran sodium sulphate. In
both sporadic (A/J mice) and colitis-associated (ICR mice) models of CRC, the
levels of TERT mRNA, COX-2 mRNA and Tcf-4 mRNA were higher in neoplastic cells
than in surrounding normal epithelial cells. In contrast, survivin mRNA was
upregulated only in neoplastic cells from A/J mice and ILK mRNA was upregulated
only in neoplastic cells from ICR mice. However, the expression of iNOS mRNA was 
similar in normal and neoplastic cells in both models and c-MYB mRNA was actually
downregulated in neoplastic cells compared with normal cells in both models.
These findings suggest that the genetic background and/or the molecular
mechanisms of tumorigenesis associated with genotoxic insults and colonic
inflammation influence the gene expression of mTERT, COX-2, Tcf-4, c-MYB, ILK and
survivin in colon epithelial neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2812727
PMID: 20096072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Apr;49(4):379-89. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20750.

FOXO1 and TCF7L2 genes involved in metastasis and poor prognosis in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma.

Kojima T(1), Shimazui T, Horie R, Hinotsu S, Oikawa T, Kawai K, Suzuki H, Meno K,
Akaza H, Uchida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

The goal of this study was to identify genes related to the metastasis of clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (CRCC). We analyzed copy number alterations in renal
tissue specimens of patients with CRCC patients with or without metastasis by
using high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and then
integrated these data with gene expression profiling data obtained using
oligonucleotide microarrays. The expression levels of target genes were
determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) with an independent tumor
set. An analysis of specimens from 23 CRCC cases with SNP arrays revealed that
hemizygous deletions at 10q and 13q were found only in cases of metastatic
disease. We found the homozygous deletion of TCF7L2 at 10q25.2 in an aggressive
case that had hemizygous deletions at 10q. In addition, a qRT-PCR analysis of
TCF7L2 mRNA levels in tumor samples revealed significantly lower levels in
patients with metastasis when compared with those without metastasis. FOXO1 was
identified as a down-regulated gene in the minimal overlapping region of the 13q 
hemizygous deletion in CRCC. Decreased FOXO1 expression was significantly
correlated with metastasis and poor survival outcome. Knockdown of FOXO1
inhibited apoptosis after doxorubicin treatment in CRCC cells and reduced the
expression of downstream genes involved in cell proliferation (CDKN1B) and
survival (BCL2L11). Lower levels of FOXO1 expression were associated with
decreased expression of CDKN1B and BCL2L11 in CRCC specimens. We conclude that
FOXO1 and TCF7L2 are involved in metastasis and that molecules in these signaling
pathways may be targets for diagnostic procedures and therapies for CRCC.

PMID: 20095040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Mar;24(3):587-97. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0379. Epub 2010 Jan
21.

Novel links among Wnt and TGF-beta signaling and Runx2.

McCarthy TL(1), Centrella M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street,
MS 208041, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. thomas.mccarthy@yale.edu

Osteoblasts exhibit complex Wnt-induced effects that increase T cell factor
(TCF)/lymphoid enhancing factor-dependent transcription in parallel with
beta-catenin stabilization and nuclear factor binding to TCF response element
DNA. Here we show that Wnt-dependent gene expression increases during the early
phase of osteoblast differentiation in vitro, is enhanced by prostaglandin E(2)
activation of transcription factor Runx2 (runt homology domain transcription
factor 2), and is specifically suppressed in Runx2 antisense-depleted
osteoblasts. Moreover, Wnt pathway induction increases expression of the
Runx2-sensitive gene, TGF-beta type I receptor, without increasing nuclear Runx2 
levels or Runx2 binding to DNA. Rather, despite an increase in beta-catenin
levels, Wnt pathway induction enhances Runx2 transcriptional potential in a
beta-catenin-independent way. Runx2 functionally associates with TCF-4 that lacks
a beta-catenin-binding domain and is more fully activated in response to both
prostaglandin E(2) and Wnt pathway induction. Wnt pathway induction increases
TGF-beta type I receptor expression, yet regulates, both positively and
negatively, TGF-beta signaling. Furthermore, TGF-beta signaling enhances TCF-4
and lymphoid enhancing factor-1 mRNA expression and increases TCF-4
transcriptional activity. Therefore, we propose that cross talk between the Wnt
and TGF-beta pathways, which converge on Runx2, both promotes and attenuates
individual aspects of osteoblast maturation.

PMCID: PMC2840811
PMID: 20093419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jan 21;11:12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-12.

Large effects on body mass index and insulin resistance of fat mass and obesity
associated gene (FTO) variants in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Tan S(1), Scherag A, Janssen OE, Hahn S, Lahner H, Dietz T, Scherag S, Grallert
H, Vogel CI, Kimmig R, Illig T, Mann K, Hebebrand J, Hinney A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a common endocrine disorder in 
women of child-bearing age, mainly characterised by chronic anovulation and
hyperandrogenism, is often associated with insulin resistance (IR) and obesity.
Its etiology and the role of IR and obesity in PCOS are not fully understood. We 
examined the influence of validated genetic variants conferring susceptibility to
obesity and/or type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) on metabolic and PCOS-specific
traits in patients with PCOS.
METHODS: We conducted an association study in 386 patients with PCOS (defined by 
the Rotterdam-criteria) using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in or in
proximity to the fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO), insulin-induced
gene-2 (INSIG2), transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) and melanocortin 4
receptor gene (MC4R). To compare the effect of FTO obesity risk alleles on BMI in
patients with PCOS to unselected females of the same age range we genotyped 1,971
females from the population-based KORA-S4 study (Kooperative Gesundheitsforschung
im Raum Augsburg, Survey 4).
RESULTS: The FTO risk allele was associated with IR traits and measures of
increased body weight. In addition, the TCF7L2 SNP was associated with body
weight traits. For the SNPs in the vicinity of INSIG2 and MC4R and for the other 
examined phenotypes there was no evidence for an association. In PCOS the
observed per risk allele effect of FTO intron 1 SNP rs9939609 on BMI was +1.56
kg/m2, whereas it was +0.46 kg/m2 in females of the same age range from the
general population as shown previously.
CONCLUSION: The stronger effect on body weight of the FTO SNP in PCOS might well 
have implications for the etiology of the disease.

PMCID: PMC2824654
PMID: 20092643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000816.

Genetic dissection of differential signaling threshold requirements for the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in vivo.

Buchert M(1), Athineos D, Abud HE, Burke ZD, Faux MC, Samuel MS, Jarnicki AG,
Winbanks CE, Newton IP, Meniel VS, Suzuki H, Stacker SA, Näthke IS, Tosh D,
Huelsken J, Clarke AR, Heath JK, Sansom OJ, Ernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville,
Australia.

Contributions of null and hypomorphic alleles of Apc in mice produce both
developmental and pathophysiological phenotypes. To ascribe the resulting
genotype-to-phenotype relationship unambiguously to the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway,
we challenged the allele combinations by genetically restricting intracellular
beta-catenin expression in the corresponding compound mutant mice. Subsequent
evaluation of the extent of resulting Tcf4-reporter activity in mouse embryo
fibroblasts enabled genetic measurement of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the form
of an allelic series of mouse mutants. Different permissive Wnt signaling
thresholds appear to be required for the embryonic development of head
structures, adult intestinal polyposis, hepatocellular carcinomas, liver
zonation, and the development of natural killer cells. Furthermore, we identify a
homozygous Apc allele combination with Wnt/beta-catenin signaling capacity
similar to that in the germline of the Apc(min) mice, where somatic Apc
loss-of-heterozygosity triggers intestinal polyposis, to distinguish whether
co-morbidities in Apc(min) mice arise independently of intestinal tumorigenesis. 
Together, the present genotype-phenotype analysis suggests tissue-specific
response levels for the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway that regulate both physiological
and pathophysiological conditions.

PMCID: PMC2800045
PMID: 20084116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Genet Med. 2010 Jan;12(1):56; author reply 56-7. doi:
10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181c956fe.

Disease risks derived from genetic variants need clinical context.

Stack CB.

Comment on
    Genet Med. 2009 Aug;11(8):588-94.

PMID: 20081422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(6):1411-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01384-09. Epub 2010 Jan
11.

Upregulation of c-MYC in cis through a large chromatin loop linked to a cancer
risk-associated single-nucleotide polymorphism in colorectal cancer cells.

Wright JB(1), Brown SJ, Cole MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

Genome-wide association studies have mapped many single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) that are linked to cancer risk, but the mechanism by which most SNPs
promote cancer remains undefined. The rs6983267 SNP at 8q24 has been associated
with many cancers, yet the SNP falls 335 kb from the nearest gene, c-MYC. We show
that the beta-catenin-TCF4 transcription factor complex binds preferentially to
the cancer risk-associated rs6983267(G) allele in colon cancer cells. We also
show that the rs6983267 SNP has enhancer-related histone marks and can form a
335-kb chromatin loop to interact with the c-MYC promoter. Finally, we show that 
the SNP has no effect on the efficiency of chromatin looping to the c-MYC
promoter but that the cancer risk-associated SNP enhances the expression of the
linked c-MYC allele. Thus, cancer risk is a direct consequence of elevated c-MYC 
expression from increased distal enhancer activity and not from
reorganization/creation of the large chromatin loop. The findings of these
studies support a mechanism for intergenic SNPs that can promote cancer through
the regulation of distal genes by utilizing preexisting large chromatin loops.

PMCID: PMC2832500
PMID: 20065031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar;1800(3):344-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.12.007.
Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Insulin alters the expression of components of the Wnt signaling pathway
including TCF-4 in the intestinal cells.

Sun J(1), Wang D, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Canada; Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, University Health Network,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological and experimental evidence that support the
correlation between Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and increased risks of
colorectal cancer formation have led us to hypothesize the existence of molecular
crosstalk between insulin and canonical Wnt signaling pathways. Insulin was shown
to stimulate Wnt target gene expression, utilizing the effector of the Wnt
signaling pathway. Whether insulin affects expression of components of Wnt
pathway has not been extensively examined.
METHODS: cDNA microarray was utilized to assess the effect of insulin on gene
expression profile in the rat intestinal non-cancer IEC-6 cell line, followed by 
real-time RT-PCR, Western blotting and reporter gene analyses in intestinal
cancer and non-cancer cells.
RESULTS: Insulin was shown to alter the expression of a dozen of Wnt pathway
related genes including TCF-4 (=TCF7L2) and frizzled- (Fzd-4). The stimulatory
effect of insulin on TCF-4 expression was then confirmed by real-time RT-PCR,
Western blotting and luciferase reporter analyses, while the activation on Fzd-4 
was confirmed by real-time PCR.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Our observations suggest that insulin may crosstalk with
the Wnt signaling pathway in a multi-level fashion, involving insulin regulation 
of the expression of Wnt target genes, a Wnt receptor, as well as mediators of
the Wnt signaling pathway.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20056134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Mar;87(3):330-5. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2009.242. Epub 2010 
Jan 6.

KCNJ11 Lys23Glu and TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T) polymorphisms affect therapeutic
efficacy of repaglinide in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes.

Yu M(1), Xu XJ, Yin JY, Wu J, Chen X, Gong ZC, Ren HY, Huang Q, Sheng FF, Zhou
HH, Liu ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, 
Central South University, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

This study showed that the polymorphisms KCNJ11 Lys23Glu and TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T)
are associated with a heightened risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM). We also explored the effects of these polymorphisms on the efficacy of
repaglinide therapy in Chinese patients with T2DM. A total of 259 patients with
T2DM and 188 healthy controls were genotyped. Forty patients with various
genotypes were randomly selected to undergo an 8-week repaglinide treatment
regimen. Patients with the G allele of the KCNJ11 Lys23Glu polymorphism showed
higher levels of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and postprandial plasma glucose
(PPG) (P < 0.05). After repaglinide treatment, patients with the GA or AA
genotype showed higher levels of FPG, PPG, and glycated hemoglobin (HbA(1c))
compared with patients with the GG genotype (P < 0.05). Patients with the C
allele of TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T) had higher total cholesterol levels and lower body
mass index (BMI) (P < 0.05). In patients with the TT genotype, the drug showed
better efficacy with respect to levels of fasting insulin, triglycerides, and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) than in patients with the CC or CT
genotype (P < 0.05). The KCNJ11 and TCF7L2 polymorphisms were associated with
repaglinide efficacy.

PMID: 20054294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Apr;38(6):1964-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1197. Epub 2009
Dec 30.

Alternative splicing of Tcf7l2 transcripts generates protein variants with
differential promoter-binding and transcriptional activation properties at
Wnt/beta-catenin targets.

Weise A(1), Bruser K, Elfert S, Wallmen B, Wittel Y, Wöhrle S, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Center for Biochemistry and
Molecular Cell Research, Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Germany.

Alternative splicing can produce multiple protein products with variable domain
composition from a single gene. The mouse Tcf7l2 gene is subject to alternative
splicing. It encodes TCF4, a member of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of
DNA-binding proteins and a nuclear interaction partner of beta-catenin which
performs essential functions in Wnt growth factor signalling. Multiple TCF4
isoforms, potentially exhibiting cell-type-specific distribution and differing in
gene regulatory properties, could strongly influence tissue-specific Wnt
responses. Therefore, we have examined mouse Tcf7l2 splice variants in neonatal
tissues, embryonic stem cells and neural progenitors. By polymerase chain
reaction amplification, cloning and sequencing, we identify a large number of
alternatively spliced transcripts and report a highly flexible combinatorial
repertoire of alternative exons. Many, but not all of the variants exhibit a
broad tissue distribution. Moreover, two functionally equivalent versions of the 
C-clamp, thought to represent an auxiliary DNA-binding domain, were identified.
Depending upon promoter context and precise domain composition, TCF4 isoforms
exhibit strikingly different transactivation potentials at natural
Wnt/beta-catenin target promoters. However, differences in C-clamp-mediated DNA
binding can only partially explain functional differences among TCF4 variants.
Still, the cell-type-specific complement of TCF4 isoforms is likely to be a major
determinant for the context-dependent transcriptional output of Wnt/beta-catenin 
signalling.

PMCID: PMC2847248
PMID: 20044351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Gut Microbes. 2011 Jan-Feb;2(1):47-51. doi: 10.4161/gmic.2.1.14649.

Paneth cell function--implications in pediatric Crohn disease.

Beisner J(1), Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Defects in the intestinal barrier play a central role in disease pathogenesis.
Recently we have demonstrated that children with ileal Crohn's disease show a
reduced expression of small intestinal HD-5 at the age of onset suggesting that a
compromised mucosal barrier function might be a key factor in the early disease
pathogenesis. We also identified a disturbance of the Wnt signaling transcription
factor TCF-4 as a major mechanism for this deficiency in children which might
result in a compromised innate immune function of small intestinal Paneth cells
via defensin secretion. Here we provide a summary on our recent findings and
discuss the data in more detail especially focusing on the role of Paneth cell
differentiation and function in the pathogenesis of pediatric ileal Crohn's
disease.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMID: 21637018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2010 Jan;27(1):23-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-009-9377-8. Epub 
2009 Dec 30.

Polymorphisms of TCF7L2 and HHEX genes in Chinese women with polycystic ovary
syndrome.

Xu P(1), Che Y, Cao Y, Wu X, Sun H, Liang F, Sun J, Ke L, Yi L, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine & The Center for Reproductive
medicine, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, 210093, China.

PURPOSE: This study was to evaluate whether polymorphisms of TCF7L2 (rs7903146)
and HHEX (rs1111875) genes responsible for insulin secretion are associated with 
the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in Chinese people.
METHODS: 326 PCOS patients and 290 healthy individuals as controls were studied. 
Blood samples were obtained for DNA analyses and hormone measurements. Genotyping
of the TCF7L2 (rs7903146) and HHEX (rs1111875) genes was carried out by the
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method.
RESULTS: We did not find statistically significant differences in the
distribution of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and HHEX rs1111875 polymorphisms between the
Chinese women with PCOS and the controls. Levels of hormones such as insulin,
FSH, LH, LH/FSH, P, T and E2 were also similar between the different genotypes of
the genes TCF7L2 and HHEX, respectively, which was confirmed within either the
PCOS subjects or controls.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no association of either of the two variants, rs7903146 of
TCF7L2 and rs1111875 of HHEX, with the occurrence of PCOS in the Chinese
population.

PMCID: PMC2826618
PMID: 20041287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Diabetologia. 2010 Apr;53(4):712-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1640-0. Epub 2009 Dec
24.

Evidence for neuroendocrine function of a unique splicing form of TCF7L2 in human
brain, islets and gut.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 8717 Grovemont Circle, Bethesda, MD 20892-4605, USA.
prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variants in the TCF7L2 gene remain the strongest genetic
associations with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Recently, we identified a
unique splicing form of TCF7L2 expressed in pancreatic islets, pancreas and colon
and detected by assay 'ex13-13b'. The expression of ex13-13b strongly correlated 
with proinsulin in glucose-stimulated pancreatic islets, suggesting a potential
role for this form in the development of type 2 diabetes. The goal of this study 
was to further characterise this unique TCF7L2 splicing form in human tissues.
METHODS: We used a panel of 34 human tissues and 80 human cell lines to measure
the expression of assay ex13-13b with use of quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The highest expression of assay ex13-13b was detected in several areas
of the brain (hypothalamus/thalamus, occipital lobe) and in neuronal cell line
SHS5Y5. Low expression was confirmed in pancreatic islets, small intestine,
pancreas and colon, while no expression was detected in other human tissues and
cell lines. The expression of assay ex13-13b correlated with the gene for
cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART, also known as CARTPT) in a
panel of human tissues (n = 12, r = 0.85, p = 0.00046), pancreatic islets (n =
23, r = 0.62, p = 0.0016) and colon (n = 98, r = 0.54, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The significant correlation between expression of a
unique splicing form of TCF7L2, named here TCF7L2-NE, and CART, the gene for an
anorexigenic neurohormone expressed in the central and peripheral nervous system,
suggests that these transcripts may share neuroendocrine functions important for 
brain, gut and pancreatic islets.

PMCID: PMC2830605
PMID: 20033802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;91(2):472-9. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27947. Epub 2009 Dec
23.

TCF7L2 rs7903146-macronutrient interaction in obese individuals' responses to a
10-wk randomized hypoenergetic diet.

Grau K(1), Cauchi S, Holst C, Astrup A, Martinez JA, Saris WH, Blaak EE, Oppert
JM, Arner P, Rössner S, Macdonald IA, Klimcakova E, Langin D, Pedersen O, Froguel
P, Sørensen TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine Copenhagen University Hospital, Centre for
Health and Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. kg@ipm.regionh.dk

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 associates with type
2 diabetes and may operate via impaired glucagon-like peptide 1 secretion, which 
is stimulated more by fat than by carbohydrate ingestion.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to examine the interaction between TCF7L2 rs7903146 
and dietary fat and carbohydrate [high-fat, low-carbohydrate: 40-45% of energy as
fat (HF); compared with low-fat, high-carbohydrate: 20-25% of energy as fat (LF)]
in obese individuals' responses to a 10-wk hypoenergetic diet (-600 kcal/d).
DESIGN: European, obese participants (n = 771) were randomly assigned to receive 
an HF or an LF diet. Body weight, fat mass (FM), fat-free mass (FFM), waist
circumference (WC), resting energy expenditure (REE), fasting fat oxidation in
percentage of REE (FatOx), homeostasis model assessed insulin release
(HOMA-beta), and HOMA-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) were determined at baseline
and after the intervention; 739 individuals were genotyped for rs7903146.
RESULTS: Average weight loss was 6.9 kg with the LF and 6.6 kg with the HF
(difference between diets, NS) diet. Among individuals who were homozygous for
the T-risk allele, those in the HF diet group experienced smaller weight losses
(Deltaweight) (2.6 kg; P = 0.009; n = 622), smaller DeltaFFM (1.6 kg; P = 0.027; 
n = 609), smaller DeltaWC (3.3 cm; P = 0.010; n = 608), and a smaller
DeltaHOMA-IR (1.3 units; P = 0.004; n = 615) than did the LF diet group. For C
allele carriers, there were no differences between the HF and LF diet groups. For
the HF diet group, each additional T allele was associated with a reduced loss of
FM (0.67 kg; P = 0.019; n = 609). TCF7L2 rs7903146 was not associated with
DeltaREE, DeltaFatOx, DeltaHOMA-beta, or dropout.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that obese individuals who are homozygous for the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-risk allele are more sensitive to LF than to HF weight-loss
diets.

PMID: 20032493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Diabetes. 2010 Mar;59(3):747-50. doi: 10.2337/db09-1050. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Gene variants of TCF7L2 influence weight loss and body composition during
lifestyle intervention in a population at risk for type 2 diabetes.

Haupt A(1), Thamer C, Heni M, Ketterer C, Machann J, Schick F, Machicao F, Stefan
N, Claussen CD, Häring HU, Fritsche A, Staiger H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The impact of the diabetes risk gene transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) on body weight is unclear. As TCF7L2 is expressed in adipose tissue and 
involved in Wnt-dependent regulation of adipogenesis, we studied the impact of
TCF7L2 variants on body composition and weight loss during lifestyle
intervention.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 309 German subjects at increased risk
for type 2 diabetes for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, and rs7895340 in TCF7L2 and performed oral glucose
tolerance tests before and after a 9-month lifestyle intervention. Fat
distribution was quantified using whole-body magnetic resonance
imaging/spectroscopy in a subgroup of 210 subjects.
RESULTS: After adjustment for confounding variables, we observed a negative
impact of the type 2 diabetes allele of SNP rs7903146 on change in BMI (P =
0.0034) and on changes in nonvisceral (P = 0.0032) and visceral fat (P = 0.0165) 
during lifestyle intervention. An association of rs7903146 with lifestyle
intervention-induced changes in insulin secretion, glucose concentrations, liver 
fat, or insulin sensitivity were not detected (all P > 0.2). Essentially the same
results were obtained with SNP rs1255372. In contrast, we found no effects of
SNPs rs11196205 and rs7895340 on change in BMI (all P > or = 0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that diabetes-associated alleles of TCF7L2 are
associated with less weight loss in response to lifestyle intervention. Thus,
diabetes-associated TCF7L2 gene variation predicts the success of lifestyle
intervention in terms of weight loss and determines individual susceptibility
toward environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC2828665
PMID: 20028944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;16(1):65-76. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1122. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Rap1 stabilizes beta-catenin and enhances beta-catenin-dependent transcription
and invasion in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Goto M(1), Mitra RS, Liu M, Lee J, Henson BS, Carey T, Bradford C, Prince M, Wang
CY, Fearon ER, D'Silva NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Periodontics and Oral Medicine and Biologic and Materials
Science, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-1078, USA.

PURPOSE: In head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells, Rap1 shuttles
between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Prior findings suggested that Rap1 may
modulate the beta-catenin-independent Wnt pathway in some settings, but the role 
of Rap1 in beta-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling remains undefined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: We observed that beta-catenin bound to active
Rap1 in vitro and Rap1 activated beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent
transcription. Immunofluorescence studies showed that ectopic expression of Rap1 
increased nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. Overexpression of active Rap1
facilitated an increase in beta-catenin-mediated transcription that was abrogated
by dominant-negative TCF4. Conversely, small interfering RNA-mediated inhibition 
of endogenous Rap1 expression inhibited beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription
as well as invasion of HNSCC. Furthermore, inhibition of Rap1 expression
downregulated the expression of matrix metalloproteinase 7, a transcriptional
target of beta-catenin/TCF. In HNSCC cells stably transfected with beta-catenin
or treated with lithium chloride or Wnt3A to stabilize endogenous beta-catenin,
inhibition of Rap1 expression led to decreases in the free pool of beta-catenin. 
Immunohistochemical studies of tissue from HNSCC patients revealed that increased
beta-catenin intensity correlated with higher tumor stage. Furthermore, the
prognostic effect of active Rap1 on tumor N stage was found to depend on
cytosolic beta-catenin expression (P < 0.013). When beta-catenin is high, higher 
Rap1GTP intensity is associated with more advanced N stage.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that Rap1 enhances beta-catenin stability and
nuclear localization. In addition to indicating that Rap1 has a significant role 
in regulating beta-catenin and beta-catenin-dependent progression to more
advanced N-stage lesions, these data highlight Rap1 as a potential therapeutic
target in HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC2844500
PMID: 20028760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2010 Jul;16(7):1127-37. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21178.

Enhanced expression of proproliferative and antiapoptotic genes in ulcerative
colitis-associated neoplasia.

Svec J(1), Musílková J, Bryndová J, Jirásek T, Mandys V, Kment M, Pácha J.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel diseases including long-standing ulcerative
colitis (UC) have an increased risk of evolving into colorectal cancer (CRC). The
overexpression of some proproliferative and antiapoptotic genes, such as
survivin, telomerase catalytic subunit (hTERT), integrin-linked kinase (ILK), and
regulatory factors c-MYB and Tcf-4, has been implicated in the development and
progression of several human malignancies including CRC.
METHODS: In this study we analyzed the expression alterations of these markers
and proinflammatory enzymes cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) during the transition of colonic mucosa from chronic inflammation
to epithelial neoplasia in biopsies of UC patients using quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry; additionally, we compared the
expression profiles of this gene panel in samples of patients with CRC after
tumor resection and in human tumor xenografts of SW620 malignant colonic cells.
RESULTS: The transcript levels of survivin, c-MYB, COX-2, iNOS, and Tcf-4 showed 
a statistically significant increase during neoplastic transformation of UC
patient colonic mucosa, whereas hTERT and ILK were not elevated. In contrast, the
specimens of CRC showed upregulated expression of not only survivin, c-MYB,
Tcf-4, COX-2, and iNOS but also hTERT. A similar expression profile was observed 
in human tumor xenografts in which all transcripts with the exception of c-MYB
were upregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that telomerase and ILK activation occurs
during the later stages of carcinoma progression, whereas upregulation of
survivin, c-MYB, and Tcf-4 is a feature of the early stage of development of
neoplasia, and thus, they might serve as early indicators for UC-associated
colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20027603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Cell Sci. 2010 Jan 15;123(Pt 2):236-45. doi: 10.1242/jcs.053264. Epub 2009 Dec 
21.

Identification of beta-catenin as a target of the intracellular tyrosine kinase
PTK6.

Palka-Hamblin HL(1), Gierut JJ, Bie W, Brauer PM, Zheng Y, Asara JM, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Disruption of the gene encoding protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) leads to
increased growth, impaired enterocyte differentiation and higher levels of
nuclear beta-catenin in the mouse small intestine. Here, we demonstrate that PTK6
associates with nuclear and cytoplasmic beta-catenin and inhibits beta-catenin-
and T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated transcription. PTK6 directly phosphorylates
beta-catenin on Tyr64, Tyr142, Tyr331 and/or Tyr333, with the predominant site
being Tyr64. However, mutation of these sites does not abrogate the ability of
PTK6 to inhibit beta-catenin transcriptional activity. Outcomes of PTK6-mediated 
regulation appear to be dependent on its intracellular localization. In the SW620
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line, nuclear-targeted PTK6 negatively regulates
endogenous beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity, whereas membrane-targeted
PTK6 enhances beta-catenin/TCF regulated transcription. Levels of TCF4 and the
transcriptional co-repressor TLE/Groucho increase in SW620 cells expressing
nuclear-targeted PTK6. Knockdown of PTK6 in SW620 cells leads to increased
beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity and increased expression of
beta-catenin/TCF target genes Myc and Survivin. Ptk6-null BAT-GAL mice,
containing a beta-catenin-activated LacZ reporter transgene, have increased
levels of beta-galactosidase expression in the gastrointestinal tract. The
ability of PTK6 to negatively regulate beta-catenin/TCF transcription by
modulating levels of TCF4 and TLE/Groucho could contribute to its
growth-inhibitory activities in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2954247
PMID: 20026641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Med Chem. 2010 Jan 28;53(2):897-910. doi: 10.1021/jm901370m.

Design and synthesis of novel diaminoquinazolines with in vivo efficacy for
beta-catenin/T-cell transcriptional factor 4 pathway inhibition.

Dehnhardt CM(1), Venkatesan AM, Chen Z, Ayral-Kaloustian S, Dos Santos O, Delos
Santos E, Curran K, Follettie MT, Diesl V, Lucas J, Geng Y, Dejoy SQ, Petersen R,
Chaudhary I, Brooijmans N, Mansour TS, Arndt K, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Medicinal Chemistry, Wyeth Research, Pearl River, New York 10965,
USA. dehnhac@wyeth.com

We are introducing a novel series of 2,4-diaminoquinazolines as beta-catenin/Tcf4
inhibitors which were identified by ligand-based design. Here we elucidate the
SAR of this series and explain how we were able to improve key molecular
properties such as solubility and cLogP leading to compound 9. Analogue 9
exhibited better biological activity and improved physical and pharmacological
properties relative to the HTS hit 49. Furthermore, 9 demonstrated good cell
growth inhibition against several human colorectal cancer lines such as LoVo and 
HT29. In addition, treatment with compound 9 led to gene expression changes that 
overlapped significantly with the transcriptional profile resulting from the
pathway inhibition by siRNA knockdown of beta-catenin or Tcf4. Subsequently, 9
was tested for efficacy in a beta-catenin/RKE-mouse xenograft, where it led to
more then 50% decrease in tumor volume.

PMID: 20025292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cell Adh Migr. 2010 Jan-Mar;4(1):56-60. Epub 2010 Jan 3.

An emerging role for class I bHLH E2-2 proteins in EMT regulation and tumor
progression.

Cano A(1), Portillo F.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain. acano@iib.uam.es

EMT is a complex process whereby cells lose cell-cell interactions and other
epithelial properties whilst acquiring a migratory and mesenchymal phenotype. EMT
is presently recognized as an important even for tumor invasion and metastasis.
Functional E-cadherin loss is a hallmark of EMT and required for tumor invasion
in the majority of carcinomas. Transcriptional downregulation is one of the major
mechanisms for E-cadherin suppression in carcinomas. In the last decade several
E-cadherin repressors, belonging to different transcriptional families, have been
identified that, importantly, also act as potent EMT inducers. One of the last
additions to EMT regulators are the class I bHLH factors E2-2 (also known as
TCF4). However, the hierarchical and functional interrelations between the
different EMT inducers are still poorly understood. Here, we comment on the new
and so far unrecognized function of E2-2 factors in EMT and discuss on the
potential interactions among various EMT inducers. Emerging evidence supporting
the participation of TCF4 in human malignancies is also discussed. Thus,
increasing understanding of EMT and its regulators is providing meaningful
insights into the present knowledge on tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2852558
PMID: 20023376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):394-401. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp317. Epub 2009 Dec
17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic protein inhibits expression of the Wnt inhibitor
DICKKOPF-1 gene and antagonizes beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Navarro D(1), Agra N, Pestaña A, Alonso J, González-Sancho JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, E-28029, Madrid, Spain.

Tumours of the Ewing family, which comprise Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours, are highly aggressive and mostly affect
children and adolescents. They are characterized by chromosomal translocations
leading to the generation of fusion proteins between EWS (or very rarely FUS) and
members of the E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors that are
capable of transforming cells. EWS/FLI1, the most frequent fusion, is thought to 
cause transformation through activation or repression of specific target genes.
We present evidence demonstrating that the Wnt inhibitor and beta-catenin/T-cell 
factor (TCF)-responsive gene DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) is a transcriptional target of
EWS/FLI1, which can inhibit both basal and beta-catenin-induced transactivation
of the DKK-1 promoter. Moreover, our data indicate that EWS/FLI1 has a more
general effect on beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription since it can block
transactivation of a consensus beta-catenin/TCF reporter construct. Consistently,
Ewing tumour cells expressing different EWS/ETS translocations cannot engage
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, whereas silencing of EWS/FLI1 restores 
beta-catenin responsiveness in A673 and RD-ES Ewing tumour cells. Accordingly,
gene set enrichment analysis shows that beta-catenin/TCF target genes are
significantly enriched among genes downregulated by EWS/FLI1 in the Ewing cell
line A673. Mechanistically, the inhibitory effect of EWS/FLI1 can be overcome by 
a constitutively active TCF4 protein (TCF4-VP16). Moreover, EWS/FLI1 binds
lymphoid enhancer factor 1, a TCF family member, and interferes with its binding 
to beta-catenin, which could explain its negative effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. Our results show that EWS/FLI1 inhibits 
both DKK-1 expression as well as beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, which 
could contribute to progression of tumours of the Ewing family.

PMID: 20019092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Endocr Rev. 2010 Apr;31(2):183-93. doi: 10.1210/er.2009-0029. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

Can the genetics of type 1 and type 2 diabetes shed light on the genetics of
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults?

Grant SF(1), Hakonarson H, Schwartz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. grants@chop.edu

The pathophysiology of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is considered 
less understood than its much better characterized counterparts of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes (T1D and T2D), where its clinical presentation exhibits some
features of each of these two main diseases, earning it a reputation as being
"type 1.5 diabetes". The etiology of LADA remains unknown, but a genetic
component has been implicated from recent reports of T1D and T2D genes playing a 
role in its pathogenesis. One way to shed much needed light on the classification
of LADA is to determine the discrete genetic factors conferring risk to the
pathogenesis of this specific phenotype and to determine to what extent LADA
shares genetic similarities with T1D and T2D. For instance, no conclusive support
for a role of the T1D-associated INS gene has been reported in T2D; conversely,
but similarly, no evidence has been found for the role of the T2D-associated
genes IDE/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, FTO, and TCF7L2 in T1D.
However, and somewhat at odds with current thinking, TCF7L2, the most strongly
associated gene with T2D to date, is strongly associated with LADA, a disorder
considered by the World Health Organization to be a slowly progressing form of
T1D. In this review, we address recent advances in the genetics of T1D and T2D
and how such discoveries have in turn shed some light on the genetics of LADA as 
being potentially at the "genetic intersection" of these two major diseases.

PMID: 20007922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Diabet Med. 2009 Dec;26(12):1185-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02847.x.

Role of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity in the pathophysiology of Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and emerging treatment strategies.

Del Prato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Section of Metabolic Diseases and 
Diabetes, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. delprato@immr.med.unipi.it

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by persistent and progressive
deterioration of glucose tolerance. Both insulin resistance and impaired insulin 
secretion contribute to development of Type 2 diabetes. However, whilst insulin
resistance is fully apparent in the pre-diabetic condition, impairment of insulin
secretion worsens over the time, being paralleled by a progressive decline in
both pancreatic B-cell function and B-cell mass. Intense research has identified 
a number of genetic variants that may predispose to impaired B-cell function, but
such predisposition can be precipitated and worsened by toxic effects of
hyperglycaemia (glucotoxicity) and elevated levels of free fatty acids
(lipotoxicity). All these aspects of the pathogenesis of Type 2 diabetes are
discussed in this review. Moreover, treatments that target reduction in
glucotoxicity or lipotoxicity are outlined, including emerging strategies that
target the role of glucagon-like peptide 1 and sodium glucose co-transporter 2.

PMID: 20002468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2010 May;16(5):795-803. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21134.

CD24 is upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease and stimulates cell motility
and colony formation.

Ahmed MA(1), Jackson D, Seth R, Robins A, Lobo DN, Tomlinson IP, Ilyas M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Queen's Medical
Centre Campus, University of Nottingham, UK. mohammed.ilyas@nottingham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: We investigated whether CD24 (reportedly a stem cell marker and
adhesion molecule) was expressed in regenerative mucosa in inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) and whether it could be functionally relevant.
METHODS: CD24 expression was examined in 10 cases of IBD and the relationship of 
CD24 with Wnt signaling was tested using dominant negative (DN)-TCF4 expression. 
For functional evaluation, CD24 was 1) cloned and forcibly expressed in HCT116
(which expresses very low levels of CD24) and 2) knocked-down by RNA interference
in HT29 (which expresses high levels of CD24). The effect of altered CD24
expression on proliferation/apoptosis, staurosporine-induced apoptosis, colony
formation in soft agar, migration, and invasion was examined.
RESULTS: CD24 was not expressed in normal tissue, while 10/10 cases of IBD showed
CD24 upregulation. Inhibition of Wnt signaling with DN-TCF4 caused CD24
downregulation. Forced expression of CD24 did not influence cell proliferation,
apoptosis, or staurosporine-induced apoptosis but it did significantly enhance
colony forming efficiency (P < 0.01). Furthermore, there was increased transwell 
migration (P < 0.001) and invasion (P < 0.03) and there was increased cell
migration in wounding assays. Conversely, knockdown of CD24 reduced transwell
migration (P < 0.01) and invasion (P < 0.01) and reduced cell motility in
wounding assays. CD24 knockdown did not influence proliferation, apoptosis
resistance, or staurosporine-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report upregulation of CD24 in
regenerating tissue in IBD. This may be regulated by Wnt signaling and can confer
enhanced colony forming ability and enhanced cell motility-features that may be
important in tissue healing in the colon.

PMID: 19998456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Genet Med. 2009 Nov;11(11):797-805. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181bd38a9.

Genotype-phenotype analysis of TCF4 mutations causing Pitt-Hopkins syndrome shows
increased seizure activity with missense mutations.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Leppig K, Ballif BC, Thiese H, Erdie-Lalena C, Bawle E, Sastry
S, Spence JE, Bandholz A, Surti U, Zonana J, Keller K, Meschino W, Bejjani BA,
Torchia BS, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, 2820 N. AstorStreet, Spokane, WA 99207, USA.

PURPOSE: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is characterized by severe mental retardation,
characteristic dysmorphic features, and susceptibility to childhood-onset
seizures and intermittent episodes of hyperventilation. This syndrome is caused
by haploinsufficiency of TCF4, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor. Missense, nonsense, splice-site mutations, and gene
deletions have been found in individuals with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. Previous
reports have suggested that the Pitt-Hopkins syndrome phenotype is independent of
mutation or deletion type.
METHODS: We screened 13,186 individuals with microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization. We also conducted a review of the literature and statistical
analysis of the phenotypic features for all individuals with confirmed mutations 
or deletions of TCF4.
RESULTS: We identified seven individuals with TCF4 deletions. All patients have
features consistent with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, although only three have
breathing anomalies, and none has seizures. Our review of previously reported
cases with TCF4 mutations and deletions showed that all patients with
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome reported to date have severe psychomotor retardation, the
onsets of seizures and hyperventilation episodes are limited to the first decade 
in most reported patients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, hyperventilation episodes
are more common than seizures and are seen in the oldest patients, and
individuals with missense TCF4 mutations are more likely to develop seizures.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of an analysis of published cases, we propose a
genotype-phenotype correlation of increased seizure activity with missense TCF4
mutations.

PMID: 19938247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):479-85. doi: 10.2337/db09-1169. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 affects the risk of type 2 diabetes by modulating
incretin action.

Villareal DT(1), Robertson H, Bell GI, Patterson BW, Tran H, Wice B, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Jun;59(6):e4; author reply e5-6.

OBJECTIVE: Common variants in the gene TCF7L2 confer the largest effect on the
risk of type 2 diabetes. The present study was undertaken to increase our
understanding of the mechanisms by which this gene affects type 2 diabetes risk.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Eight subjects with risk-conferring TCF7L2 genotypes
(TT or TC at rs7903146) and 10 matched subjects with wild-type genotype (CC)
underwent 5-h oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), isoglycemic intravenous glucose
infusion, and graded glucose infusion (GGI). Mathematical modeling was used to
quantify insulin-secretory profiles during OGTT and glucose infusion protocols.
The incretin effect was assessed from ratios of the insulin secretory rates (ISR)
during oral and isoglycemic glucose infusions. Dose-response curves relating
insulin secretion to glucose concentrations were derived from the GGI.
RESULTS: beta-cell responsivity to oral glucose was 50% lower (47 +/- 4 vs. 95
+/- 15 x 10(9) min(-1); P = 0.01) in the group of subjects with risk-conferring
TCF7L2 genotypes compared with control subjects. The incretin effect was also
reduced by 30% (32 +/- 4 vs. 46 +/- 4%; P = 0.02) in the at-risk group. The lower
incretin effect occurred despite similar glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) responses to oral glucose. 
The ISR response to intravenous glucose over a physiologic glucose concentration 
range (5-9 mmol/l) was similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 appears to affect risk of type 2
diabetes, at least in part, by modifying the effect of incretins on insulin
secretion. This is not due to reduced secretion of GLP-1 and GIP but rather due
to the effect of TCF7L2 on the sensitivity of the beta-cell to incretins.
Treatments that increase incretin sensitivity may decrease the risk of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2809956
PMID: 19934000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007872.

Control of TCF-4 expression by VDR and vitamin D in the mouse mammary gland and
colorectal cancer cell lines.

Beildeck ME(1), Islam M, Shah S, Welsh J, Byers SW.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) pathway is important in the prevention
and potentially in the treatment of many cancers. One important mechanism of VDR 
action is related to its interaction with the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
Agonist-bound VDR inhibits the oncogenic Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF pathway by
interacting directly with beta-catenin and in some cells by increasing cadherin
expression which, in turn, recruits beta-catenin to the membrane. Here we
identify TCF-4, a transcriptional regulator and beta-catenin binding partner as
an indirect target of the VDR pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this work, we show that TCF-4 (gene name
TCF7L2) is decreased in the mammary gland of the VDR knockout mouse as compared
to the wild-type mouse. Furthermore, we show 1,25(OH)2D3 increases TCF-4 at the
RNA and protein levels in several human colorectal cancer cell lines, the effect 
of which is completely dependent on the VDR. In silico analysis of the human and 
mouse TCF7L2 promoters identified several putative VDR binding elements. Although
TCF7L2 promoter reporters responded to exogenous VDR, and 1,25(OH)2D3, mutation
analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, showed that the increase in
TCF7L2 did not require recruitment of the VDR to the identified elements and
indicates that the regulation by VDR is indirect. This is further confirmed by
the requirement of de novo protein synthesis for this up-regulation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although it is generally assumed that binding of
beta-catenin to members of the TCF/LEF family is cancer-promoting, recent studies
have indicated that TCF-4 functions instead as a transcriptional repressor that
restricts breast and colorectal cancer cell growth. Consequently, we conclude
that the 1,25(OH)2D3/VDR-mediated increase in TCF-4 may have a protective role in
colon cancer as well as diabetes and Crohn's disease.

PMCID: PMC2774944
PMID: 19924301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007697.

TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 is associated with coronary artery disease severity
and mortality.

Sousa AG(1), Marquezine GF, Lemos PA, Martinez E, Lopes N, Hueb WA, Krieger JE,
Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute (InCor),
University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 polymorphisms have been consistently associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus in different populations and type 2 diabetes mellitus is a
major risk factor for cardiovascular disease, especially coronary artery disease.
This study aimed to evaluate the association between TCF7L2 polymorphism
rs7903146 and coronary artery disease in diabetic and non-diabetic subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: two populations were studied in order to assess severity of 
coronary artery disease and cardiovascular events incidence. Eight-hundred and
eighty nine subjects who were referred for cardiac catheterization for coronary
artery disease diagnosis were cross-sectionally evaluated for coronary lesions
(atherosclerotic burden) and 559 subjects from the MASS-II Trial were
prospectively followed-up for 5 years and assessed for major cardiovascular
events incidence. As expected, rs7903146 T allele was associated with diabetes.
Although diabetic patients had a higher prevalence of coronary lesions, no
association between TCF7L2 genotype and coronary lesions was found in this
subgroup. However, non-diabetic individuals carrying the T allele were associated
with a significantly higher frequency of coronary lesions than non-diabetic
non-carriers of the risk allele (adjusted OR = 2.32 95%CI 1.27-4.24, p = 0.006). 
Moreover, presence of multi-vessel coronary artery disease was also associated
with the CT or TT genotypes in non-diabetics. Similarly, from the prospective
sample analysis, non-diabetics carrying the CT/TT genotypes had significantly
more composite cardiovascular end-points events than CC carriers (p = 0.049),
mainly due to an increased incidence of death (p = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: rs7903146 T allele is associated with diabetes and, in non-diabetic 
individuals, with a higher prevalence and severity of coronary artery disease and
cardiovascular events. name of registry site (see list below), registration
number, trial registration URL in brackets.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: MEDICINE, ANGIOPLASTY, OR SURGERY STUDY 
(MASS II): Unique identifier: ISRCTN66068876.

PMCID: PMC2773425
PMID: 19924244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;298(2):E245-56. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00538.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Neonatal growth and regeneration of beta-cells are regulated by the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in normal and diabetic rats.

Figeac F(1), Uzan B, Faro M, Chelali N, Portha B, Movassat J.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris Diderot-Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Equipe
d'Accueil Conventionnée 4413, Laboratory of Biology and Pathology of the
Endocrine Pancreas, Paris, France.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is critical for a variety of fundamental cellular
processes. Here, we investigated the implication of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling in the in vivo regulation of beta-cell growth and regeneration in
normal and diabetic rats. To this aim, TCF7L2, the distal effector of the
canonical Wnt pathway, was knocked down in groups of normal and diabetic rats by 
the use of specific antisense morpholino-oligonucleotides. In other groups of
diabetic rats, the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway was activated by the inhibition of
its negative regulator GSK-3beta. GSK-3beta was inactivated by either LiCl or
anti-GSK-3beta oligonucleotides. The beta-cell mass was evaluated by morphometry.
beta-cell proliferation was assessed in vivo and in vitro by BrdU incorporation
method. In vivo beta-cell neogenesis was estimated by the evaluation of
PDX1-positive ductal cells and GLUT2-positive ductal cells and the number of beta
cells budding from the ducts. We showed that the in vivo disruption of the
canonical Wnt pathway resulted in the alteration of normal and compensatory
growth of beta-cells mainly through the inhibition of beta-cell proliferation.
Conversely, activation of the Wnt pathway through the inhibition of GSK-3beta had
a significant stimulatory effect on beta-cell regeneration in diabetic rats. In
vitro, GSK-3beta inactivation resulted in the stimulation of beta-cell
proliferation. This was mediated by the stabilization of beta-catenin and the
induction of cyclin D. Taken together, our results demonstrate the involvement of
the canonical Wnt signaling in the neonatal regulation of normal and regenerative
growth of pancreatic beta-cells. Moreover, we provide evidence that activation of
this pathway by pharmacological maneuvers can efficiently improve beta-cell
regeneration in diabetic rats. These findings might have potential clinical
applications in the regenerative therapy of diabetes.

PMID: 19920216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2010 Feb;21(1):31-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e3283346cb6.

Interactions between genetic factors that predict diabetes and dietary factors
that ultimately impact on risk of diabetes.

Qi L(1), Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of the present review is to summarize recent
advances in investigations of interactions between established genetic and
dietary risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
RECENT FINDINGS: Several studies reported that dietary factors related to
carbohydrate quality and quantity, such as whole grains and glycemic load, might 
interact with transcription factor 7-like 2 variants in relation to T2D risk. The
genetic predisposition defined by the combination of 10 established T2D risk
alleles was found to modulate the association between Western dietary pattern
(high intakes of red meat, processed meat, and low fiber) and T2D; a stronger
association was observed in those with a high-risk genetic profile. Variants in
genes HHEX, CDKN2A/2B, JAZF1, and IGF2BP2 were found to interact with prenatal
nutrition in relation to T2D risk and glucose levels in later life.
SUMMARY: The available data provide preliminary support for the gene-diet
interactions in determining T2D. However, most findings have yet to be validated.
Future studies will need agreed standards of study design and statistical power, 
dietary measurement, analytical methods, and replication strategies.

PMCID: PMC2833314
PMID: 19915463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Feb;105(2):452-9. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.643. Epub 2009
Nov 10.

Defective paneth cell-mediated host defense in pediatric ileal Crohn's disease.

Perminow G(1), Beisner J, Koslowski M, Lyckander LG, Stange E, Vatn MH, Wehkamp
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Akershus University Hospital and Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: Adult ileal Crohn's disease (CD) is characterized by a specific
decrease in ileal Paneth cell alpha-defensins. In addition to NOD2, we previously
identified a disturbance of the Wnt-signaling transcription factor TCF-4 as a
major mechanism for this deficiency. The aim of this study was to evaluate human 
alpha-defensin-5 (HD-5) and TCF-4 in an independent cohort of pediatric CD
patients.
METHODS: Expression levels of HD-5 and TCF-4 mRNA were quantified by real-time
PCR in biopsies from newly diagnosed untreated pediatric CD patients (<18 years, 
n=36) and age-matched symptomatic non-inflammatory bowel disease controls with a 
histologically normal gut (n=29). To assess the influence of current
inflammation, mucosal interleukin-8 (IL-8) and fecal calprotectin levels were
determined.
RESULTS: Small intestinal HD-5 and TCF-4 mRNA were significantly reduced in
pediatric ileal CD (L1+L3) (P=0.022 and P=0.0005, respectively) and were
significantly correlated (r=0.499; P=0.0001). In ileal but not colonic CD, TCF-4 
was also reduced in the colon (P=0.005). Importantly, both HD-5 and TCF-4 were
independent of inflammation, as measured by IL-8 expression or fecal
calprotectin. In contrast to the small intestine, colonic Paneth cell HD-5 mRNA
was significantly elevated in colonic CD (L2) (P=0.026) and was correlated with
fecal calprotectin levels (r=0.481; P=0.020).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we describe a specific decrease in HD-5 and TCF-4
mRNA expression levels in children with ileal CD. In the small intestine, this
decrease was independent of current inflammation, whereas inflammation seems to
induce Paneth cell metaplasia in the colon. Our data extend the hypothesis of an 
important role of antimicrobial host defense in pediatric CD patients.

PMID: 19904243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;30(2):372-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00063-09. Epub 2009 Nov 9.

KLF4 interacts with beta-catenin/TCF4 and blocks p300/CBP recruitment by
beta-catenin.

Evans PM(1), Chen X, Zhang W, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, USA.

Wnt signaling is crucial in the organization and maintenance of the human
intestinal epithelium, and somatic mutations that result in deregulated Wnt
signaling are an early event in the development of colorectal cancer. The Wnt
ligand ultimately results in the stabilization of cytoplasmic beta-catenin, which
is then free to enter the nucleus and activate transcription through its
interaction with the transcription factor TCF4. Our laboratory recently found
that KLF4, a transcription factor highly expressed in the adult intestine and
critical for intestinal differentiation, interacts with beta-catenin and inhibits
Wnt signaling. In this study, we characterize the molecular mechanisms of
KLF4-mediated inhibition of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. We find that the KLF4
directly interacts with the C-terminal transactivation domain of beta-catenin and
inhibits p300/CBP recruitment by beta-catenin. KLF4 inhibits p300/CBP-mediated
beta-catenin acetylation as well as histone acetylation on Wnt target genes. In
addition, we observe that KLF4 directly interacts with TCF4 independently of
beta-catenin and that KLF4 and TCF4 are expressed in similar patterns within the 
large intestine, with greatest staining near the epithelial surface. These
results provide a deeper understanding of the regulation of beta-catenin in the
intestine and will have important implications in cancer and stem cell research.

PMCID: PMC2798472
PMID: 19901072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Diabetologia. 2010 Jan;53(1):123-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1578-2. Epub 2009 Nov
8.

Regulation of wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT) signalling in
pancreatic islets from wild-type and obese mice.

Krützfeldt J(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY,
USA.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2010 Sep;53(9):2073-5.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: TCF7L2 is a type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene and downstream
effector of canonical wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT)
signalling. However, it is unknown whether this pathway is active in adult
pancreatic islets in vivo, and whether it is regulated in obesity.
METHODS: We analysed activation of endogenous WNT signalling in the endocrine
pancreas from wild-type and obese mice (ob/ob) using a reporter transgene
(Topgal). Regulation of WNT signalling was compared using gene chip experiments
from isolated pancreatic islets. Activation of canonical WNT signalling in
pancreatic islets and the mouse beta cell line MIN6 was measured using
immunoblotting for cytosolic beta-catenin.
RESULTS: Endogenous canonical WNT signalling was absent in the adult endocrine
pancreas in both wild-type and obese mice. We identified WNT4 as an abundant WNT 
signalling molecule in adult pancreatic islets that is induced in two different
insulin-resistant mouse models. Increased expression of WNT4 inhibited canonical 
WNT signalling in pancreatic islets and MIN6 cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Canonical WNT signalling is not active in adult beta 
cells in vivo. WNT4 provides a potential mechanism for suppression of canonical
WNT signalling in obese mice.

PMID: 19898815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mol Cancer. 2009 Nov 6;8:96. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-96.

No effect of cancer-associated SNP rs6983267 in the 8q24 region on co-expression 
of MYC and TCF7L2 in normal colon tissue.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
20892, MD, USA. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs6983267, located within the 8q24 region,
is strongly associated with risk of colorectal and prostate cancer. It has been
suggested that the mechanism of this association is related to differential
interaction of TCF7L2 protein (previously known as TCF-4) with alleles of
rs6983267, influencing the expression of a well-known oncogene, MYC, located 335 
Kb telomeric. Here, we tested the correlation between mRNA expression of MYC and 
several alternatively spliced forms of TCF7L2 in 117 non-cancer colon samples. We
observed a strong correlation (r = 0.60, p < 10(-6)) between expression of MYC
and a unique splicing form of TCF7L2. The level of MYC expression in these
samples was associated with expression of some TCF7L2 splicing forms but not with
genotypes of rs6983267, or interaction of rs6983267 with TCF7L2 expression. These
findings suggest that some splicing forms of TCF7L2 may be functionally important
for regulation of MYC expression in colon tissue but this regulation is not
directly dependent on rs6983267.

PMCID: PMC2777153
PMID: 19895682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Apr;51(4):1927-34. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4591.
Epub 2009 Nov 5.

Disruption of mouse corneal epithelial differentiation by conditional
inactivation of pnn.

Joo JH(1), Kim YH, Dunn NW, Sugrue SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Purpose. To investigate the specific role of Pinin (Pnn) in the development of
anterior eye segment in mice. Methods. Conditional inactivation of Pnn in the
developing surface eye ectoderm and lens was achieved by creating mice carrying a
Pnn null and a floxed Pnn allele as well as a Pax6-Cre-GFP (Le-Cre) transgene.
The resultant Pnn conditional knockout mice were examined by histologic and
immunohistologic approaches. Results. Pax6-Cre-mediated deletion of Pnn resulted 
in severe malformation of lens placode-derived tissues including cornea and lens.
Pnn mutant corneal epithelium displayed the loss of corneal epithelial identity
and appeared epidermis-like, downregulating corneal keratins (K12) and
ectopically expressing epidermal keratins (K10 and K14). This squamous metaplasia
of Pnn mutant corneal epithelium closely correlated with significantly elevated
beta-catenin activity and Tcf4 level. In addition, Pnn inactivation also led to
misregulated level of p68 RNA helicase in mutant corneal epithelium. Conclusions.
These data indicate that Pnn plays an essential role in modulating and/or
orchestrating the activities of major developmental factors of anterior eye
segments.

PMCID: PMC2868409
PMID: 19892877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Acta Diabetol. 2010 Dec;47 Suppl 1:195-8. doi: 10.1007/s00592-009-0161-0. Epub
2009 Nov 3.

Association of a common variant in TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus in
the Palestinian population.

Ereqat S(1), Nasereddin A, Cauchi S, Azmi K, Abdeen Z, Amin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School, Al-Quds
University, Jerusalem, Palestine.

Recent genome-wide association studies have provided an important resource for
furthering our understanding of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) disease
mechanisms. Most of these T2DM gene loci affect insulin secretion. We examined
the association of rs7903146 variant in the transcription factor 7 like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) with T2DM in 333 Palestinian subjects (219 were type 2 diabetic patients
and 114 normoglycemic subjects). The rs7903146 variant of TCF7L2 significantly
increased T2DM risk with an allelic odds ratio of 3.34 (95% CI [1.99-5.60], P <
0.0001). No significant association was observed between TCF7L2 genotypes and
covariates of age, gender and BMI or any tested metabolic trait (total
cholesterol and fasting plasma glucose) in both diabetic and nondiabetic
individuals (P > 0.05). Among the diabetic group, the TT genotype carrier have
earlier age at diagnosis compared with CC and CT carriers (P = 0.013). This is
the first study conducted on this gene in the Palestinian population and provides
valuable information for comparison with other ethnic groups.

PMID: 19885641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Dec;90(6):1502-8. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28379. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

Effects of TCF7L2 polymorphisms on glucose values after a lifestyle intervention.

Bo S(1), Gambino R, Ciccone G, Rosato R, Milanesio N, Villois P, Pagano G,
Cassader M, Gentile L, Durazzo M, Cavallo-Perin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Unit of Cancer Epidemiology,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy. sbo@molinette.piemonte.it

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is the strongest locus linked to type 2 diabetes that has been
identified thus far, and rs7903146 is the most significantly associated variant. 
Few intervention studies have shown that it has negative effects on metabolic
improvement after lifestyle programs.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to assess the effects of this variant on lifestyle
intervention-induced changes in glucose values and metabolic variables at 1- and 
4-y follow-ups.
DESIGN: The rs7903146 variant was genotyped in 335 nondiabetic, dysmetabolic
participants in a randomized lifestyle intervention trial.
RESULTS: Subjects with the unfavorable TT genotype showed higher values of
fasting glucose and lower homeostasis model assessment of beta cell function at
baseline. Lifestyle modifications were successful in the amelioration of
metabolic traits in all genetic subgroups after 1 y. At 4-y follow-up most of the
metabolic benefits had disappeared. In a multiple regression model, values for
glucose and homeostasis model assessment of beta cell function at 4 y were
significantly associated with the T allele (for glucose and homeostasis model
assessments, respectively: beta = 6.6; 95% CI: 2.5, 10.7; P = 0.001; and beta =
-0.37; 95% CI: -0.54, -0.20; P < 0.001) but not with intervention. There was no
interaction between genotype and intervention. After 1 y, impaired fasting
glucose and diabetes incidence were inversely associated with intervention. After
4 y, the presence of a T allele was associated with impaired fasting glucose
(odds ratio: 3.04; 95% CI: 1.53, 6.04; P = 0.001) and diabetes (odds ratio: 2.63;
95% CI: 1.00, 6.96; P = 0.05) but not with intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Lifestyle modifications improved the metabolic pattern in all
genetic subgroups. At the end of the trial, however, weight gain occurred, and
carriers of the T allele developed first hyperglycemia and decreased insulin
secretion, which suggests the need for different "after-care" preventive
approaches tailored to each genotype's metabolic risk.

PMID: 19864407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Int J Med Microbiol. 2010 Jan;300(1):34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2009.08.011. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Innate antimicrobial host defense in small intestinal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Beisner J, Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, D-70376
Stuttgart, Germany.

Paneth cells (PCs) are specialized epithelial cells predominantly found in the
small intestinal crypts of Lieberkuehn. They produce different broad spectrum
antimicrobial peptides most abundantly the alpha-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und
DEFA6). Both these PC products show a specific reduction in small intestinal
Crohn's disease (CD) - a form of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Their decrease
is independent of current inflammation and an association with a NOD2 frameshift 
mutation has been demonstrated. More recently, another independent and even more 
frequent mechanism has been found which is linked to diminished levels of the Wnt
pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4). Besides regulating the 
expression of HD-5 and HD-6 as TCF4 target genes, the Wnt pathway also
orchestrates Paneth cell differentiation and maturation and controls stem cell
maintenance in the small intestine. Besides NOD2 (which is predominantly
expressed in PC) and ATG16L1 (inter alia important in the exocytosis of PC
products), TCF4 is the third gene which is associated with small intestinal CD
and Paneth cell antimicrobial function. Thus, Paneth cells seem to be key player 
emphazising a paramount importance of antimicrobial host defense in small
intestinal CD pathogenesis.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 19850516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cancer. 2009 Oct 22;8:90. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-90.

Canonical Wnt signaling is antagonized by noncanonical Wnt5a in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Yuzugullu H(1), Benhaj K, Ozturk N, Senturk S, Celik E, Toylu A, Tasdemir N,
Yilmaz M, Erdal E, Akcali KC, Atabey N, Ozturk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Bilkent
University, 06800, Ankara, Turkey. yuzugulh@ujf-grenoble.fr

BACKGROUND: beta-catenin mutations that constitutively activate the canonical Wnt
signaling have been observed in a subset of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs).
These mutations are associated with chromosomal stability, low histological
grade, low tumor invasion and better patient survival. We hypothesized that
canonical Wnt signaling is selectively activated in well-differentiated, but
repressed in poorly differentiated HCCs. To this aim, we characterized
differentiation status of HCC cell lines and compared their expression status of 
Wnt pathway genes, and explored their activity of canonical Wnt signaling.
RESULTS: We classified human HCC cell lines into "well-differentiated" and
"poorly differentiated" subtypes, based on the expression of hepatocyte lineage, 
epithelial and mesenchymal markers. Poorly differentiated cell lines lost
epithelial and hepatocyte lineage markers, and overexpressed mesenchymal markers.
Also, they were highly motile and invasive. We compared the expression of 45 Wnt 
pathway genes between two subtypes. TCF1 and TCF4 factors, and LRP5 and LRP6
co-receptors were ubiquitously expressed. Likewise, six Frizzled receptors, and
canonical Wnt3 ligand were expressed in both subtypes. In contrast, canonical
ligand Wnt8b and noncanonical ligands Wnt4, Wnt5a, Wnt5b and Wnt7b were expressed
selectively in well- and poorly differentiated cell lines, respectively.
Canonical Wnt signaling activity, as tested by a TCF reporter assay was detected 
in 80% of well-differentiated, contrary to 14% of poorly differentiated cell
lines. TCF activity generated by ectopic mutant beta-catenin was weak in poorly
differentiated SNU449 cell line, suggesting a repressive mechanism. We tested
Wnt5a as a candidate antagonist. It strongly inhibited canonical Wnt signaling
that is activated by mutant beta-catenin in HCC cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Differential expression of Wnt ligands in HCC cells is associated
with selective activation of canonical Wnt signaling in well-differentiated, and 
its repression in poorly differentiated cell lines. One potential mechanism of
repression involved Wnt5a, acting as an antagonist of canonical Wnt signaling.
Our observations support the hypothesis that Wnt pathway is selectively activated
or repressed depending on differentiation status of HCC cells. We propose that
canonical and noncanonical Wnt pathways have complementary roles in HCC, where
the canonical signaling contributes to tumor initiation, and noncanonical
signaling to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2770486
PMID: 19849855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Dec 20;517(6):925-39. doi: 10.1002/cne.22199.

Expression of the diabetes-associated gene TCF7L2 in adult mouse brain.

Lee S(1), Lee CE, Elias CF, Elmquist JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9077, USA.

Polymorphisms of the gene TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2) are strongly
associated with the development and progression of type 2 diabetes. TCF7L2 is
important in the development of peripheral organs such as adipocytes, pancreas,
and the intestine. However, very little is known about its expression elsewhere. 
In this study we used in situ hybridization histochemistry to show that TCF7L2
has a unique expression pattern in the mouse brain. TCF7L2 is expressed in two
distinct populations. First, it is highly expressed in thalamic and tectal
structures. Additionally, TCF7L2 mRNA is expressed at moderate to low levels in
specific cells of the hypothalamus, preoptic nucleus, and circumventricular
organs. Collectively, these patterns of expression suggest that TCF7L2 has
distinct functions within the brain, with a general role in the development and
maintenance of thalamic and midbrain neurons, and then a distinct role in
autonomic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4176933
PMID: 19845015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Gastroenterology. 2010 Mar;138(3):1035-45.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.09.061. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Galectin-3 increases gastric cancer cell motility by up-regulating fascin-1
expression.

Kim SJ(1), Choi IJ, Cheong TC, Lee SJ, Lotan R, Park SH, Chun KH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastric Cancer Branch, Division of Translational and Clinical Research I,
National Cancer Center Research Institute and Hospital, Jungbalsan-ro,
Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Galectin-3 is a beta-galactoside-binding protein that
increases gastric cancer cell motility in response to integrin signaling and is
highly expressed in gastric tumor cells. Galectin-3 induces cytoskeletal
remodeling to increase cell motility, but the mechanisms of this process are not 
understood. We investigated the effects of galectin-3 on fascin-1, an
actin-bundling protein.
METHODS: We collected malignant and normal tissues from gastric cancer patients
and examined the expression levels of galectin-3 and fascin-1. We silenced
galectin-3 expression in human gastric cancer cell lines using small interfering 
RNA and lenti-viral constructs and determined the effects on fascin-1 expression,
cell motility, and invasion.
RESULTS: Malignant gastric tissues expressed high levels of galectin-3 and
fascin-1, compared with normal gastric tissues. Silencing of galectin-3 resulted 
in altered cancer cell morphology, reduced fascin-1 expression, decreased cell
motility, and reduced malignant cell invasion. Galectin-3 overexpression reversed
these effects. Silencing of fascin-1 also reduced cell motility and caused
changes in cell shape, as did silencing of galectin-3. Furthermore, galectin-3
silencing inhibited the interaction between glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta,
beta-catenin, and T-cell factor (TCF) 4, and the binding of beta-catenin/TCF-4 to
the fascin-1 promoter. Nuclear localization of GSK-3beta and beta-catenin were
not detected when galectin-3 was silenced. Overexpression of mutated galectin-3
(with mutations in the GSK-3beta binding and phosphorylation motifs) did not
increase fascin-1 levels, in contrast to overexpression of wild-type galectin-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Galectin-3 increases cell motility by up-regulating fascin-1
expression. Galectin-3 might be a potential therapeutic target for the prevention
and treatment of gastric cancer progression.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19818782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. EMBO J. 2009 Nov 4;28(21):3329-40. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.285. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

The kinase TNIK is an essential activator of Wnt target genes.

Mahmoudi T(1), Li VS, Ng SS, Taouatas N, Vries RG, Mohammed S, Heck AJ, Clevers
H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Wnt signalling maintains the undifferentiated state of intestinal
crypt/progenitor cells through the TCF4/beta-catenin-activating transcriptional
complex. In colorectal cancer, activating mutations in Wnt pathway components
lead to inappropriate activation of the TCF4/beta-catenin transcriptional
programme and tumourigenesis. The mechanisms by which TCF4/beta-catenin activate 
key target genes are not well understood. Using a proteomics approach, we
identified Tnik, a member of the germinal centre kinase family as a Tcf4
interactor in the proliferative crypts of mouse small intestine. Tnik is
recruited to promoters of Wnt target genes in mouse crypts and in Ls174T
colorectal cancer cells in a beta-catenin-dependent manner. Depletion of TNIK and
expression of TNIK kinase mutants abrogated TCF-LEF transcription, highlighting
the essential function of the kinase activity in Wnt target gene activation. In
vitro binding and kinase assays show that TNIK directly binds both TCF4 and
beta-catenin and phosphorylates TCF4. siRNA depletion of TNIK followed by
expression array analysis showed that TNIK is an essential, specific activator of
Wnt transcriptional programme. This kinase may present an attractive candidate
for drug targeting in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2776109
PMID: 19816403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Feb;88(2):132-5. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20633.

Interstitial deletion of 18q: comparative genomic hybridization array analysis of
46, XX,del(18)(q21.2.q21.33).

Kato Z(1), Morimoto W, Kimura T, Matsushima A, Kondo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University,
Yanagido 1-1, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. zen-k@gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Interstitial deletion of chromosome 18q is rare, making it difficult 
to assign phenotypes to particular cytogenetic deletions.
CASE: We present an 18-year-old female with an interstitial deletion of
chromosome 18q21.2-q21.33. The clinical features included severe psychomotor
retardation with mild growth retardation, hypotonia, midfacial hypoplasia,
carp-shaped mouth, hypertelorism, strabismus, narrow upward slant palpebral
fissures, short philtrum, everted lower lip, malformed ears, flat nasal bridge,
and epicanthic folds. Brain abnormalities, such as agenesis of the corpus
callosum, and abnormalities of the hands and feet were absent. Initially, the
deletion was recognized as 18q21.1-q21.31 by conventional chromosomal analysis,
and microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization revealed a 9.6-Mb deletion
at 18q21.2-q21.33. The deletion included the transcription factor 4 gene and the 
methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) gene, but not the MBD1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The deletion of the transcription factor 4 gene suggested a possible
contribution of the deletion to the patient's facial abnormalities, as observed
in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. Together with other reported cases with interstitial
deletion of 18q, a possible contribution of haploinsufficiency in both MBD1 and
MBD2 genes to a Rett syndrome-like phenotype was suggested, but further genetic
studies on other cases are necessary to clarify the genotype-phenotype
correlation.

PMID: 19813260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Feb;88(2):183-92. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0542-4. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

TCF7L2 genetic variants and progression to diabetes in the Chinese population:
pleiotropic effects on insulin secretion and insulin resistance.

Chang YC(1), Chiu YF, Ho LL, Ting CT, Shih KC, Curb JD, Chen YD, Li HY, Chuang
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Douliou,
Yunlin, Taiwan.

TCF7L2 genetic variants were associated with progression to type 2 diabetes in
Europeans. However, the role of TCF7L2 in type 2 diabetes remained uncertain in
Chinese. Seventeen tag single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 1,094
subjects of Chinese origin from the Stanford Asia-Pacific Program for
Hypertension and Insulin Resistance family study. At baseline, the rs7903146 T
allele in the exon 4 linkage disequilibrium (LD) block were associated with lower
insulinogenic index at 60 min (P = 0.01), while the rs290481 G allele near the 3'
end was associated with higher 2-h post-challenge glucose (P = 0.003) and insulin
concentration (P = 0.02), elevated systolic (P = 0.01) and diastolic blood
pressure (P = 0.006), lower waist circumference (P = 0.01), and increased
steady-state plasma glucose (SSPG) concentration measured with modified insulin
suppression test (P = 0.02). Over an average follow-up period of 5.43 years,
participants with the rs7903146 T allele or variants in the same LD block, but
not those with the rs290481 G allele, were more likely to progress to diabetes
(hazard ratio = 2.61, 95% confidence interval, 1.27-5.39, P = 0.009) than were
non-carriers. TCF7L2 gene expression was inversely associated with SSPG in human 
visceral (r = -0.73, P = 0.006) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (r = -0.62, P =
0.03). TCF7L2 may exert pleiotropic effects on insulin secretion or insulin
resistance. However, only variants associated with impaired beta-cell function
predict progression to diabetes in Chinese.

PMID: 19806338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 30;4(9):e7231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007231.

Alternative splicing of TCF7L2 gene in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue
and risk of type 2 diabetes.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Kaplan LM, Schadt EE, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146 and rs12255372
located within TCF7L2 gene have been identified as the strongest common genetic
risk factors for development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We hypothesized that these
genetic variants might increase the risk of T2D through regulation of alternative
splicing or expression level of TCF7L2 in human adipose tissue.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Expression of 13 assays detecting alternatively
spliced forms of TCF7L2 was measured by quantitative reverse-transcriptase PCR
(qRT-PCR) in paired biopsies of omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue from 159 
obese individuals (BMI 54.6+/-12.2 kg/m(2)). TCF7L2 expression in both types of
adipose tissue was not associated with SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372, T2D status 
and blood levels of glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c). Expression of
assays "ex12-13", "ex12-14" and "ex13-13a" detecting C-terminal alternative exons
of TCF7L2 was higher in subcutaneous compared to omental adipose tissue by 1.46
fold (p = 6.5x10(-15)), 1.41 fold (p = 1.4x10(-9)) and 1.26 fold (p = 4.7x10(-6))
in the control group and by 1.86 fold (p = 1.7x10(-4)), 1.77 fold (p =
7.3x10(-4)) and 1.58 fold (p = 6.1x10(-4)) in the T2D group. A pathway enrichment
analysis on transcripts significantly co-expressed with TCF7L2 in a microarray
set combined with individual expression assays, suggested tissue-specific roles
of TCF7L2 splicing forms in regulation of transcription, signal transduction and 
cell adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of TCF7L2 alternatively spliced forms may have different 
functional roles in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue but is not associated
with SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 or T2D status.

PMCID: PMC2747626
PMID: 19789636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1050-1. doi: 10.1038/ng1009-1050.

Tcf proteins are deeply rooted in skin.

Owens DM.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1068-75.

PMID: 19786951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;26(1):47-52. doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e328332b850.

Recent insights into the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer.

Goel A(1), Boland CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Baylor Sammons 
Cancer Center, Baylor Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75246, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related deaths in the Western world, but our understanding of this disease
is incomplete. The recent advent of new technologies has provided novel insights 
into the pathogenesis of CRC.
RECENT FINDINGS: Genome-wide association studies have recently linked CRC to 10
common genetic variants or single-nucleotide polymorphisms that map to
chromosomes 8q23, 8q24, 10p14, 11q23, 14q22, 15q13, 16q22, 18q21, 19q13 and 20p1.
However, the causal significance of these variants is not understood, and some
are located in poorly characterized genomic regions or gene deserts. Recent
studies indicate that the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs6983267, which maps to
8q24, serves as an enhancer of MYC expression by binding T cell factor 4 (TCF4)
and influencing Wnt signaling. In addition, several microRNAs interact with genes
such as K-RAS, APC, p53, PTEN, TCF4, COX-2, DNMT3a and DNMT3b. Germline
hypermethylation of the DNA mismatch repair genes MLH1 and MSH2 may serve as
predisposing events in some CRC patients.
SUMMARY: Recent studies have elucidated novel mechanisms involved in CRC,
including the involvement of single-nucleotide polymorphisms not located within
traditional genes, the role of microRNAs and epimutations in DNA mismatch repair 
genes. Interestingly, most of this progress has been made by understanding DNA
that does not encode genes.

PMCID: PMC2846600
PMID: 19786869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Oncogene. 2010 Jan 7;29(1):128-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.302. Epub 2009 Sep 28.

Downregulation of E-cadherin is an essential event in activating
beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription and expression of its target genes in
Pdcd4 knockdown cells.

Wang Q(1), Sun ZX, Allgayer H, Yang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

We reported earlier that knockdown of tumor suppressor Pdcd4 (programed cell
death 4) downregulates E-cadherin expression and activates beta-catenin/Tcf
(T-cell factor)-dependent transcription in colon tumor cells. However, the
underlying mechanism of these observations remains unknown. In this study, we
showed that knockdown of Pdcd4 downregulates E-cadherin expression through
elevated protein level of Snail. Over-expression of Pdcd4 upregulates E-cadherin 
expression and inhibits beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription. We then showed 
that knockdown of E-cadherin activates beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription. 
Conversely, over-expression of E-cadherin in Pdcd4 knockdown cells inhibits
beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription. In addition, Pdcd4 knockdown stimulates
urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (u-PAR) and c-Myc expression,
whereas u-PAR and c-Myc expression can be reversed by over-expressing E-cadherin 
in Pdcd4 knockdown cells. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we showed that
beta-catenin/Tcf4 directly binds to the promoters of u-PAR and c-myc in Pdcd4
knockdown cells. Futhermore, knockdown of u-PAR or c-Myc inhibits invasion in
Pdcd4 knockdown cells, suggesting that both u-PAR and c-Myc contribute to
invasion induced by Pdcd4 knockdown. Taken together, our data showed that
elevated Snail expression by Pdcd4 knockdown leads to downregulation of
E-cadherin resulting in activating beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription and
stimulating the expression of c-Myc and u-PAR, thus providing molecular
explanation of how Pdcd4 suppresses tumor invasion.

PMCID: PMC2920641
PMID: 19784072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Cancer Microenviron. 2009 Sep 25;2(1):69-80. doi: 10.1007/s12307-009-0030-y.
eCollection 2009.

The NF-<U+03BA>B/AKT-dependent Induction of Wnt Signaling in Colon Cancer Cells by
Macrophages and IL-1ß.

Kaler P(1), Godasi BN(1), Augenlicht L(1), Klampfer L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical
Center, 111 E 210 street, Bronx, NY 10467 USA.

Progression of colon cancer from microadenoma to macroscopic tumors is coupled to
augmentation of canonical Wnt signaling. We recently reported that tumor
associated macrophages, through interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß) dependent phosphorylation 
of GSK3ß, promote Wnt signaling in colon cancer cells, demonstrating that
proinflammatory cytokines can enhance TCF4/ß-catenin transcriptional activity in 
tumor cells. Here we investigated the pathway whereby IL-1ß inactivates GSK3ß and
promotes Wnt signaling in colon cancer cells. We showed that normal human
monocytes, THP1 macrophages and IL-1 failed to induce Wnt signaling in tumor
cells expressing dominant negative I<U+03BA>B (dnI<U+03BA>B), demonstrating that macrophages
and IL-1 activate Wnt signaling in a NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent manner. NF-<U+03BA>B activity was
required for macrophages and IL-1 to activate PDK1 and AKT in tumor cells and
thereby inhibit GSK3ß activity. Consistently, dominant negative AKT (dnAKT), or
pharmacological inhibition of AKT in tumor cells, prevented macrophage/IL-1
mediated phosphorylation of GSK3ß, activation of Wnt signaling, and induction of 
c-jun and c-myc, confirming that macrophages and IL-1 promote Wnt signaling in an
AKT dependent manner. Finally, we showed IL-1 and macrophages failed to promote
growth of colon cancer cells with impaired NF-<U+03BA>B or AKT signaling, confirming the
requirement for NF-<U+03BA>B and AKT activation for the protumorigenic activity of tumor
associated macrophages. Thus, we showed that IL-1 and tumor associated
macrophages activate NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent PDK1/AKT signaling in tumor cells, and
thereby inactivate GSK3ß, enhance Wnt signaling and promote growth of colon
cancer cells, establishing a novel molecular link between inflammation and tumor 
growth.

PMCID: PMC2787930
PMID: 19779850  [PubMed]


447. Mol Cancer. 2009 Sep 24;8:76. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-76.

Blockade of Wnt-1 signaling leads to anti-tumor effects in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Wei W(1), Chua MS, Grepper S, So SK.

Author information: 
(1)Asian Liver Center, Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. weiwei25@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive cancer, and is the
third leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Standard therapy is ineffective
partly because HCC is intrinsically resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Its
poor prognosis and limited treatment options make it critical to develop novel
and selective chemotherapeutic agents. Since the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is
essential in HCC carcinogenesis, we studied the inhibition of Wnt-1-mediated
signaling as a potential molecular target in HCC.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that Wnt-1 is highly expressed in human hepatoma cell
lines and a subgroup of human HCC tissues compared to paired adjacent non-tumor
tissues. An anti-Wnt-1 antibody dose-dependently decreased viability and
proliferation of Huh7 and Hep40 cells over-expressing Wnt-1 and harboring wild
type beta-catenin, but did not affect normal hepatocytes with undetectable Wnt-1 
expression. Apoptosis was also observed in Huh7 and Hep40 cells after treatment
with anti-Wnt-1 antibody. In these two cell lines, the anti-Wnt-1 antibody
decreased beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activities, which were associated
with down-regulation of the endogenous beta-catenin/Tcf4 target genes c-Myc,
cyclin D1, and survivin. Intratumoral injection of anti-Wnt-1 antibody suppressed
in vivo tumor growth in a Huh7 xenograft model, which was also associated with
apoptosis and reduced c-Myc, cyclin D1, and survivin expressions.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that Wnt-1 is a survival factor for HCC cells,
and that the blockade of Wnt-1-mediated signaling may offer a potential
pathway-specific therapeutic strategy for the treatment of a subgroup of HCC that
over-expresses Wnt-1.

PMCID: PMC2759906
PMID: 19778454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2009 Oct;25(10):1005-11. doi: 10.1089/aid.2008.0284.

Short communication: RNA interference directed against Axin1 upregulates human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 gene expression by activating the Wnt signaling
pathway in HeLa-derived J111 cells.

Kameoka M(1), Kameoka Y, Utachee P, Kurosu T, Sawanpanyalert P, Ikuta K, Auwanit 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging And Re-emerging
Infections, Nonthaburi, Thailand. mkameoka@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Axin1, a regulator of Wnt signaling, was previously identified as playing a
negative role in the late phase of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
replication in HeLa-derived J111 cells. In this report, we studied the molecular 
mechanism of how Axin1 regulates HIV-1 replication. HIV-1 transactivator,
Tat-dependent viral reporter gene expression was enhanced in J111 cells
transfected with small interfering RNA (siRNA) against Axin1. In addition, viral 
transcription was upregulated in J111 cells transfected with siRNA against Axin1.
In contrast, HIV-1 gene expression was not enhanced by transfecting HeLa cells
with siRNA against Axin1. The expression levels of T cell factor-4 (TCF4) and
beta-catenin were higher in J111 than HeLa cells. In addition, siRNAs against
TCF4 and beta-catenin inhibited the Axin1 siRNA-dependent enhancement of HIV-1
gene expression in J111 cells. These results suggest that Axin1 plays a negative 
role in HIV-1 transcription through the Wnt signaling pathway in J111 cells under
normal cell culture conditions.

PMID: 19778269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. No To Hattatsu. 2009 Sep;41(5):365-7.

[Case of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukumura S, Tachi N.

PMID: 19764459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Can Fam Physician. 2009 Sep;55(9):893.

Genetics: type 2 diabetes.

Dorman H, Meschino WS, Allanson J, Blaine SM, Cremin C, Gibbons CA, Honeywell C, 
Permaul J, Carroll JC.

PMCID: PMC2743584
PMID: 19752257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 26;28(47):4133-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.271. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

A Wnt kinase network alters nuclear localization of TCF-1 in colon cancer.

Najdi R(1), Syed A, Arce L, Theisen H, Ting JH, Atcha F, Nguyen AV, Martinez M,
Holcombe RF, Edwards RA, Marsh JL, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Constitutive activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has been implicated as
the primary cause of colon cancer. However, the major transducers of Wnt
signaling in the intestine, T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1) and TCF-4, have opposing
functions. Knockout of TCF-4 suppresses growth and maintenance of crypt stem
cells, whereas knockout of TCF-1 leads to adenomas. These phenotypes suggest that
TCF-4 is Wnt-promoting, whereas TCF-1 acts like a tumor suppressor. Our study of 
TCF expression in human colon crypts reveals a mechanistic basis for this
paradox. In normal colon cells, a dominant-negative isoform of TCF-1 (dnTCF-1) is
expressed that is equally distributed between nuclear and cytoplasmic
compartments. In colon cancer cells, TCF-1 is predominantly cytoplasmic.
Localization is because of active nuclear export and is directed by an
autocrine-acting Wnt ligand that requires Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase II
(CaMKII) activity for secretion and a downstream step in the export pathway.
TCF-4 remains nuclear; its unopposed activity is accompanied by downregulation of
dnTCF-1 and increased expression of full-length isoforms. Thus, the dnTCF-1 and
TCF-4 balance is corrupted in cancer by two mechanisms, a Wnt/CaMKII kinase
signal for nuclear export and decreased dnTCF-1 expression. We propose that
dnTCF-1 provides homeostatic regulation of Wnt signaling and growth in normal
colon, and the alterations in nuclear export and promoter usage contribute to
aberrant Wnt activity in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2787979
PMID: 19749792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2010 May;21(3):309-13. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.09.002.
Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Molecular control of facial morphology.

Liu B(1), Rooker SM, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United
States.

We present a developmental perspective on the concept of phylotypic and
phenotypic stages of craniofacial development. Within orders of avians and
mammals, a phylotypic period exists when the morphology of the facial prominences
is minimally divergent. We postulate that species-specific facial variations
arise as a result of subtle shifts in the timing and the duration of molecular
pathway activity (e.g., heterochrony), and present evidence demonstrating a
critical role for Wnt and FGF signaling in this process. The same molecular
pathways that shape the vertebrate face are also implicated in craniofacial
deformities, indicating that comparisons between and among animal species may
represent a novel method for the identification of human craniofacial disease
genes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3410822
PMID: 19747977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Neurosci. 2009 Sep 9;29(36):11399-408. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0160-09.2009.

A genome-wide screen for spatially restricted expression patterns identifies
transcription factors that regulate glial development.

Fu H(1), Cai J, Clevers H, Fast E, Gray S, Greenberg R, Jain MK, Ma Q, Qiu M,
Rowitch DH, Taylor CM, Stiles CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Departments of
Neurobiology and Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Forward genetic screens in genetically accessible invertebrate organisms such as 
Drosophila melanogaster have shed light on transcription factors that specify
formation of neurons in the vertebrate CNS. However, invertebrate models have, to
date, been uninformative with respect to genes that specify formation of the
vertebrate glial lineages. All recent insights into specification of vertebrate
glia have come via monitoring the spatial and temporal expression patterns of
individual transcription factors during development. In studies described here,
we have taken this approach to the genome scale with an in silico screen of the
Mahoney pictorial atlas of transcription factor expression in the developing CNS.
From the population of 1445 known or probable transcription factors encoded in
the mouse genome, we identify 12 novel transcription factors that are expressed
in glial lineage progenitor cells. Entry-level screens for biological function
establish one of these transcription factors, Klf15, as sufficient for genesis of
precocious GFAP-positive astrocytes in spinal cord explants. Another
transcription factor, Tcf4, plays an important role in maturation of
oligodendrocyte progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2775518
PMID: 19741146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. BMC Cancer. 2009 Sep 4;9:312. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-312.

No association between a candidate TCF7L2 variant and risk of breast or ovarian
cancer.

Goode EL(1), Szabo C, Prokunina-Olsson L, Vierkant RA, Fredericksen ZS, Collins
FS, White KL, Schmidt M, Fridley BL, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, USA.
egoode@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is a transcription factor involved in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling which has a variant known to be associated with risk of Type 2 diabetes
and, in some studies, with risk of certain cancers, including familial breast
cancer. No studies of ovarian cancer have been reported to date.
METHODS: Two clinic-based case-control studies at the Mayo Clinic were assessed
including 798 breast cancer cases, 843 breast cancer controls, 391 ovarian cancer
cases, and 458 ovarian cancer controls. Genotyping at TCF7L2 rs12255372 used a 5'
endonuclease assay, and statistical analysis used logistic regression among
participants as a whole and among a priori-defined subsets.
RESULTS: No associations with risk of breast or ovarian cancer were observed
(ordinal model, p = 0.62 and p = 0.75, respectively). In addition, no
associations were observed among sub-groups defined by age, BMI, family history, 
stage, grade, histology, or tumor behavior.
CONCLUSION: Although the biology of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and
prior association between rs12255372 and numerous phenotypes warranted
examination of this TCF7L2 SNP, no compelling evidence for association with
breast or ovarian cancer was observed.

PMCID: PMC2749057
PMID: 19732438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Hepatol. 2009 Nov;51(5):853-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.06.026. Epub 2009 Aug 
12.

Nonstructural 5A protein activates beta-catenin signaling cascades: implication
of hepatitis C virus-induced liver pathogenesis.

Park CY(1), Choi SH, Kang SM, Kang JI, Ahn BY, Kim H, Jung G, Choi KY, Hwang SB.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory of Hepatitis C Virus and Ilsong Institute of Life
Science, Hallym University, Dongan-gu, Anyang, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The nonstructural 5A (NS5A) protein of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
has been implicated in HCV-induced liver pathogenesis. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
has also been involved in tumorigenesis. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of 
HCV pathogenesis, we examined the potential effects of HCV NS5A protein on
Wnt/beta-catenin signal transduction cascades.
METHODS: The effects of NS5A protein on beta-catenin signaling cascades in
hepatic cells were investigated by luciferase reporter gene assay, confocal
microscopy, immunoprecipitation assay, and immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: beta-Catenin-mediated transcriptional activity is elevated by NS5A
protein, in the context of HCV replication, and by infection of cell
culture-produced HCV. NS5A protein directly interacts with endogenous
beta-catenin and colocalizes with beta-catenin in the cytoplasm. NS5A protein
inactivates glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and increases subsequent accumulation 
of beta-catenin in HepG2 cells. beta-Catenin was also accumulated in HCV
patients' liver tissues. In addition, the accumulation of beta-catenin in HCV
replicon cells requires both activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and
inactivation of GSK3beta.
CONCLUSIONS: NS5A activates beta-catenin signaling cascades through increasing
the stability of beta-catenin. This modulation is accomplished by the protein
interplay between viral and cellular signaling transducer. These data suggest
that NS5A protein may directly be involved in Wnt/beta-catenin-mediated liver
pathogenesis.

PMID: 19726098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2010 Feb;26(2):129-34. doi: 10.3109/09513590903215490.

Genetic variants of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit associated
protein 1-like 1 and transcription factor 7-like 2 are not associated with
polycystic ovary syndrome in Chinese women.

Liu X(1), Li L, Chen ZJ, Lu Z, Shi Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for ReproductiveMedicine of Shandong Province, Shandong
Provincial Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of
China.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common disorder in women that shares many
genetic features with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Novel risk loci for type 2
diabetes, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7756992 in cyclin-dependent
kinase 5 (CDK5) regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1), rs290487
and rs11196218 in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), were recently
identified. The aim of this study was to test whether these loci are also
associated with PCOS. We recruited 826 patients with PCOS and 620 healthy
controls for case-control analysis. The genotypes of these three SNPs were
identified. The relationships between PCOS-related clinical endocrine and
metabolic features and genotypes were also analyzed. Genotype distribution of
these three loci in case and control groups showed no deviation from the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. No significant differences in genotype and allele
frequencies were found between patients with PCOS and healthy controls. No
associations were observed between genotypes of the three SNPs and the clinical
endocrine and metabolic features of patients with PCOS in case group after
adjustment for body mass index. We concluded that rs7756992 in CDKAL1, rs290487
and rs11196218 in TCF7L2 have no associations with PCOS or PCOS-related clinical 
features.

PMID: 19718565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1068-75. doi: 10.1038/ng.431. Epub 2009 Aug 30.

Tcf3 and Tcf4 are essential for long-term homeostasis of skin epithelia.

Nguyen H(1), Merrill BJ, Polak L, Nikolova M, Rendl M, Shaver TM, Pasolli HA,
Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1050-1.

Single-layered embryonic skin either stratifies to form epidermis or responds to 
Wnt signaling (stabilized beta-catenin) to form hair follicles. Postnatally, stem
cells continue to differentially use Wnt signaling in long-term tissue
homeostasis. We have discovered that embryonic progenitor cells and postnatal
hair follicle stem cells coexpress Tcf3 and Tcf4, which can act as
transcriptional activators or repressors. Using loss-of-function studies and
transcriptional analyses, we uncovered consequences to the absence of Tcf3 and
Tcf4 in skin that only partially overlap with those caused by beta-catenin
deficiency. We established roles for Tcf3 and Tcf4 in long-term maintenance and
wound repair of both epidermis and hair follicles, suggesting that Tcf proteins
have both Wnt-dependent and Wnt-independent roles in lineage determination.

PMCID: PMC2792754
PMID: 19718027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Nov;20(11):2459-67. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008121314. Epub 2009
Aug 27.

TCF7L2 polymorphism associates with new-onset diabetes after transplantation.

Ghisdal L(1), Baron C, Le Meur Y, Lionet A, Halimi JM, Rerolle JP, Glowacki F,
Lebranchu Y, Drouet M, Noël C, El Housni H, Cochaux P, Wissing KM, Abramowicz D, 
Abramowicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Transplantation Rénale, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, 1070 Bruxelles,
Belgique. lghisdal@yahoo.com

New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a serious and frequent
complication in transplant recipients. Whether NODAT shares the same
susceptibility genes as type 2 diabetes is unknown. In this multicenter study, we
genotyped 1076 white patients without diabetes at transplantation for 11
polymorphisms that associate with type 2 diabetes. We defined NODAT as a fasting 
plasma glucose > or =126 mg/dl on at least two occasions or de novo hypoglycemic 
therapy. We compared clinical and genetic factors between patients who developed 
NODAT within 6 mo of transplantation (n = 118; incidence 11%) and patients
without diabetes (n = 958). In multivariate analysis, NODAT significantly
associated with the following characteristics: TCF7L2 polymorphism (odds ratio
[OR] 1.60 per each T allele; P = 0.002), age (OR 1.03 per year; P < 0.001), body 
mass index at transplantation (OR 1.09 per unit; P < 0.001), tacrolimus use (OR
2.26; P < 0.001), and the occurrence of a corticoid-treated acute rejection
episode (OR 2.78; P < 0.001). In summary, our data show that the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism, a known risk factor for type 2 diabetes in the general population, 
also associates with NODAT.

PMCID: PMC2799180
PMID: 19713311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Exp Dermatol. 2009 Oct;18(10):842-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.00922.x. Epub 
2009 Aug 23.

Methylation-associated silencing of S100A4 expression in human epidermal cancers.

Li Y(1), Liu ZL, Zhang KL, Chen XY, Kong QY, Wu ML, Sun Y, Liu J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Liaoning Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, College
of Basic Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

S100A4 appears important for cancer metastasis and its overexpression is common
in a variety of human malignancies, but its status in epidermal cancers remains
lesser known. Likewise, E-cadherin downregulation and Wingless (Wnt) activation
are frequent cancer-associated alterations, whereas their potential correlations 
with S100A4 expression in skin lesions have not been characterized. These issues 
were addressed in the present study using tissue microarray-based
immunohistochemical staining, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and
western blotting. Meanwhile, the underlying epigenetic mechanism leading to the
altered S100A4 expression in epidermal tumors was elucidated.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that S100A4 expression frequencies were 100% (8/8) 
in normal epidermis, 80.6% (25/31) in tumor-surrounding non-cancerous epidermis, 
66.7% (10/15) in premalignant diseases, 8.3% (1/11) in Bowen's disease and
7.7-26.3% in different cancer tissues. The incidence of S100A4 detection in the
normal and non-cancerous epidermis was significantly different from that of
epidermal cancers (P = 0.000). Accordingly, human immortalized keratinocyte line 
HaCat but not skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) line colo16 was positive in
S100A4 expression. S100A4 downregulation, E-cadherin reduction and Wnt activation
coexisted in most of epidermal cancers but unnecessarily overlapped. Methylation 
DNA sequencing revealed methylation of four critical (cytosine and guanine
separated by a phosphate or -C-phosphate-G-) CpG sites within S100A4 intron first
in S100A4-negative colo16 cells and skin SCCs, and
demethylator/5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment efficiently recovered S100A4
expression in colo16 cells. Our findings demonstrate that S100A4 downregulation, 
as the consequence of DNA methylation, is closely correlated with skin tumor
formation. Wnt activation and E-cadherin reduction and S100A4 down-regulation are
paralleled molecular events in skin tumors, which may serve as the biomarkers for
predicting epidermal cancer risk.

PMID: 19703228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):28115-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.047258. Epub 2009
Aug 18.

Beta-catenin regulates vitamin C biosynthesis and cell survival in murine liver.

Nejak-Bowen KN(1), Zeng G, Tan X, Cieply B, Monga SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15216, USA.

Because the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays multiple roles in liver pathobiology, 
it is critical to identify gene targets that mediate such diverse effects. Here
we report a novel role of beta-catenin in controlling ascorbic acid biosynthesis 
in murine liver through regulation of expression of regucalcin or senescence
marker protein 30 and L-gulonolactone oxidase. Reverse transcription-PCR, Western
blotting, and immunohistochemistry demonstrate decreased regucalcin expression in
beta-catenin-null livers and greater expression in beta-catenin overexpressing
transgenic livers, HepG2 hepatoma cells (contain constitutively active
beta-catenin), regenerating livers, and in hepatocellular cancer tissues that
exhibit beta-catenin activation. Interestingly, coprecipitation and
immunofluorescence studies also demonstrate an association of beta-catenin and
regucalcin. Luciferase reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays verified
a functional TCF-4-binding site located between -163 and -157 (CTTTGCA) on the
regucalcin promoter to be critical for regulation by beta-catenin. Significantly 
lower serum ascorbate levels were observed in beta-catenin knock-out mice
secondary to decreased expression of regucalcin and also of L-gulonolactone
oxidase, the penultimate and last (also rate-limiting) steps in the synthesis of 
ascorbic acid, respectively. These mice also show enhanced basal hepatocyte
apoptosis. To test if ascorbate deficiency secondary to beta-catenin loss and
regucalcin decrease was contributing to apoptosis, beta-catenin-null hepatocytes 
or regucalcin small interfering RNA-transfected HepG2 cells were cultured, which 
exhibited significant apoptosis that was alleviated by the addition of ascorbic
acid. Thus, through regucalcin and L-gulonolactone oxidase expression,
beta-catenin regulates vitamin C biosynthesis in murine liver, which in turn may 
be one of the mechanisms contributing to the role of beta-catenin in cell
survival.

PMCID: PMC2788862
PMID: 19690176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Placenta. 2009 Oct;30(10):876-83. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.07.010. Epub 2009 
Aug 13.

Activation of beta-catenin signalling increases StarD7 gene expression in JEG-3
cells.

Rena V(1), Angeletti S, Panzetta-Dutari G, Genti-Raimondi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología (CIBICI),
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET),
Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba, Haya de la Torre y Medina Allende, Córdoba, Argentina.

StarD7 gene encodes a protein that belongs to the StAR-related lipid transfer
proteins involved in intracellular transport and metabolism of lipids. It has
been previously documented that StarD7 has a wide-spread mRNA expression in
trophoblastic tissues and several tumour cell lines with highest levels in both
choriocarcinoma JEG-3 and JAR cells, hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2, and
colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells. To understand the molecular mechanisms
that regulate the expression of the human StarD7 gene, we have cloned and
characterized the 5'-flanking region of the gene. Transient transfections of
several 5'deleted StarD7-promoter-firefly luciferase constructs into JEG-3 cells 
indicated that the -312/+157 region contains the gene minimal promoter. In
addition, sequence analysis of a 1.6kb gene fragment revealed the presence of a
TATA-less promoter as well as multiple regulatory motifs, including one
regulatory element corresponding to the T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) binding site.
Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta), a component of
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling, increased both StarD7 mRNA and protein expression as
well as its promoter activity. Co-transfection experiments in JEG-3 cell line
revealed that the StarD7 promoter is activated by TCF4 transcription factor and
by its beta-catenin coactivator. Moreover, site-directed mutagenesis of the TCF4 
site located -614/-608bp relative to the transcription start site markedly
diminished StarD7 promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated that beta-catenin and TCF4 are bound in vivo to the StarD7 gene
promoter in JEG-3 cells treated with lithium chloride. Collectively, these
studies show that beta-catenin and TCF4 activate the human StarD7 gene
interacting with its promoter region through Wnt/beta-catenin signalling.

PMID: 19679347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Aug;7(8):1189-96. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0027. Epub
2009 Aug 11.

The links between transcription, beta-catenin/JNK signaling, and carcinogenesis.

Saadeddin A(1), Babaei-Jadidi R, Spencer-Dene B, Nateri AS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Group, Division of Pre-Clinical Oncology, NottinghamDigestive 
Diseases Centre, School of Clinical Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom. a.nateri@nottingham.ac.uk

Interactions between transcription and signaling are fundamentally important for 
understanding both the structure and function of genetic pathways and their role 
in diseases such as cancer. The finding that beta-catenin/TCF4 and JNK/c-Jun
cooperate has important implications in carcinogenesis. Previously, we found that
binding of c-Jun and beta-catenin/TCF4 to the c-jun promoter is dependent upon
JNK activity, thus one role for this complex is to contribute to the repression
and/or activation of genes that may mediate cell maintenance, proliferation,
differentiation, and death, whereas deregulation of these signals may contribute 
to carcinogenesis. Here we address the functional links reported between
activated beta-catenin/JNK signaling pathways, their component genes, and their
common targets, and discuss how alterations in the properties of these genes lead
to the development of cancer.

PMID: 19671687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Int J Cancer. 2010 May 15;126(10):2426-36. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24810.

Small molecule antagonists of Tcf4/beta-catenin complex inhibit the growth of HCC
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Wei W(1), Chua MS, Grepper S, So S.

Author information: 
(1)Asian Liver Center, Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5655, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 5th most common cancer worldwide. It is
intrinsically resistant toward standard chemotherapy, making it imperative to
develop novel selective chemotherapeutic agents. The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
plays critical roles in development and oncogenesis, and is dysregulated in HCC. 
Our study aims to evaluate the activity of 3 small molecule antagonists of the
Tcf4/beta-catenin complex (PKF118-310, PKF115-584 and CGP049090) on HCC cell
lines in vitro and in vivo. All 3 chemicals displayed dose-dependent cytotoxicity
in vitro against all 3 HCC cell lines (HepG2, Hep40 and Huh7), but were at least 
10 times less cytotoxic to normal hepatocytes (from 3 donors) by using ATP assay.
In HepG2 and Huh7 cells, treatment with the antagonists decreased
Tcf4/beta-catenin binding capability and transcriptional activity, associated
with downregulation of the endogenous Tcf4/ beta-catenin target genes c-Myc,
cyclin D1 and survivin. In HepG2 and Huh7 cells, treatment with the antagonists
induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at the G1/S phase. All antagonists
suppressed in vivo tumor growth in a HepG2 xenograft model, associated with
apoptosis and reduced c-Myc, cyclin D1 and survivin expressions. Our results
suggest that these 3 antagonists of the Tcf4/beta-catenin complex are potential
chemotherapeutic agents which may offer a pathway specific option for the
clinical management of HCC.

PMID: 19662654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Anim Breed Genet. 2009 Jun;126(3):228-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0388.2008.00770.x.

An evaluation of four candidate genes for use in selection programmes aimed at
increased intramuscular fat in Duroc swine.

Schwab CR(1), Mote BE, Du ZQ, Amoako R, Baas TJ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)National Swine Registry, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA.

A sufficient level of intramuscular fat (IMF) is needed to enhance consumer
acceptance of pork products, and is currently receiving greater attention within 
swine genetic improvement programmes. An examination of previously described and 
novel genetic variants within candidate genes for IMF deposition was performed to
evaluate potential use of genetic markers in marker-assisted selection (MAS).
Biological candidate genes implicated to play a role in adipogenesis were
investigated within two different lines of purebred Duroc pigs. These included
MC4R, FABP3, DLK1, and TCF7L2. Significant variation in IMF within the control
line was described by the MC4R genotype and a novel BsrfI single nucleotide
polymorphism within the FABP3 gene. Genetic markers for DLK1 and TCF7L2 evaluated
in this population are not currently recommended for selection in Duroc swine.
Existence of MC4R and FABP3 mutations may be useful markers in MAS aimed at IMF
improvement, provided that gene effects are segregating and the presence of an
association is detected within the population. However, additional work to
confirm the use of the investigated genetic markers in selection programmes is
needed.

PMID: 19646151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Schizophr Res. 2009 Oct;114(1-3):50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.07.008. Epub
2009 Jul 29.

Genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes with pharmacologic intervention in
African-American patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.

Irvin MR(1), Wiener HW, Perry RP, Savage RM, Go RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA. irvinr@uab.edu

An increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) in schizophrenia (SCZ) patients 
has been observed. Exposure to antipsychotics (APs) has been shown to induce
metabolic dysregulation in some patients but not all treated patients. We
hypothesized that important candidate genes for T2D may increase risk for T2D in 
African-American patients with SCZ or schizoaffective disorder. The PAARTNERS
study comprises African-American families with at least one proband with SCZ or
schizoaffective disorder. The current study of PAARTNERS SCZ and schizoaffective 
disorder cases (N=820) examined single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within
select T2D candidate genes including transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2),
calpain 10 (CAPN10), and ectoenzyme nucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 
1 (ENNP1) for association with prevalent T2D. We report the association of TCF7L2
(rs7903146) with T2D under both additive and recessive models for the risk allele
T. Specifically, the odds ratio (OR) for having T2D was 1.4 (p=0.03) under an
additive model and 2.4 (p=0.004) under a recessive model. We also report a
marginally significant TCF7L2 by AP treatment interaction that should be
investigated in future studies. CAPN10 (rs3792267) was marginally associated with
T2D with OR=1.5 (p=0.08) when considering the model GG vs. AG/AA with risk allele
G. ENPP1 (rs1044498) was not associated with T2D. We conclude TCF7L2, a risk
factor for T2D in the general population, is also a risk factor for T2D in
African-American patients with SCZ or schizoaffective disorder. Research is
needed to determine if T2D associated polymorphisms are of interest in the
pharmacogenetics and future treatment choices of antipsychotics in
African-American patients.

PMCID: PMC2753171
PMID: 19643578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncol Rep. 2009 Sep;22(3):451-7.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta and gastric cancer (Review).

Wu CW(1), Yu J, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Institute
of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PR China.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are members of the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily which form heterodimers with retinoid X receptors
(RXRs) in nucleus and bind to the PPAR response elements (PPREs) of target genes,
leading to a wide spectrum of physiological functions. With an improved
understanding of its physiological role, PPARdelta and its agonist have been
gaining attention in cancer research in recent years. Despite the paucity of
research concerning the direct relationship between PPARdelta and gastric cancer,
there is substantial evidence that PPARdelta may play a role in the development
of gastric cancer. This review focuses on recent literature describing the role
of PPARdelta, especially in its association with nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB), interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and
Wnt-beta-catenin/TCF-4 pathways on gastric tumorigenesis and highlights critical 
discrepancies that need to be resolved for a more comprehensive understanding of 
how this receptor modulates gastric tumorigenesis. The potential role of
PPARdelta as a therapeutic target in the treatment of gastric cancer deserves
further research focus.

PMID: 19639188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0809-868.

Elucidating the role of 8q24 in colorectal cancer.

Harismendy O(1), Frazer KA.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Genomic Medicine, Scripps Translational Science Institute and the
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1156.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):885-90.
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):882-4.

PMID: 19639026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genet Med. 2009 Aug;11(8):588-94. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181b13a4f.

Evaluation of risk prediction updates from commercial genome-wide scans.

Mihaescu R(1), van Hoek M, Sijbrands EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Witteman JC, Hofman A, 
van Duijn CM, Janssens AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2010 Jan;12(1):56; author reply 56-7.

PURPOSE: Commercial internet-based companies offer genome-wide scans to predict
the risk of common diseases and personalize nutrition and lifestyle
recommendations. These risk estimates are updated with every new gene discovery.
METHODS: To assess the benefits of updating risk information in commercial
genome-wide scans, we compared type 2 diabetes risk predictions based on TCF7L2
alone, 18 polymorphisms alone, and 18 polymorphisms plus age, sex, and body mass 
index. Analyses were performed using data from the Rotterdam study, a
prospective, population-based study among individuals aged 55 years and older.
Data were available from 5297 participants.
RESULTS: The actual prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the study population was
20%. Predicted risks were below average for carriers of the TCF7L2 CC genotype
(predicted risk 17.6%) and above average for the CT and TT genotypes (20.8% and
28.0%). Adding the other 17 polymorphisms caused 34% of participants to be
reclassified (i.e., switched between below and above average): 24% of the CC
carriers changed to increased risk, 52% and 6% of the CT and TT carriers changed 
to decreased risk. Including information on age, sex, and body mass index caused 
29% to change categories (27%, 31%, and 19% for CC, CT, and TT carriers,
respectively). In total, 39% of participants changed categories once when risk
factors were updated, and 11% changed twice, i.e., back to their initial risk
category.
CONCLUSION: Updating risk factors may produce contradictory information about an 
individual's risk status over time, which is undesirable if lifestyle and
nutritional recommendations vary accordingly.

PMID: 19636253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 2;387(4):736-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.102. Epub 2009 Jul 25.

The transcription factor ITF-2A induces cell cycle arrest via p21(Cip1).

Herbst A(1), Helferich S, Behrens A, Göke B, Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Germany.
Andreas.Herbst@med.uni-muenchen.de

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is a hallmark of cancer and the chromosomal regions 
5q, 8p, 17p, and 18q are frequently affected by LOH in colorectal cancer. The
ITF2 gene is located on chromosome 18q and we have recently demonstrated that
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor ITF-2B is
affected by LOH. Apart from ITF-2B, the ITF2 gene also encodes the isoform ITF-2A
that lacks amino-terminal sequences found in ITF-2B. Analysis of ITF-2A
expression in micro-dissected colorectal tumor tissue revealed that ITF-2A
expression is frequently lost in colorectal cancers, suggesting that loss of
ITF-2A provides cancer cells with a growth advantage. Further studies
demonstrated that re-expression of ITF-2A in colon cancer cell lines interferes
with cell cycle progression. This data support the notion that the ITF2 gene on
chromosome 18q is a tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 19635457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 1;69(15):6065-73. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2409. Epub
2009 Jul 21.

The wnt target jagged-1 mediates the activation of notch signaling by progastrin 
in human colorectal cancer cells.

Pannequin J(1), Bonnans C, Delaunay N, Ryan J, Bourgaux JF, Joubert D, Hollande
F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR5203, Institut National de la 
Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U661, University of Montpellier I, Montpellier,
France.

The Wnt and Notch signaling pathways are both abnormally activated in colorectal 
cancer (CRC). We recently showed that progastrin depletion inhibited Wnt
signaling and increased goblet cell differentiation of CRC cells. Here, we show
that progastrin down-regulation restores the expression by CRC cells of the early
secretory lineage marker Math-1/Hath-1 due to an inhibition of Notch signaling.
This effect is mediated by a decreased transcription of the Notch ligand
Jagged-1, downstream of beta-catenin/Tcf-4. Accordingly, recombinant progastrin
sequentially activated the transcription of Wnt and Notch target genes in
progastrin-depleted cells. In addition, restoration of Jagged-1 levels in these
cells is sufficient to activate Tcf-4 activity, demonstrating the occurrence of a
feedback regulation from Notch toward Wnt signaling. These results suggest that
progastrin could be instrumental in maintaining the concomitant activation of Wnt
and Notch pathways in CRC cells, further highlighting the interest of progastrin 
targeting for the clinical management of CRC.

PMID: 19622776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):103-13. doi: 10.1002/path.2590.

c-Rel is a transcriptional repressor of EPHB2 in colorectal cancer.

Fu T(1), Li P, Wang H, He Y, Luo D, Zhang A, Tong W, Zhang L, Liu B, Hu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Research Institute of Surgery, Daping Hospital,
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

The receptor tyrosine kinase EPHB2 has recently been identified as a TCF4
transcriptional target that controls the intestinal epithelial architecture
through repulsive interactions with Ephrin-B ligands. Many reports have
demonstrated that most human colorectal cancers lose EPHB2 expression despite
constitutive Wnt activation. Therefore, we investigated the mechanisms that cause
EPHB2 down-regulation in colorectal cancer. In this study, we demonstrate that
DNA hypermethylation was not responsible for the frequent loss of EPHB2
expression in colorectal cancer. Cloning and functional characterization of the
EPHB2 gene 5'-flanking region revealed a potential negative regulatory element in
the distal regulatory region. In vitro electrophoretic gel mobility shift and in 
vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that c-Rel directly binds 
to the putative element. Inhibiting c-Rel activity or knocking down c-Rel
expression by RNA interference in colon cancer cells was sufficient to induce
EPHB2 expression. Furthermore, transient transfection assays demonstrated that
c-Rel over-expression repressed endogenous EPHB2 expression in colon cancer
cells. We demonstrate for the first time that c-Rel acts as a transcriptional
repressor of EPHB2 and plays an active role in EPHB2 down-regulation in
colorectal cancers.

PMID: 19621336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Jul 17;10:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-67.

Type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2 polymorphism is not associated with fetal and
postnatal growth in two birth cohort studies.

Mook-Kanamori DO(1), de Kort SW, van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, Moll
HA, Steegers EA, Hokken-Koelega AC, Jaddoe VW.

Author information: 
(1)The Generation R Study Group, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. d.mook@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: An inverse association between birth weight and the risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (T2D) in adulthood has been reported. This association
may be explained by common genetic variants related to insulin secretion and
resistance, since insulin is the most important growth factor in fetal life. The 
objective of this study was to examine whether T2D gene polymorphism TCF7L2
rs7903146 is associated with growth patterns from fetal life until infancy.
METHODS: This study was performed in two independent birth cohort studies, one
prospective population-based (Generation R), and one of subjects born
small-for-gestational-age (SGA cohort). Fetal growth was assessed by ultrasounds 
in second and third trimesters of pregnancy in Generation R. Growth in infancy
was assessed in both cohorts at birth and at 6, 12 and 24 months postnatally.
TCF7L2 genotype was determined in 3,419 subjects in Generation R and in 566
subjects in the SGA cohort.
RESULTS: Minor allele frequency did not differ significantly (p = 0.47) between
Generation R (T-allele: 28.7%) and the SGA cohort (T-allele: 29.8%). No
differences at birth were found in gestational age or size (head circumference,
length, weight) between the genotypes in either cohort. TCF7L2 genotype was also 
not associated with any pre- or postnatal growth characteristic in either
Generation R or the SGA cohort.
CONCLUSION: We found no evidence for an association between TCF7L2 genotype and
fetal and early postnatal growth. Furthermore, this TCF7L2 polymorphism was not
associated with an increased risk of SGA.

PMCID: PMC2722586
PMID: 19615048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 1;18(19):3696-707. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp317. Epub 2009 Jul
13.

Antagonistic SR proteins regulate alternative splicing of tumor-related Rac1b
downstream of the PI3-kinase and Wnt pathways.

Gonçalves V(1), Matos P, Jordan P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr Ricardo Jorge
1649-016, Lisboa, Portugal.

The small GTPase Rac1 regulates signaling pathways controlling actin-dependent
cell motility as well as gene transcription. An alternative splicing variant
Rac1b is overexpressed in a subset of colorectal tumors and is required to
sustain tumor cell viability. Thus, it is of therapeutic interest to understand
the molecular mechanism behind the overexpression of Rac1b through alternative
splicing. Here we describe that ASF/SF2 and SRp20 are two antagonistic splicing
factors regulating Rac1b expression in colorectal tumor cells. Using an Rac1
minigene, we identified that SRp20 increased skipping of alternative exon 3b in
HT29 colorectal cells, whereas ASF/SF2 increased its inclusion. The depletion of 
the endogenous expression of these splicing factors by specific small interfering
RNA confirmed that ASF/SF2 acts as an enhancer of endogenous Rac1b splicing,
whereas SRp20 acts as a silencer. Point mutations in exon 3b defined two adjacent
regulatory regions required for skipping or inclusion of exon 3b, which are
recognized in vitro by SRp20 and ASF/SF2, respectively. Both splicing factors
were found to be regulated by upstream signaling pathways: the inhibition of the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway increased protein levels of ASF/SF2 and
promoted Rac1b, whereas activation of beta-catenin/TCF4 increased expression of
SRp20 and inhibited that of Rac1b. Together, these data reveal that signaling
pathways act in concert to target independent splicing factors and achieve the
correct combinatorial code to regulate alternative splicing of the small GTPase
Rac1.

PMID: 19602482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 15;18(20):3795-804. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp321. Epub 2009
Jul 14.

Tissue-specific alternative splicing of TCF7L2.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Welch C, Hansson O, Adhikari N, Scott LJ, Usher N, Tong M,
Sprau A, Swift A, Bonnycastle LL, Erdos MR, He Z, Saxena R, Harmon B, Kotova O,
Hoffman EP, Altshuler D, Groop L, Boehnke M, Collins FS, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

Common variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
identified as the strongest genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
However, the mechanisms by which these non-coding variants increase risk for T2D 
are not well-established. We used 13 expression assays to survey mRNA expression 
of multiple TCF7L2 splicing forms in up to 380 samples from eight types of human 
tissue (pancreas, pancreatic islets, colon, liver, monocytes, skeletal muscle,
subcutaneous adipose tissue and lymphoblastoid cell lines) and observed a
tissue-specific pattern of alternative splicing. We tested whether the expression
of TCF7L2 splicing forms was associated with single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), rs7903146 and rs12255372, located within introns 3 and 4 of the gene and 
most strongly associated with T2D. Expression of two splicing forms was lower in 
pancreatic islets with increasing counts of T2D-associated alleles of the SNPs: a
ubiquitous splicing form (P = 0.018 for rs7903146 and P = 0.020 for rs12255372)
and a splicing form found in pancreatic islets, pancreas and colon but not in
other tissues tested here (P = 0.009 for rs12255372 and P = 0.053 for rs7903146).
Expression of this form in glucose-stimulated pancreatic islets correlated with
expression of proinsulin (r(2) = 0.84-0.90, P < 0.00063). In summary, we
identified a tissue-specific pattern of alternative splicing of TCF7L2. After
adjustment for multiple tests, no association between expression of TCF7L2 in
eight types of human tissue samples and T2D-associated genetic variants remained 
significant. Alternative splicing of TCF7L2 in pancreatic islets warrants future 
studies. GenBank Accession Numbers: FJ010164-FJ010174.

PMCID: PMC2748888
PMID: 19602480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Diabetologia. 2009 Sep;52(9):1858-65. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1436-2. Epub 2009
Jul 8.

A susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes confers substantial risk for diabetes
complicating cystic fibrosis.

Blackman SM(1), Hsu S, Ritter SE, Naughton KM, Wright FA, Drumm ML, Knowles MR,
Cutting GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Insulin-requiring diabetes affects 25-50% of young adults with
cystic fibrosis (CF). Although the cause of diabetes in CF is unknown, recent
heritability studies in CF twins and siblings indicate that genetic modifiers
play a substantial role. We sought to assess whether genes conferring risk for
diabetes in the general population may play a risk modifying role in CF.
METHODS: We tested whether a family history of type 2 diabetes affected diabetes 
risk in CF patients in 539 families in the CF Twin and Sibling family-based
study. A type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene (transcription factor 7-like 2, or
TCF7L2) was evaluated for association with diabetes in CF using 998 patients from
the family-based study and 802 unrelated CF patients in an independent
case-control study.
RESULTS: Family history of type 2 diabetes increased the risk of diabetes in CF
(OR 3.1; p = 0.0009). A variant in TCF7L2 associated with type 2 diabetes (the T 
allele at rs7903146) was associated with diabetes in CF in the family study (p = 
0.004) and in the case-control study (p = 0.02; combined p = 0.0002). In the
family-based study, variation in TCF7L2 increased the risk of diabetes about
three-fold (HR 1.75 per allele, 95% CI 1.3-2.4; p = 0.0006), and decreased the
mean age at diabetes diagnosis by 7 years. In CF patients not treated with
systemic glucocorticoids, the effect of TCF7L2 was even greater (HR 2.9 per
allele, 95% CI 1.7-4.9, p = 0.00011).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: A genetic variant conferring risk for type 2 diabetes
in the general population is a modifier of risk for diabetes in CF.

PMCID: PMC2877501
PMID: 19585101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5734-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0468. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 effects on junctional plakoglobin
and induction of a cadherin switch.

Shair KH(1), Schnegg CI, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1) is considered the major oncoprotein of
Epstein-Barr virus and is frequently expressed in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
LMP1 promotes growth and migration of epithelial cells, and the loss of
plakoglobin has been identified as a contributing factor to LMP1-induced
migration. Plakoglobin is a junctional protein that can also serve as a
transcription factor in Tcf/Lef signaling. To determine the effects of LMP1 on
the molecular and functional properties of plakoglobin, LMP1 was overexpressed in
the NPC cell line C666-1. LMP1 did not affect plakoglobin stability but did
decrease plakoglobin transcription. The resultant decreased levels of nuclear
plakoglobin did not affect Tcf/Lef activity or the amount of plakoglobin bound to
Tcf4. Although LMP1 induced and stabilized beta-catenin, a protein with common
binding partners to plakoglobin, the loss of plakoglobin did not affect its
association with Tcf4. However, LMP1 did induce a cadherin switch from E- to
N-cadherin, a process involved in cancer progression, and enhanced the
association of junctional beta-catenin with N-cadherin. LMP1 decreased overall
levels of junctional plakoglobin but the remaining junctional plakoglobin was
found associated with the induced N-cadherin. This increased association of
junctional plakoglobin with N-cadherin was a distinguishing feature of
LMP1-expressing cells that have reduced migration due to restoration of
plakoglobin. Low levels of plakoglobin were also detected in human NPC tissues.
These findings reveal that the effects of LMP1 on junctional plakoglobin and the 
initiation of a cadherin switch likely contribute to metastasis of NPC.

PMCID: PMC2771661
PMID: 19584275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Nov 15;78(10):1298-304. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.06.104.
Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Nitro-aspirin inhibits MCF-7 breast cancer cell growth: effects on COX-2
expression and Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling.

Nath N(1), Vassell R, Chattopadhyay M, Kogan M, Kashfi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical
School, 138th Street and Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, United States.
nnath@nyit.edu

There is current evidence implicating the Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF pathway in breast 
cancer. We investigated the effect of para- and meta-positional isomers of nitric
oxide-releasing aspirin (NO-ASA), and aspirin (ASA) on MCF-7 human breast cancer 
cell growth and beta-catenin/TCF signaling. The p- and m-NO-ASA isomers strongly 
inhibited cell growth and beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity compared to
ASA; the IC50s for growth inhibition were 57+/-4, 193+/-10 and >5000microM, and
for transcriptional inhibition they were 12+/-1.8, 75+/-6.5 and >5000microM for
p-, m-NO-ASA and ASA, respectively. p-NO-ASA reduced the expression of
Wnt/beta-catenin downstream target gene cyclin D1, and total cellular
beta-catenin levels. COX-2 expression was induced by p-NO-ASA, protein kinase C
inhibitors reversed this induction. p-NO-ASA blocked the cell cycle transition at
S to G2/M phase. These studies suggest a targeted
chemopreventive/chemotherapeutic potential for NO-ASA against breast cancer.

PMID: 19576865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Neurochem Int. 2009 Sep;55(5):307-17. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.03.016. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway in human astrocytomas.

Sareddy GR(1), Panigrahi M, Challa S, Mahadevan A, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India.

Astrocytomas are the most common form of primary brain tumors. Understanding the 
molecular basis of development and progression of astrocytomas is required to
develop more effective therapies. Although, over activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway is a hallmark of several forms of cancer, little is 
known about its role in human astrocytomas. Here, we report the evidence that
Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway is constitutively activated in astrocytic 
tumors. In the present study, human astrocytic tumors with different clinical
grades were analyzed for mRNA expression of Dvl-1, Dvl-2, Dvl-3, beta-catenin,
c-myc and cyclin D1 and protein levels of beta-catenin, Lef1, Tcf4, c-Myc, N-Myc,
c-jun and cyclin D1. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated the overexpression of Dvl-3,
beta-catenin, c-myc and cyclin D1 in astrocytomas. Western blotting revealed
upregulation of beta-catenin, Lef1, Tcf4 and their target proteins in the core
tumor tissues in comparison to peritumor and normal brain tissues. The protein
and mRNA levels were positively correlated with the histological malignancy.
Cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, nuclear localization of
Lef1, Tcf4, c-Myc, N-Myc, c-jun and cyclin D1 were demonstrated by
immunohistochemical staining. Our studies tend to suggest that
Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway is implicated in malignancy of
astrocytomas.

PMID: 19576519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Metabolism. 2009 Oct;58(10):1369-71. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.04.023. Epub
2009 Jul 1.

Preliminary report: No association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and
euglycemic-clamp-derived insulin sensitivity in a mixed-age cohort.

Rasmussen-Torvik LJ(1), Pankow JS, Jacobs DR Jr, Sinaiko AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55454-1015, USA. rasm0218@umn.edu

There are conflicting reports about the significance of TCF7L2 single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs7903146, a single nucleotide polymorphism found to be associated
with type 2 diabetes mellitus in several genomewide association studies, and
insulin sensitivity. The association of rs7903146 and euglycemic-clamp-derived
insulin sensitivity was tested in a cohort of children and their parents. Four
hundred seventy whites (from 226 families) and 89 African Americans (from 48
families) were included in the analysis. No significant associations were seen
between rs7903146 and insulin sensitivity. Adjusted genotype means were
consistent across races and generational subgroups.

PMCID: PMC2748141
PMID: 19573884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nature. 2009 Aug 6;460(7256):744-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08186. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Common variants conferring risk of schizophrenia.

Stefansson H(1), Ophoff RA, Steinberg S, Andreassen OA, Cichon S, Rujescu D,
Werge T, Pietiläinen OP, Mors O, Mortensen PB, Sigurdsson E, Gustafsson O,
Nyegaard M, Tuulio-Henriksson A, Ingason A, Hansen T, Suvisaari J, Lonnqvist J,
Paunio T, Børglum AD, Hartmann A, Fink-Jensen A, Nordentoft M, Hougaard D,
Norgaard-Pedersen B, Böttcher Y, Olesen J, Breuer R, Möller HJ, Giegling I,
Rasmussen HB, Timm S, Mattheisen M, Bitter I, Réthelyi JM, Magnusdottir BB,
Sigmundsson T, Olason P, Masson G, Gulcher JR, Haraldsson M, Fossdal R,
Thorgeirsson TE, Thorsteinsdottir U, Ruggeri M, Tosato S, Franke B, Strengman E, 
Kiemeney LA; Genetic Risk and Outcome in Psychosis (GROUP), Melle I, Djurovic S, 
Abramova L, Kaleda V, Sanjuan J, de Frutos R, Bramon E, Vassos E, Fraser G,
Ettinger U, Picchioni M, Walker N, Toulopoulou T, Need AC, Ge D, Yoon JL, Shianna
KV, Freimer NB, Cantor RM, Murray R, Kong A, Golimbet V, Carracedo A, Arango C,
Costas J, Jönsson EG, Terenius L, Agartz I, Petursson H, Nöthen MM, Rietschel M, 
Matthews PM, Muglia P, Peltonen L, St Clair D, Goldstein DB, Stefansson K,
Collier DA.

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Linszen DH, van Os J, Wiersma D, Bruggeman R, Cahn W, de 
Haan L, Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Schizophrenia is a complex disorder, caused by both genetic and environmental
factors and their interactions. Research on pathogenesis has traditionally
focused on neurotransmitter systems in the brain, particularly those involving
dopamine. Schizophrenia has been considered a separate disease for over a
century, but in the absence of clear biological markers, diagnosis has
historically been based on signs and symptoms. A fundamental message emerging
from genome-wide association studies of copy number variations (CNVs) associated 
with the disease is that its genetic basis does not necessarily conform to
classical nosological disease boundaries. Certain CNVs confer not only high
relative risk of schizophrenia but also of other psychiatric disorders. The
structural variations associated with schizophrenia can involve several genes and
the phenotypic syndromes, or the 'genomic disorders', have not yet been
characterized. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based genome-wide association
studies with the potential to implicate individual genes in complex diseases may 
reveal underlying biological pathways. Here we combined SNP data from several
large genome-wide scans and followed up the most significant association signals.
We found significant association with several markers spanning the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region on chromosome 6p21.3-22.1, a marker
located upstream of the neurogranin gene (NRGN) on 11q24.2 and a marker in intron
four of transcription factor 4 (TCF4) on 18q21.2. Our findings implicating the
MHC region are consistent with an immune component to schizophrenia risk, whereas
the association with NRGN and TCF4 points to perturbation of pathways involved in
brain development, memory and cognition.

PMCID: PMC3077530
PMID: 19571808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 4;386(4):762-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.126. Epub 2009 Jun 27.

Daxx positively modulates beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcriptional potential.

Huang YS(1), Shih HM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.

Constitutive activation of the transcription factor TCF4 activity by mutated APC 
or beta-catenin contributes to cell neoplastic transformation. While numerous
proteins were identified to activate TCF4-dependent activity via beta-catenin
interaction, little is known about factors directly acting on TCF4. Here we
report that Daxx binds to TCF4 and potentiates beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated
transcriptional activation and target gene expression. Binding studies revealed
that Daxx-TCF4 interaction is through the C-terminal domain of Daxx and TCF4
segment containing amino acid residue 269-327. Alteration of Daxx levels in cells
by overexpression or RNA interference resulted in an increase or decrease of the 
beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent transactivation activity and target gene expression, 
respectively. Furthermore, TCF4-(269-327) segment acts as a dominantly negative
mutant by blocking Daxx-TCF4 interaction and TCF4-mediated transactivation
potential. Together, our results suggest that Daxx functions as a positive
coregulator in modulating the beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent transcriptional
potential via TCF4 interaction.

PMID: 19563778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;115(19):4488-503. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24491.

Wnt antagonist gene polymorphisms and renal cancer.

Hirata H(1), Hinoda Y, Nakajima K, Kikuno N, Yamamura S, Kawakami K, Suehiro Y,
Tabatabai ZL, Ishii N, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of several wingless-type mouse mammary tumor
virus integration site (Wnt) pathway-related genes has been reported in renal
cancer. Except for the T-cell factor 4 gene TCF4, there are no reports regarding 
Wnt pathway gene polymorphisms in renal cancer. Therefore, the authors of this
report hypothesized that the polymorphisms in Wnt signaling genes may be risk
factors for renal cancer.
METHODS: In total, 210 patients (145 men and 65 women) with pathologically
confirmed renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and 200 age-matched and sex-matched control 
individuals were enrolled in this study. We genotyped 14 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 6 genes. including Dickkopf 2 (DKK2) (reference SNP
identification number 17037102 [rs17037102], rs419558, and rs447372), DKK3
(rs3206824, rs11022095, rs1472189, rs7396187, and rs2291599), DKK4 (rs2073664),
secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4) (rs1802073 and rs1802074), mothers
against decapentaplegic homolog (SMAD) family member 7 or SMAD7 (rs12953717), and
disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 2 or DAAM2 (rs6937133 and
rs2504106) using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing in the patients with RCC and in the
healthy, age-matched control group. The relations also were tested between these 
polymorphisms and clinicopathologic data, including sex, tumor grade, tumor
stage, lymph node involvement, distant metastasis, and overall survival.
RESULTS: A significant decrease in the frequency of the guanine/adenine (G/A) +
A/A genotypes in the DKK3 codon 335 rs3206824 was observed in the patients with
RCC compared with the control group. The frequency of the rs3206824 (G/A)
A-rs7396187 (guanine/cytosine [G/C]) C haplotype was significantly lower in
patients with RCC compared with other haplotypes. In addition, DKK3 rs1472189
cytosine/thymine (C/T) was associated with distant metastasis, and, DKK2
rs17037102 G-homozygous patients had a decreased risk for death in multivariate
Cox regression analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: To the authors' knowledge, this is the first report documenting that
DKK3 polymorphisms are associated with RCC and that the DKK2 rs17037102
polymorphism may be a predictor for survival in patients with RCC after radical
nephrectomy.

2009 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3940366
PMID: 19562778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):882-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.403. Epub 2009 Jun 28.

The 8q24 cancer risk variant rs6983267 shows long-range interaction with MYC in
colorectal cancer.

Pomerantz MM(1), Ahmadiyeh N, Jia L, Herman P, Verzi MP, Doddapaneni H, Beckwith 
CA, Chan JA, Hills A, Davis M, Yao K, Kehoe SM, Lenz HJ, Haiman CA, Yan C,
Henderson BE, Frenkel B, Barretina J, Bass A, Tabernero J, Baselga J, Regan MM,
Manak JR, Shivdasani R, Coetzee GA, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9.

An inherited variant on chromosome 8q24, rs6983267, is significantly associated
with cancer pathogenesis. We present evidence that the region harboring this
variant is a transcriptional enhancer, that the alleles of rs6983267
differentially bind transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and that the risk
region physically interacts with the MYC proto-oncogene. These data provide
strong support for a biological mechanism underlying this non-protein-coding risk
variant.

PMCID: PMC2763485
PMID: 19561607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):885-90. doi: 10.1038/ng.406. Epub 2009 Jun 28.

The common colorectal cancer predisposition SNP rs6983267 at chromosome 8q24
confers potential to enhanced Wnt signaling.

Tuupanen S(1), Turunen M, Lehtonen R, Hallikas O, Vanharanta S, Kivioja T,
Björklund M, Wei G, Yan J, Niittymäki I, Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Ristimäki A,
Di-Bernardo M, East P, Carvajal-Carmona L, Houlston RS, Tomlinson I, Palin K,
Ukkonen E, Karhu A, Taipale J, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9.

Homozygosity for the G allele of rs6983267 at 8q24 increases colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk approximately 1.5 fold. We report here that the risk allele G shows
copy number increase during CRC development. Our computer algorithm, Enhancer
Element Locator (EEL), identified an enhancer element that contains rs6983267.
The element drove expression of a reporter gene in a pattern that is consistent
with regulation by the key CRC pathway Wnt. rs6983267 affects a binding site for 
the Wnt-regulated transcription factor TCF4, with the risk allele G showing
stronger binding in vitro and in vivo. Genome-wide ChIP assay revealed the
element as the strongest TCF4 binding site within 1 Mb of MYC. An unambiguous
correlation between rs6983267 genotype and MYC expression was not detected, and
additional work is required to scrutinize all possible targets of the enhancer.
Our work provides evidence that the common CRC predisposition associated with
8q24 arises from enhanced responsiveness to Wnt signaling.

PMID: 19561604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7. doi: 10.1038/nn0709-815.

Genetics meets epigenetics: HDACs and Wnt signaling in myelin development and
regeneration.

Li H, Richardson WD.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38.

PMID: 19554044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 7;106(27):11154-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0901591106. Epub 2009 Jun 22.

An integrated genome screen identifies the Wnt signaling pathway as a major
target of WT1.

Kim MK(1), McGarry TJ, O Broin P, Flatow JM, Golden AA, Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

WT1, a critical regulator of kidney development, is a tumor suppressor for
nephroblastoma but in some contexts functions as an oncogene. A limited number of
direct transcriptional targets of WT1 have been identified to explain its complex
roles in tumorigenesis and organogenesis. In this study we performed genome-wide 
screening for direct WT1 targets, using a combination of ChIP-ChIP and expression
arrays. Promoter regions bound by WT1 were highly G-rich and resembled the sites 
for a number of other widely expressed transcription factors such as SP1, MAZ,
and ZNF219. Genes directly regulated by WT1 were implicated in MAPK signaling,
axon guidance, and Wnt pathways. Among directly bound and regulated genes by WT1,
nine were identified in the Wnt signaling pathway, suggesting that WT1 modulates 
a subset of Wnt components and responsive genes by direct binding. To prove the
biological importance of the interplay between WT1 and Wnt signaling, we showed
that WT1 blocked the ability of Wnt8 to induce a secondary body axis during
Xenopus embryonic development. WT1 inhibited TCF-mediated transcription activated
by Wnt ligand, wild type and mutant, stabilized beta-catenin by preventing TCF4
loading onto a promoter. This was neither due to direct binding of WT1 to the TCF
binding site nor to interaction between WT1 and TCF4, but by competition of WT1
and TCF4 for CBP. WT1 interference with Wnt signaling represents an important
mode of its action relevant to the suppression of tumor growth and guidance of
development.

PMCID: PMC2708714
PMID: 19549856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 18;4(6):e5955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005955.

Positive reciprocal regulation of ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 and
beta-catenin/TCF signaling.

Bheda A(1), Yue W, Gullapalli A, Whitehurst C, Liu R, Pagano JS, Shackelford J.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are involved in the regulation of distinct
critical cellular processes. Ubiquitin C-terminal Hydrolase L1 (UCH L1) has been 
linked to several neurological diseases as well as human cancer, but the
physiological targets and the regulation of UCH L1 expression in vivo have been
largely unexplored. Here we demonstrate that UCH L1 up-regulates beta-catenin/TCF
signaling: UCH L1 forms endogenous complexes with beta-catenin, stabilizes it and
up-regulates beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription. We also show that,
reciprocally, beta-catenin/TCF signaling up-regulates expression of endogenous
UCH L1 mRNA and protein. Moreover, using ChIP assay and direct mutagenesis we
identify two TCF4-binding sites on the uch l1 promoter that are involved in this 
regulation. Since the expression and deubiquitinating activity of UCH L1 are
required for its own basic promoter activity, we propose that UCH L1 up-regulates
its expression by activation of the oncogenic beta-catenin/TCF signaling in
transformed cells.

PMCID: PMC2694282
PMID: 19536331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. BMC Cell Biol. 2009 Jun 17;10:47. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-47.

Characterization of sequences in human TWIST required for nuclear localization.

Singh S(1), Gramolini AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Charles H, Best Institute, University of Toronto,
112 College Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1L6, Canada. shalini.singh@utoronto.ca

BACKGROUND: Twist is a transcription factor that plays an important role in
proliferation and tumorigenesis. Twist is a nuclear protein that regulates a
variety of cellular functions controlled by protein-protein interactions and gene
transcription events. The focus of this study was to characterize putative
nuclear localization signals (NLSs) 37RKRR40 and 73KRGKK77 in the human TWIST
(H-TWIST) protein.
RESULTS: Using site-specific mutagenesis and immunofluorescences, we observed
that altered TWISTNLS1 K38R, TWISTNLS2 K73R and K77R constructs inhibit nuclear
accumulation of H-TWIST in mammalian cells, while TWISTNLS2 K76R expression was
un-affected and retained to the nucleus. Subsequently, co-transfection of TWIST
mutants K38R, K73R and K77R with E12 formed heterodimers and restored nuclear
localization despite the NLSs mutations. Using a yeast-two-hybrid assay, we
identified a novel TWIST-interacting candidate TCF-4, a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor. The interaction of TWIST with TCF-4 confirmed using NLS
rescue assays, where nuclear expression of mutant TWISTNLS1 with co-transfixed
TCF-4 was observed. The interaction of TWIST with TCF-4 was also seen using
standard immunoprecipitation assays.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates the presence of two putative NLS motifs in
H-TWIST and suggests that these NLS sequences are functional. Furthermore, we
identified and confirmed the interaction of TWIST with a novel protein candidate 
TCF-4.

PMCID: PMC2709654
PMID: 19534813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Acta Diabetol. 2010 Mar;47(1):83-6. doi: 10.1007/s00592-009-0133-4. Epub 2009 Jun
17.

Transcription factor 7-like 2-gene polymorphism is related to fasting C peptide
in latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA).

Szepietowska B(1), Moczulski D, Wawrusiewicz-Kurylonek N, Grzeszczak W, Gorska M,
Szelachowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. barbara.szepietowska@yale.edu

Common polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been
associated with type 2 diabetes in different populations and recently with LADA, 
but not with type 1 diabetes. The aim of our study was to investigate association
between the rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene and LADA in Polish
patients. Link between the "high risk for type 2 diabetes genotype" with clinical
features was analyzed. 68 newly diagnosed patients with LADA and 195 healthy
controls were genotyped for the rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene using
the PCR-based RFLP method. Fasting C peptide level was measured by ELISA. We
observed increased frequencies of the TT genotype of the rs7903146 polymorphism
in the TCF7L2 gene in LADA patients compared to controls (15 vs. 6%, P = 0.03).
Fasting C peptide serum concentration was significantly lower in group of
patients with LADA carrying the TT genotype (P < 0.01). In conclusion, the data
from this study confirmed previous results showing genetic similarities between
patients with LADA and type 2 diabetes. Non-autoimmune mechanism may be related
to beta cell dysfunction in patients with LADA.

PMID: 19533015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. EMBO J. 2009 Jul 8;28(13):1843-54. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.153. Epub 2009 Jun 11.

JNK signalling modulates intestinal homeostasis and tumourigenesis in mice.

Sancho R(1), Nateri AS, de Vinuesa AG, Aguilera C, Nye E, Spencer-Dene B, Behrens
A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, CRUK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn
Fields Laboratories, London, UK.

Wnt signalling is a crucial signalling pathway controlling intestinal homeostasis
and cancer. We show here that the JNK MAP kinase pathway and one of its most
important substrates, the AP-1 transcription factor c-Jun, modulates Wnt
signalling strength in the intestine. Transgenic gut-specific augmentation of JNK
signalling stimulated progenitor cell proliferation and migration, resulting in
increased villus length. In the crypt, c-Jun protein was highly expressed in
progenitor cells and the absence of c-Jun resulted in decreased proliferation and
villus length. In addition to several known c-Jun/AP-1 target genes, expression
of Wnt target genes Axin2 and Lgr5 were stimulated by JNK activation, suggesting 
a cross talk of JNK to Wnt signalling. Expression of the Wnt pathway component
TCF4 was controlled by JNK activity, and chromatin immunoprecipitation and
reporter assays identified tcf4 as a direct c-Jun target gene. Consequently,
increased JNK activity accelerated tumourigenesis in a model of colorectal
carcinogenesis. As c-jun is a direct target of the TCF4/beta-catenin complex, the
control of tcf4 expression by JNK/c-Jun leads to a positive feedback loop that
connects JNK and Wnt signalling. This mechanism regulates the physiological
function of progenitor cells and oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC2711188
PMID: 19521338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1571-85. doi: 10.1101/gad.1806309. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway inhibits timely myelination and remyelination in
the mammalian CNS.

Fancy SP(1), Baranzini SE, Zhao C, Yuk DI, Irvine KA, Kaing S, Sanai N, Franklin 
RJ, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Regeneration Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1487-93.

The progressive loss of CNS myelin in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) has
been proposed to result from the combined effects of damage to oligodendrocytes
and failure of remyelination. A common feature of demyelinated lesions is the
presence of oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) blocked at a premyelinating stage. 
However, the mechanistic basis for inhibition of myelin repair is incompletely
understood. To identify novel regulators of OLP differentiation, potentially
dysregulated during repair, we performed a genome-wide screen of 1040
transcription factor-encoding genes expressed in remyelinating rodent lesions. We
report that approximately 50 transcription factor-encoding genes show dynamic
expression during repair and that expression of the Wnt pathway mediator Tcf4
(aka Tcf7l2) within OLPs is specific to lesioned-but not normal-adult white
matter. We report that beta-catenin signaling is active during oligodendrocyte
development and remyelination in vivo. Moreover, we observed similar regulation
of Tcf4 in the developing human CNS and lesions of MS. Data mining revealed
elevated levels of Wnt pathway mRNA transcripts and proteins within MS lesions,
indicating activation of the pathway in this pathological context. We show that
dysregulation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling in OLPs results in profound delay of 
both developmental myelination and remyelination, based on (1) conditional
activation of beta-catenin in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo and (2)
findings from APC(Min) mice, which lack one functional copy of the endogenous Wnt
pathway inhibitor APC. Together, our findings indicate that dysregulated
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling inhibits myelination/remyelination in the mammalian
CNS. Evidence of Wnt pathway activity in human MS lesions suggests that its
dysregulation might contribute to inefficient myelin repair in human neurological
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2704469
PMID: 19515974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3575-82. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0609. Epub 
2009 Jun 9.

Genetic variants of TCF7L2 are associated with insulin resistance and related
metabolic phenotypes in Taiwanese adolescents and Caucasian young adults.

Liu PH(1), Chang YC, Jiang YD, Chen WJ, Chang TJ, Kuo SS, Lee KC, Hsiao PC, Chiu 
KC, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Genes, Environment, and Human Health, Institute of
Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100,
Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: The effect of TCF7L2 rs7903146 on glucose homeostasis is considered
primarily due to impaired insulin secretion in European populations. Because we
previously demonstrated that TCF7L2 rs290487 near the 3' end of TCF7L2 was
significantly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Taiwanese subjects, we
aimed to investigate potential mechanisms underlying the associations of rs290487
with T2D.
METHODS: Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested for
association with glucose/insulin homeostasis as well as other quantitative
metabolic phenotypes using the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test in
525 Taiwanese adolescent twin-pairs and siblings. The results were further
replicated in 116 nondiabetic normotensive Caucasian young adults.
RESULTS: Among the 18 SNPs, rs290487 C allele was significantly associated with
higher 60-, 90-, and 120-min glucose concentrations (P = 0.001, 0.01, and 0.02,
respectively); higher 60- and 90-min insulin concentrations (P = 0.01 and 0.01,
respectively); and a lower insulin sensitivity index (P = 0.04). No association
was found for rs290487 with measures of insulin secretion. The rs290487 C allele 
was also associated with HOMA-IR (P = 0.005) and insulin sensitivity index (P =
0.01) in Caucasian young adults. Another SNP, rs10749127 C allele located in
intron 4, was also associated with features of the metabolic syndrome, including 
elevated systolic (P = 0.02) and diastolic (P = 2.0 x 10(-4)) blood pressure,
triglycerides (P = 7.0 x 10(-4)), and uric acid (P = 0.03). In a meta-analysis,
the rs290487 C allele was confirmed to be associated with an increased risk of
T2D (odds ratio, 1.11; 95% confidence interval, 1.03-1.19; P = 0.005) across East
Asian populations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support an important role for T2D risk-conferring
gene TCF7L2 in insulin resistance in both Taiwanese and Caucasian youth and
underscore the emerging role of Wnt signaling in insulin resistance.

PMID: 19509102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Nov;24(11):3360-6. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp271. Epub
2009 Jun 8.

Association and interaction analyses of genetic variants in ADIPOQ, ENPP1, GHSR, 
PPARgamma and TCF7L2 genes for diabetic nephropathy in a Taiwanese population
with type 2 diabetes.

Wu LS(1), Hsieh CH, Pei D, Hung YJ, Kuo SW, Lin E.

Author information: 
(1)1Vita Genomics, Inc, Wugu Shiang, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a common microvascular complication of
diabetes. In this study, we aimed to explore both primary effects of single-locus
and multilocus interactions to test the hypothesis that the type 2 diabetes (T2D)
genes may contribute to the aetiology of DN in T2D independently and/or through
complex interactions in a Taiwanese population with T2D.
METHODS: We genotyped six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for five common 
T2D genes including adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing (ADIPOQ),
ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/ phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1), growth hormone
secretagogue receptor (GHSR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma) and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2). There were 216 T2D
patients diagnosed with DN and 178 age-similar T2D without DN (control) subjects.
To investigate gene-gene interactions, we employed both generalized multifactor
dimensionality reduction (GMDR) method and logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Single-locus analyses showed significant main effects of ENPP1 (P =
0.0032; adjusted OR = 1.85; 95% CI = 1.17-2.92) on the risk of DN in T2D.
Furthermore, a potential gene-gene interaction involving ENPP1 and GHSR was
suggested in the best two-locus GMDR model (P = 0.021). The significant
three-locus GMDR model (P < 0.001) was also identified among ADIPOQ, GHSR and
TCF7L2. Analyses using logistic regression models confirmed the gene-gene
interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the SNPs from the T2D-related genes may
contribute to the risk of DN in T2D independently and/or in an interactive manner
in Taiwanese T2D patients.

PMID: 19506043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38. doi: 10.1038/nn.2333. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation by disrupting the
beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Ye F(1), Chen Y, Hoang T, Montgomery RL, Zhao XH, Bu H, Hu T, Taketo MM, van Es
JH, Clevers H, Hsieh J, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7.

Oligodendrocyte development is regulated by the interaction of repressors and
activators in a complex transcriptional network. We found that two
histone-modifying enzymes, HDAC1 and HDAC2, were required for oligodendrocyte
formation. Genetic deletion of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 in oligodendrocyte lineage
cells resulted in stabilization and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, which 
negatively regulates oligodendrocyte development by repressing Olig2 expression. 
We further identified the oligodendrocyte-restricted transcription factor
TCF7L2/TCF4 as a bipartite co-effector of beta-catenin for regulating
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Targeted disruption of Tcf7l2 in mice led to
severe defects in oligodendrocyte maturation, whereas expression of its
dominant-repressive form promoted precocious oligodendrocyte specification in
developing chick neural tube. Transcriptional co-repressors HDAC1 and HDAC2
compete with beta-catenin for TCF7L2 interaction to regulate downstream genes
involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, crosstalk between HDAC1/2 and 
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway mediated by TCF7L2 serves as a regulatory
mechanism for oligodendrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2701973
PMID: 19503085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Metabolism. 2009 Sep;58(9):1263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.03.025. Epub 2009 
Jun 18.

Genetic variation of FTO and TCF7L2 in premature adrenarche.

Lappalainen S(1), Voutilainen R, Utriainen P, Laakso M, Jääskeläinen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. saila.lappalainen@uku.fi

Premature adrenarche (PA) has been associated with increased body mass index. Our
aim was to determine whether the obesity-associated variant at fat mass and
obesity gene (FTO) is more frequent in PA subjects. Furthermore, we hypothesized 
that altered Wnt signaling due to genetic variants at transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) could play a role in the polygenic pathogenesis of PA. We genotyped
polymorphisms at FTO rs9939609 and at TCF7L2 rs7903146 and rs12255372 in 73
Finnish white prepubertal children with PA and in 97 age- and sex-matched healthy
controls. In addition, we investigated the associations of these genetic
variations with weight, height, circulating adrenocortical hormone levels,
glucose metabolism, lipid profile, and blood pressure. The differences in the
minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of rs9939609, rs7903146, and rs12255372 were not 
statistically significant between the PA and control groups (difference in MAFs
[95% confidence interval]: -0.06 [-0.18, 0.05], 0.04 [-0.05, 0.12], and 0.01
[-0.07, 0.10]; P = .3, .4, and .8, respectively). However, the risk allele at
TCF7L2 rs7903146 was more frequent in PA subjects than in controls when we
restricted the analysis to the subjects with lower weight-for-height than the
median of the PA subjects (weight-for-height <108%, corresponding body mass index
SD score <0.79; difference in MAFs [95% confidence interval]: 0.12 [-0.001,
0.23]; P = .038). Risk variant at FTO rs9939609 associated with higher
weight-for-height in the healthy children (P = .001). In conclusion, the minor
variant at FTO rs9939609 seems to play no major role in the increased
weight-for-height of PA subjects; but the risk allele at TCF7L2 rs7903146 may
have a role in the pathogenesis of PA in lean subjects.

PMID: 19497595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2009 Jun;13(3):332-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.04.622. Epub 
2009 May 23.

Emerging therapies for metabolic diseases--the focus is on diabetes and obesity.

Hughes TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zafgen, Inc., 5 Cambridge Center, Floor 2, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States.
thughes@zafgen.com

Type 2 diabetes and obesity remain the focus of investigational drugs for
metabolic disease. Only one new class of agents (Dipeptidylpeptidase 4
Inhibitors) has been approved in this field for control of blood glucose in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Significant progress has been made in the
elucidation of pathways of interest for new therapies in diabetes and obesity,
partly through advances in human genetics that have highlighted genetic loci
relevant to pancreatic beta cell dysfunction and hypothalamic control of food
intake, respectively. Investigational drugs targeting these pathways are in early
clinical investigation, including GPR119 agonists. Compounds targeting lipid
partitioning and lipid biosynthetic enzymes also have emerged, including
inhibitors of the enzymes DGAT1 and SCD1.

PMID: 19482541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Aug;85(2):139-46. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2009.04.024. Epub 2009 May 30.

Meta-analysis of the association between SNPs in TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in
East Asian population.

Luo Y(1), Wang H, Han X, Ren Q, Wang F, Zhang X, Sun X, Zhou X, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing, PR China.

AIMS: To evaluate the effect of TCF7L2 on genetic susceptibility of type 2
diabetes (T2DM) in East Asian population by using the meta-analysis.
METHODS: Search all the publications about the association between TCF7L2 and
T2DM in East Asian population from PubMed, CNKI and abstracts of major diabetes
conferences. Perform the meta-analysis of all the validated studies and evaluate 
the association between rs7903146 T allele, rs12255372 T allele, rs11196205 C
allele, rs290487 C allele and rs11196218 G allele of TCF7L2 and the risk of T2DM.
RESULTS: Eleven studies from nine eligible papers and one unpublished study of
ours were included in the meta-analysis. Ten eligible studies were analyzed for
rs7903146, five were analyzed for rs12255372 and rs11196205, and three were
analyzed for rs290487 and rs11196218. We found that four SNPs (rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, rs290487) in TCF7L2 were significantly associated with
T2DM in East Asian populations. The rs11196218 also showed a marginal
association. The estimated population-attributable risk (PAR) associated with
analyzed SNPs ranged from 2% to 7%.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in TCF7L2 were strongly associated with the risk of T2DM in
East Asian population. But the contribution of its genetic variants to the
epidemic of type 2 diabetes in East Asian was relatively low.

PMID: 19482368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Genet Epidemiol. 2010 Jan;34(1):34-41. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20432.

A novel method for haplotype clustering and visualization.

Teo YY(1), Small KS.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. teo@well.ox.ac.uk

In population genetics, it is common to represent the haplotype diversity at a
genomic region between multiple populations using well-constructed visual
representations. This typically requires the chromosomes from these populations
to be grouped according to some definition of haplotypic similarity. Here, we
introduce a novel algorithm for clustering haplotypes with the specific aim of
addressing haplotype diversity within or between populations. The algorithm
allows for missing data in the haplotypes and appropriately downweighs single
nucleotide polymorphisms with higher extent of missingness. By identifying the
canonical haplotypes in a genomic region, defined as the haplotype forms, which
most chromosomes are similar to, the algorithm maps each chromosome to either a
unique canonical haplotype or as a mosaic of the identified canonical haplotypes.
This mapping can subsequently be utilized for producing graphical visualizations 
of the haplotype clustering for understanding the extent of haplotype diversity
in the region. The clustering application has been implemented in R for
distribution as haplosim, and we also provide a visualization script hapvisual
for graphical display of the clustering results. The outcome of such analysis can
be informative in understanding the extent of haplotype diversity between
populations, in addressing the reproducibility of established association signals
across multiple populations, and also in the investigation of positive selection 
in the human genome.

PMID: 19479748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Jan;72(1):47-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03635.x. Epub 2009 May 18.

Interactions between TCF7L2 genotype and growth hormone-induced changes in
glucose homeostasis in small for gestational age children.

de Kort SW(1), Mook-Kanamori DO, Jaddoe VW, Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus MC-Sophia,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. s.dekort@erasmusmc.nl

CONTEXT: The Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 gene polymorphism
has been associated with risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM),
possibly by decreasing insulin secretion. Small for gestational age (SGA) birth
has been associated with type 2 DM in later life. Growth hormone (GH) treatment
reduces insulin sensitivity and increases insulin secretion. Therefore,
GH-treated SGA children are an ideal group to investigate whether the TCF7L2
rs7903146 genotype is associated with changes in glucose homeostasis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism on
changes in insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity during 4 years of GH
treatment in children born SGA.
SUBJECTS: A total of 246 Caucasian short children born SGA, with a median age of 
7.8 years.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion were measured by the 
frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test (FSIGT) (n = 68) and
homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) calculations (all).
RESULTS: There was no association between rs7903146 genotype and insulin
sensitivity or insulin secretion at baseline but after adjustment for possible
confounders, insulin secretion was higher in the CT/TT group than in the CC
group. During GH treatment, carriers of the rs7903146 T allele had an increase in
insulin secretion similar to that of carriers of the CC genotype. The decrease in
insulin sensitivity was only significant in the CT/TT group, but the difference
in decrease between genotype groups did not reach significance (P = 0.06). The
disposition index (insulin secretion x insulin sensitivity), which is an estimate
of beta cell function, was not associated with genotype and did not change during
GH treatment.
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism is not associated with the change
in insulin secretion during GH treatment in short SGA children.

PMID: 19473183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Diabetologia. 2009 Aug;52(8):1589-98. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1384-x. Epub 2009
May 26.

Stromal cell-derived factor-1 promotes survival of pancreatic beta cells by the
stabilisation of beta-catenin and activation of transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2).

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Thier 306, Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) is a chemokine produced in
stromal tissues in multiple organs. Earlier we reported on levels of SDF-1 and
SDF-1 receptor (CXCR4) in the insulin-producing beta cells of the mouse pancreas 
and determined that the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis is important for beta cell survival
through activation of the prosurvival kinase, protein kinase B (AKT). Since AKT
is known to modulate the wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT)
signalling cascade, we examined the effects of SDF-1/CXCR4 on WNT signalling in
beta cells and whether this signalling is important for cell survival.
METHODS: Activation of downstream WNT signalling (beta-catenin and transcription 
factor 7-like 2, [TCF7L2]) in response to SDF-1 was examined in the islets of WNT
signalling reporter (Tcf-optimal promoter beta-galactosidase) mice and in INS-1
and MIN6 beta cells. Cytoprotection of beta cells by SDF-1 in response to the
induction of apoptosis was assessed by caspase 3 and TUNEL assays.
RESULTS: SDF-1 induced WNT signalling in beta cells of isolated islets and in
INS-1 cells via CXCR4-mediated activation of Galphai/o-coupled signalling and the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT signalling cascade resulting in the inhibition 
of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta. The key WNT signalling regulators,
beta-catenin and AKT, were activated by SDF-1 at the transcriptional and
post-translational levels. Specific inhibition of beta-catenin in the WNT
signalling cascade reversed the anti-apoptotic effects of SDF-1.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: SDF-1 promotes pancreatic beta cell survival via
activation of AKT and downstream WNT signalling via the stabilisation and
activation of beta-catenin/TCF7L2 transcriptional activators. These findings
suggest a mechanism for SDF-1 based glucose-lowering therapies by enhancing beta 
cell mass through increasing cell survival.

PMCID: PMC4085163
PMID: 19468708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Lett. 2009 Oct 18;284(1):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.04.012. Epub
2009 May 21.

Anti-proliferative activity of heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 inhibitors via
beta-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway in adult T cell leukemia cells.

Kurashina R(1), Ohyashiki JH, Kobayashi C, Hamamura R, Zhang Y, Hirano T,
Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) 
inhibition, and to identify molecular pathways responsible for anti-proliferative
effect on adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) cells. For Hsp90 inhibition, we
used geldanamycin derivates, 17-AAG (17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) and 
17-DMAG (17-(dimethylaminoethylamino) 17-demethoxygeldanamycin) in this study.
The inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of 17-AAG in an ATL cell line, designated
as TaY, and two HTLV-1 transformed cell lines (MT-2 and MT-4) was 300-700 nM, and
that of 17-DMAG was 150-200nM. Fresh ATL cells obtained from patients were more
sensitive to both 17-AAG and 17-DMAG. Gene expression analysis of TaY cells
revealed up-regulation of HSPA1A encoding Hsp70, a hallmark of Hsp90 inhibition. 
Genes regulating cell proliferation or anti-apoptosis (i.e. BCL2 and BIRC5),
genes related to cytokines or chemokines (i.e. IL9 and CCL27), and notably
TCF7L2, a down-stream effecter of beta-catenin were remarkably down-regulated.
Down-regulation of TCF7L2 mRNA was noted in the three cell lines and two patient 
specimens after Hsp90 inhibition. Hsp90 inhibitors dephosphorylate AKT, thereby, 
activate GSK-3beta, which phosphorylates beta-catenin for ubiquitination. This
indicates the possibility that beta-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway plays an important
role in Hsp90 inhibitor-induced cell death in ATL cells and HTLV-1 transformed
cells. Our results have provided new insights into the complex molecular
pharmacology of Hsp90 inhibitors, and suggest that Hsp90 inhibitors might be
beneficial as anti-proliferative agents in treating ATL patients.

PMID: 19464103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes Care. 2009 Jun;32(6):1107-14. doi: 10.2337/dc08-2171.

Genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes: recent progress and clinical
implications.

Grant RW(1), Moore AF, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. rgrant@partners.org

PMCID: PMC2681026
PMID: 19460916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):311-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.548. Epub 2009 
May 18.

Developmental origins of species-specific muscle pattern.

Tokita M(1), Schneider RA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tsukuba, Tenno-dai, Ibaraki, Japan.

Vertebrate jaw muscle anatomy is conspicuously diverse but developmental
processes that generate such variation remain relatively obscure. To identify
mechanisms that produce species-specific jaw muscle pattern we conducted
transplant experiments using Japanese quail and White Pekin duck, which exhibit
considerably different jaw morphologies in association with their particular
modes of feeding. Previous work indicates that cranial muscle formation requires 
interactions with adjacent skeletal and muscular connective tissues, which arise 
from neural crest mesenchyme. We transplanted neural crest mesenchyme from quail 
to duck embryos, to test if quail donor-derived skeletal and muscular connective 
tissues could confer species-specific identity to duck host jaw muscles. Our
results show that duck host jaw muscles acquire quail-like shape and attachment
sites due to the presence of quail donor neural crest-derived skeletal and
muscular connective tissues. Further, we find that these species-specific
transformations are preceded by spatiotemporal changes in expression of genes
within skeletal and muscular connective tissues including Sox9, Runx2, Scx, and
Tcf4, but not by alterations to histogenic or molecular programs underlying
muscle differentiation or specification. Thus, neural crest mesenchyme plays an
essential role in generating species-specific jaw muscle pattern and in promoting
structural and functional integration of the musculoskeletal system during
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2726847
PMID: 19450573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 17;284(29):19613-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.005017. Epub
2009 May 14.

MAD2B, a novel TCF4-binding protein, modulates TCF4-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation.

Hong CF(1), Chou YT, Lin YS, Wu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
11490, Taiwan.

T cell factor 4 (TCF4) interacts with beta-catenin in the WNT signaling pathway
and transactivates downstream target genes involved in cancer progression. To
identify proteins that regulate TCF4-mediated biological responses, we performed 
a yeast two-hybrid screen to search for a TCF4-binding protein(s) and found that 
MAD2B interacts with TCF4. We confirmed that MAD2B is a TCF4-binding protein by
co-immunoprecipitation. Using the TOPFLASH reporter assay, we found that MAD2B
blocks TCF4-mediated transactivation. The MAD2B binding regions of TCF4 were
identified by TCF4 deletion mapping and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
analysis. TCF4 and MAD2B interactions abolished the DNA binding ability of TCF4. 
Knockdown of MAD2B in SW480 colorectal cancer cells led to the conversion of
epithelial cells to a mesenchymal fibroblastoid phenotype (epithelial-mesenchymal
transdifferentiation). An E-cadherin promoter reporter analysis showed that MAD2B
modulates TCF4-mediated E-cadherin expression. MAD2B knockdown blocked E-cadherin
expression and significantly induced mesenchymal markers, such as N-cadherin and 
vimentin. Mesenchymal induction was accompanied by F-actin redistribution and the
appearance of a fibroblastoid phenotype. MAD2B knockdown also increased both mRNA
and protein levels of Slug, a known TCF4-induced E-cadherin transcriptional
repressor. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that MAD2B silencing
enhances the ability of TCF4 to bind the Slug promoter. Thus, MAD2B is a novel
TCF4-interacting protein. This study provides the first evidence for the
involvement of MAD2B in TCF4-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal
transdifferentiation.

PMCID: PMC2740587
PMID: 19443654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2009 Aug;24(8):875-84. doi: 10.1007/s00384-009-0725-z. Epub
2009 May 7.

Elevated expressions of MMP7, TROP2, and survivin are associated with survival,
disease recurrence, and liver metastasis of colon cancer.

Fang YJ(1), Lu ZH, Wang GQ, Pan ZZ, Zhou ZW, Yun JP, Zhang MF, Wan DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern
China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

PURPOSE: Colorectal cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide. We tested
the hypothesis that differences in the expression of certain molecular markers of
colon cancer may account for different clinical outcomes.
METHODS: Tissue microarray technology was used to assay the expression of 17
biological markers [beta-catenin, CD44v7, c-myc, cyclin D1, estrogen receptor
beta, mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase,
maspin, matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP7), p53, Pin1, peroxisome
proliferators-activated receptor-gamma, survivin, T cell transcription factor 4
(TCF4), transforming growth factor beta receptor II (TGFbetaR II), TGFbeta,
TROP2, and Wnt] by immunohistochemistry in 620 colon cancer patients. The Cox
proportional hazards regression model was applied to analyze the lifetime data,
including time to death, time to recurrence, and time to liver metastasis.
RESULTS: All the markers were present at significantly higher expression levels
in tumor specimens than in normal colonic specimens. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed
that high expression of TROP2, MMP7, and survivin were related to decreased
survival; TCF4 and TROP2 were related to disease recurrence; and CD44v7, cyclin
D1, MMP7, p53, survivin, and TCF4 were related to liver metastasis. However, the 
results of the multivariate analysis only showed that expression of MMP7,
survivin, and TROP2 were significant predictors of lower patient survival, while 
TROP2 and MMP7 were significantly related to disease recurrence and liver
metastasis, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that elevated survivin, MMP7, and TROP2 expression
levels are related to decreased survival. In addition, elevated MMP7 and TROP2
expression levels are predictors of disease recurrence and liver metastasis,
respectively.

PMID: 19421758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2009 Nov;36(11):1074-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2009.05203.x. Epub 2009 Apr 27.

Anticancer activity of Panax notoginseng extract 20(S)-25-OCH3-PPD: Targetting
beta-catenin signalling.

Bi X(1), Zhao Y, Fang W, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 
60612, USA.

1. The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a critical role in carcinogenesis and so
agents that target Wnt/beta-catenin may have potential in cancer prevention and
therapy. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the anticancer activity of 
the novel natural product dammarane-type triterpene sapogenin (20(S)-25-OCH3-PPD;
PPD25) isolated from the leaves of Panax notoginseng. 2. The anticancer activity 
of PPD25 was evaluated in three colon cancer cell lines and in one lung cancer
cell line. The effects of PPD25 to inhibit proliferation and to induce apoptosis 
were evaluated. In addition, the potential mechanisms underlying the effects of
PPD25 were investigated. 3. It was found that the addition of 5 or 25 micromol/L 
PPD25 to the culture medium significantly inhibited cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis in all four cancer cell lines. Mechanistic studies revealed
that PPD25 significantly reduced the expression of beta-catenin, a key mediator
in the Wnt pathway, as well as transcriptional targets of beta-catenin, namely
c-myc, cyclin D1, cdk4 and T cell factor (TCF)-4. In addition, beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional activity was significantly suppressed by PPD25. 4. The data
demonstrate that the PPD25 exerts its anticancer effect by targetting
beta-catenin signalling, suggesting that PPD25 may have potential as a
chemotherapeutic and/or chemopreventive agent for colon and lung cancer.

PMID: 19413587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Neuroscience. 2009 Apr 10;159(4):1326-37. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.02.010. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

Molecular development of the lateral geniculate nucleus in the absence of retinal
waves during the time of retinal axon eye-specific segregation.

Iwai L(1), Kawasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Systems Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

When retinal waves are inhibited binocularly, eye-specific segregation of retinal
axons is disrupted, and retinal axons from the two eyes remain intermingled in
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). This effect of binocular retinal wave
inhibition is mediated by the lack of activity-dependent competition between
retinal axons from the two eyes, but it is unknown whether this effect is also
mediated by the developmental arrest of the LGN in an immature state. Here we
find developmental markers of the LGN during eye-specific segregation. The
expression levels of Purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4/PEP19), transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2/TCF4) and LIM homeobox protein 9 (Lhx9) in the LGN change
significantly during eye-specific segregation. Using PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 as
developmental markers of the LGN, we examine whether LGN development is affected 
by binocular disruption of retinal waves during eye-specific segregation.
Binocular injection of epibatidine strongly inhibits eye-specific segregation,
whereas it does not affect the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9. Furthermore, 
the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 is normal in binocularly enucleated
animals and in mice treated with the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) inhibitor,
clorgyline. In addition, our experiments using LGN slice cultures show that the
expression of PCP4 and TCF7L2 in LGN slices changes as in vivo. Our results
suggest that LGN development proceeds, at least in part, even in the absence of
retinal inputs. PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 should be useful to examine LGN development
during eye-specific segregation in mice and in ferrets.

PMID: 19409202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G168-78. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90589.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 regulates Paneth cell lineage allocation and 
accrual of epithelial stem cells during murine intestinal development.

Vidrich A(1), Buzan JM, Brodrick B, Ilo C, Bradley L, Fendig KS, Sturgill T, Cohn
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Health Center of Excellence, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR-3) is expressed in the lower crypt
epithelium, where stem cells of the intestine reside. The role of FGFR-3
signaling in regulating features of intestinal morphogenesis was examined in
FGFR-3-null (FGFR-3(-/-)) mice. FGFR-3(-/-) mice had only about half the number
of intestinal crypts and a marked decrease in the number of functional clonogenic
stem cells, as assessed by an in vivo microcolony-forming assay, compared with
wild-type littermates. A marked deficit in allocation of progenitor cells to
Paneth cell differentiation was noted, although all the principal epithelial
lineages were represented in FGFR-3(-/-) mice. The total cellular content and
nuclear localization of beta-catenin protein were reduced in FGFR-3(-/-) mice, as
was expression of cyclin D1 and matrix metalloproteinase-7, major downstream
targets of beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) signaling. Activation of FGFR-3
in Caco-2 cells, an intestinal epithelial cell line, abrogated the fall in
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling activity that is normally observed in these cells as
cultures become progressively more confluent. These findings are consistent with 
the hypothesis that, during intestinal development, FGFR-3 signaling regulates
crypt epithelial stem cell expansion and crypt morphogenesis, as well as Paneth
cell lineage specification, through beta-catenin/Tcf-4-dependent and -independent
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2711760
PMID: 19407216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):639-48, 648.e1-9. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.04.049. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

ITF-2 is disrupted via allelic loss of chromosome 18q21, and ITF-2B expression is
lost at the adenoma-carcinoma transition.

Herbst A(1), Bommer GT, Kriegl L, Jung A, Behrens A, Csanadi E, Gerhard M, Bolz
C, Riesenberg R, Zimmermann W, Dietmaier W, Wolf I, Brabletz T, Göke B, Kolligs
FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The ubiquitously expressed basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor ITF-2B has an important role in differentiation processes,
and its transcription is regulated by beta-catenin. The ITF-2 gene is located in 
the chromosomal region 18q21; allelic loss of this locus occurs in 70% of
colorectal cancers. We analyzed the expression, regulation, and function of
ITF-2B in colorectal carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) status of 18q21 and expression of
ITF-2B were studied in colorectal carcinomas using polymerase chain
reaction-based methods and immunohistochemistry. The biologic effects of ITF-2B
were studied in colorectal cancer cells. Reporter gene assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation were utilized to analyze effects of ITF-2B on gene
transcription.
RESULTS: ITF-2B is strongly expressed in colon adenomas but frequently
down-regulated in carcinomas because of LOH at 18q21. ITF-2B induces cell cycle
arrest and regulates the expression of p21(Cip1) via newly identified E-boxes in 
the CDKN1A gene, independently of p53. Loss of ITF-2B expression correlates with 
loss of p21(Cip1) expression in primary colon carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Accumulation of mutations and allelic losses are driving forces of
colorectal carcinogenesis. ITF-2B, which is up-regulated during early colorectal 
carcinogenesis because of loss of adenomatous polyposis coli, is a target for LOH
on chromosome 18q, along with deleted in colorectal carcinoma and Smad4. This
finding, along with the fact that ITF-2B is a regulator of the key cell cycle
inhibitor p21(Cip1), indicates that ITF-2B is a tumor suppressor that has an
important function at the adenoma to carcinoma transition.

PMID: 19394332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2009 Sep;24(9):1039-47. doi: 10.1007/s00384-009-0705-3.
Epub 2009 Apr 22.

Spatiotemporal pattern analysis of transcription factor 4 in the developing
anorectum of the rat embryo with anorectal malformations.

Zhang T(1), Bai YZ, Wang da J, Jia HM, Yuan ZW, Wang WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital China Medical University, 
Heping District, Shenyang 110004, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: As a member of the transcription factors family, transcription factor
4(Tcf4) is known to influence gene expression in endodermally derived tissues
including lung, liver, pancreas, stomach, and intestine. However, it remained
unknown if this capability is active during anorectal development in the normal
and anorectal malformations (ARM) rat embryos.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, ethylenethiourea (ETU)-induced ARM model
was introduced to investigate the expression pattern of Tcf4 during anorectal
development using immunohistochemical staining, reverse transcriptase polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR), and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Immunostaining revealed that Tcf4 expression showed space-dependent
changes in the developing anorectum: in normal embryos, Tcf4 protein is initially
expressed in the dorsal endoderm of urorectal septum (URS) and hindgut on
embryonic day 13 (E13). Additionally, separate expression domain develops
intensively on the dorsal CM on E14. On E15, positive cells are then detected in 
the fused tissue of URS, and prominently in the anal membrane. In the ARM
embryos, however, the epithelium of the cloaca, URS, and anorectum was negative
or faint for Tcf4. In Western blot and RT-PCR, time-dependent changes of Tcf4
protein and mRNA expression were remarkable during the anorectal development: on 
E14, E14.5, and E15, the expression level reached the peak; after E16, Tcf4
expression gradually decreased. In contrast, in ARM embryos, spatiotemporal
expression of Tcf4 was imbalanced during the anorectal morphogenesis from E13 to 
E16.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implied that the downregulation of Tcf4 at the time of
cloacal separation into rectum and urethra might be related to the development of
ARM.

PMID: 19387659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1227-30. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1356-1. Epub 2009
Apr 22.

Translating TCF7L2: from gene to function.

Pearson ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
e.pearson@cpse.dundee.ac.uk

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1298-307.

PMID: 19387612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2388-99. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp178. Epub 2009 Apr 
21.

Decreased TCF7L2 protein levels in type 2 diabetes mellitus correlate with
downregulation of GIP- and GLP-1 receptors and impaired beta-cell function.

Shu L(1), Matveyenko AV, Kerr-Conte J, Cho JH, McIntosh CH, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Islet Biology Laboratory, Centre for Biomolecular Interactions Bremen,
University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):3004.

Recent human genetics studies have revealed that common variants of the TCF7L2
(T-cell factor 7-like 2, formerly known as TCF4) gene are strongly associated
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). We have shown that TCF7L2 expression in the
beta-cells is correlated with function and survival of the insulin-producing
pancreatic beta-cell. In order to understand how variations in TCF7L2 influence
diabetes progression, we investigated its mechanism of action in the beta-cell.
We show robust differences in TCF7L2 expression between healthy controls and
models of T2DM. While mRNA levels were approximately 2-fold increased in isolated
islets from the diabetic db/db mouse, the Vancouver Diabetic Fatty (VDF) Zucker
rat and the high fat/high sucrose diet-treated mouse compared with the
non-diabetic controls, protein levels were decreased. A similar decrease was
observed in pancreatic sections from patients with T2DM. In parallel, expression 
of the receptors for glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1R) and glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP-R) was decreased in islets from humans with T2DM 
as well as in isolated human islets treated with siRNA to TCF7L2 (siTCF7L2).
Also, insulin secretion stimulated by glucose, GLP-1 and GIP, but not KCl or
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) was impaired in siTCF7L2-treated isolated
human islets. Loss of TCF7L2 resulted in decreased GLP-1 and GIP-stimulated AKT
phosphorylation, and AKT-mediated Foxo-1 phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion.
Our findings suggest that beta-cell function and survival are regulated through
an interplay between TCF7L2 and GLP-1R/GIP-R expression and signaling in T2DM.

PMCID: PMC2722186
PMID: 19386626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 2009 May 28;28(21):2163-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.82. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

Wnt pathway aberrations including autocrine Wnt activation occur at high
frequency in human non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Akiri G(1), Cherian MM, Vijayakumar S, Liu G, Bafico A, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality worldwide.
Non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), which represent around 80% of lung
tumors, exhibit poor prognosis and are usually refractory to conventional
chemotherapy. Elucidating the molecular and cellular mechanisms that are
dysregulated in NSCLCs may lead to new possibilities for targeted therapy or
enhanced efficacy of current therapies. Here we demonstrate Wnt pathway
activation in around 50% of human NSCLC cell lines and primary tumors, through
different mechanisms, including autocrine Wnt pathway activation involving
upregulation of specific Wnt ligands. Downregulation of activated Wnt signaling
inhibited NSCLC proliferation and induced a more differentiated phenotype.
Together, our findings establish importance of activated Wnt signaling in human
NSCLCs and offer the possibility of targeting upregulated Wnt signaling as a new 
therapeutic modality for this disease.

PMCID: PMC4451819
PMID: 19377513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Zebrafish. 2009 Mar;6(1):59-68. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2009.0580.

T-cell factor 4 (tcf7l2) is the main effector of Wnt signaling during zebrafish
intestine organogenesis.

Faro A(1), Boj SF, Ambrósio R, van den Broek O, Korving J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.

The Wnt pathway orchestrates cell fate decisions during embryonic development,
organogenesis, and adult tissues homeostasis. T-cell factor (Tcf )/lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors are the downstream effectors 
of canonical Wnt signaling. Upon Wnt signal activation, beta-catenin stabilizes
and translocates to the nucleus, where it interacts with Tcfs activating the
transcription of Wnt target genes. In the absence of Wnt, levels of stable
beta-catenin are reduced by the action of adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) and
other cytoplasmic proteins. Mutations in Apc cause constitutive accumulation of
beta-catenin and inappropriate activation of the Wnt pathway. apc(mcr/mcr) fish
embryos show absence of expression of tissue-specific differentiation markers in 
the intestine, suggesting that inappropriate activation of Wnt signaling
abrogates gut organogenesis. Which Tcf transcription factor mediates Wnt
signaling during zebrafish gut organogenesis remains unclear. We studied the
combined effect of loss of Tcf family members and Apc in the developing embryo.
Tcf4 (tcf7l2) loss rescues the apc(mcr/mcr) phenotype in the intestine. Single
depletion of Tcf1 (tcf7) and Tcf3 (tcf7l1a) function in an Apc mutant background 
had no effect on endoderm development. This study reveals that Tcf4 (tcf7l2) is
the major effector of Wnt signaling in the intestine during zebrafish
organogenesis.

PMID: 19374549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Apr 15;10:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-33.

Contribution of type 2 diabetes associated loci in the Arabic population from
Tunisia: a case-control study.

Ezzidi I(1), Mtiraoui N, Cauchi S, Vaillant E, Dechaume A, Chaieb M, Kacem M,
Almawi WY, Froguel P, Mahjoub T, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
intissar_z@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Candidate gene and genome-wide association studies have both
reproducibly identified several common Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
that confer type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk in European populations. Our aim was to
evaluate the contribution to T2D of five of these established T2D-associated loci
in the Arabic population from Tunisia.
METHODS: A case-control design comprising 884 type 2 diabetic patients and 513
control subjects living in the East-Center of Tunisia was used to analyze the
contribution to T2D of the following SNPs: E23K in KCNJ11/Kir6.2, K121Q in ENPP1,
the -30G/A variant in the pancreatic beta-cell specific promoter of Glucokinase, 
rs7903146 in TCF7L2 encoding transcription factor 7-like2, and rs7923837 in HHEX 
encoding the homeobox, hematopoietically expressed transcription factor.
RESULTS: TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele increased susceptibility to T2D (OR = 1.25
[1.06-1.47], P = 0.006) in our study population. This risk was 56% higher among
subjects carrying the TT genotype in comparison to those carrying the CC genotype
(OR = 1.56 [1.13-2.16], P = 0.002). No allelic or genotypic association with T2D 
was detected for the other studied polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: In the Tunisian population, TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele confers an
increased risk of developing T2D as previously reported in the European
population and many other ethnic groups. In contrast, none of the other tested
SNPs that influence T2D risk in the European population was associated with T2D
in the Tunisian Arabic population. An insufficient power to detect minor allelic 
contributions or genetic heterogeneity of T2D between different ethnic groups can
explain these findings.

PMCID: PMC2678106
PMID: 19368707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Circ Res. 2009 May 8;104(9):1076-84. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196899. Epub
2009 Apr 9.

Genetic fate mapping identifies second heart field progenitor cells as a source
of adipocytes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

Lombardi R(1), Dong J, Rodriguez G, Bell A, Leung TK, Schwartz RJ, Willerson JT, 
Brugada R, Marian AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Sciences Center, 6770 Bertner Street,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The phenotypic hallmark of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, a
genetic disease of desmosomal proteins, is fibroadipocytic replacement of the
right ventricle. Cellular origin of excess adipocytes, the responsible
mechanism(s) and the basis for predominant involvement of the right ventricle are
unknown. We generated 3 sets of lineage tracer mice regulated by cardiac lineage 
promoters alpha-myosin heavy chain (alphaMyHC), Nkx2.5, or Mef2C. We
conditionally expressed the reporter enhanced yellow fluorescent protein while
concomitantly deleting the desmosomal protein desmoplakin in cardiac myocyte
lineages using the Cre-LoxP technique. Lineage tracer mice showed excess
fibroadiposis and increased numbers of adipocytes in the hearts. Few adipocytes
in the hearts of alphaMyHC-regulated lineage tracer mice, but the majority of
adipocytes in the hearts of Nkx2.5- and Mef2C-regulated lineage tracer mice,
expressed enhanced yellow fluorescent protein. In addition, rare cells
coexpressed adipogenic transcription factors and the second heart field markers
Isl1 and Mef2C in the lineage tracer mouse hearts and in human myocardium from
patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. To delineate the
responsible mechanism, we generated transgenic mice expressing desmosomal protein
plakoglobin in myocyte lineages. Transgene plakoglobin translocated to nucleus,
detected by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence staining and
coimmunoprecipitated with Tcf7l2, a canonical Wnt signaling transcription factor.
Expression levels of canonical Wnt/Tcf7l2 targets bone morphogenetic protein 7
and Wnt5b, which promote adipogenesis, were increased and expression level of
connective tissue growth factor, an inhibitor of adipogenesis, was decreased. We 
conclude adipocytes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy originate 
from the second heart field cardiac progenitors, which switch to an adipogenic
fate because of suppressed canonical Wnt signaling by nuclear plakoglobin.

PMCID: PMC2767296
PMID: 19359597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;94(7):2617-25. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1664. Epub 
2009 Apr 7.

Evidence for association between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and TCF7L2 and 
glucose intolerance in women with PCOS and TCF7L2.

Biyasheva A(1), Legro RS, Dunaif A, Urbanek M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Of the recently identified type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) 
susceptibility loci, transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) confers the greatest 
relative risk for T2D and significantly predicts conversion to T2D in persons
with impaired glucose tolerance. TCF7L2 is, therefore, also a strong candidate
gene for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a common endocrine disorder
characterized by androgen excess and menstrual irregularities and associated with
insulin resistance and a 7-fold increased risk for T2D.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We tested for association between 58 single
nucleotide polymorphisms mapping to TCF7L2 and PCOS in 624 index (PCOS) cases and
553 control women of European ancestry. Furthermore, in the women with PCOS, we
tested for association with seven reproductive and metabolic quantitative traits.
RESULTS: Although we did not detect evidence for association between the
previously described TCF7L2 T2D locus, the proinsulin:insulin molar ratio, a
marker of pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction, was strongly associated with this
locus (P = 2.1 x 10(-4)). We also observed evidence for association between PCOS 
and two single nucleotide polymorphisms, rs11196236 (P = 9.0 x 10(-4)) and
rs11196229 (P = 0.0027) mapping more than 100 kb centromeric to the previously
published T2D susceptibility loci.
CONCLUSIONS: We have observed evidence of association with two independent TCF7L2
loci in a PCOS cohort: 1) association between the proinsulin:insulin molar ratio 
and the T2D locus; and 2) association with reproductive PCOS phenotype and a
novel locus. This study suggests that variation in different regions of a
susceptibility gene contributes to distinct phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2708958
PMID: 19351735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):800-2. doi: 10.2337/db09-0099.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene TCF7L2 and its role in beta-cell function.

Gloyn AL(1), Braun M, Rorsman P.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):894-905.

PMCID: PMC2661580
PMID: 19336690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3291-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1909. Epub
2009 Mar 31.

Epidermal growth factor receptor/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4/matrix
metalloproteinase 1: a new pathway for regulating keratinocyte invasiveness after
UVA irradiation.

Jean C(1), Blanc A, Prade-Houdellier N, Ysebaert L, Hernandez-Pigeon H, Al Saati 
T, Haure MJ, Coluccia AM, Charveron M, Delabesse E, Laurent G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U563, Toulouse
cedex-3, France. christine.jean@inserm.fr

Previous studies have established that UV irradiation results in epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) activation in keratinocytes. However, the signaling
pathways and cellular effects related to this process remain incompletely
elucidated. Herein, we describe for the first time that UVA-mediated EGFR
activation results in beta-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation at the Y654 residue
responsible for the dissociation of E-cadherin/alpha-catenin/beta-catenin
complexes. Moreover, UVA induces an EGFR-dependent, but Wnt-independent,
beta-catenin relocalization from the membrane to the nucleus followed by its
association with T-cell factor 4 (TCF4). This newly formed beta-catenin/TCF4
complex binds to a specific site on matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter
and governs MMP1 gene and protein expression, as well as cell migration in
collagen and gelatin. Altogether, these results suggest that UVA stimulates
keratinocyte invasiveness through two coordinated EGFR-dependent processes: loss 
of cell-to-cell contact due to beta-catenin/E-cadherin/alpha-catenin dissociation
and increased cell migration through extracellular matrix component degradation
due to beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent MMP1 regulation. These events may represent an
important step in epidermis repair following UVA injury and their abnormal
regulation could contribute to photoaging and photocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 19336574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 May;37(9):3007-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp179. Epub 2009 Mar
20.

Dazap2 modulates transcription driven by the Wnt effector TCF-4.

Lukas J(1), Mazna P, Valenta T, Doubravska L, Pospichalova V, Vojtechova M,
Fafilek B, Ivanek R, Plachy J, Novak J, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska, Prague 4, Czech Republic.

A major outcome of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin-signalling pathway is the
transcriptional activation of a specific set of target genes. A typical feature
of the transcriptional response induced by Wnt signalling is the involvement of
Tcf/Lef factors that function in the nucleus as the principal mediators of
signalling. Vertebrate Tcf/Lef proteins perform two well-characterized functions:
in association with beta-catenin they activate gene expression, and in the
absence of Wnt ligands they bind TLE/Groucho proteins to act as transcriptional
repressors. Although the general characteristics of Tcf/Lef factors are well
understood, the mechanisms that control their specific roles in various cellular 
backgrounds are much less defined. In this report we reveal that the evolutionary
conserved Dazap2 protein functions as a TCF-4 interacting partner. We demonstrate
that a short region proximal to the TCF-4 HMG box mediates the interaction and
that all Tcf/Lef family members associate with Dazap2. Interestingly, knockdown
of Dazap2 not only reduced the activity of Wnt signalling as measured by
Tcf/beta-catenin reporters but additionally altered the expression of
Wnt-signalling target genes. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation studies
indicate that Dazap2 modulates the affinity of TCF-4 for its DNA-recognition
motif.

PMCID: PMC2685103
PMID: 19304756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Jun;9(5):296-305. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.03.001. Epub
2009 Mar 19.

Gene expression analysis of canonical Wnt pathway transcriptional regulators
during early morphogenesis of the facial region in the mouse embryo.

Vendrell V(1), Summerhurst K, Sharpe J, Davidson D, Murphy P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences, Trinity College Dublin,
Ireland.

Structures and features of the face, throat and neck are formed from a series of 
branchial arches that grow out along the ventrolateral aspect of the embryonic
head. Multiple signalling pathways have been implicated in patterning
interactions that lead to species-specific growth and differentiation within the 
branchial region that sculpt these features. A direct role for Wnt signalling in 
particular has been shown. The spatial and temporal distribution of Wnt pathway
components contributes to the operation of the signalling system. We present the 
precise distribution of gene expression of canonical Wnt pathway transcriptional 
regulators, Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4 and beta-catenin between embryonic day (E) 9.5
and 11.5. In situ hybridization combined with Optical Projection Tomography was
used to record and compare distribution of transcripts in 3D within the
developing branchial arches. This shows widespread yet very specific expression
of the gene set indicating that all genes contribute to proper patterning of the 
region. Tcf1 and Lef1 are more prominent in rostral arches, particularly at later
ages, and Tcf3 and Tcf4 are in general expressed more deeply (medial/endodermal
aspect) in the arches than Tcf1 and Lef1. Comparison with Wnt canonical pathway
readout patterns shows that the relationship between the expression of individual
transcription factors and activation of the pathway is not simple, indicating
complexity and flexibility in the signalling system.

PMID: 19303461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Cell Sci. 2009 Apr 1;122(Pt 7):1014-24. doi: 10.1242/jcs.028241.

The class I bHLH factors E2-2A and E2-2B regulate EMT.

Sobrado VR(1), Moreno-Bueno G, Cubillo E, Holt LJ, Nieto MA, Portillo F, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM),
28029 Madrid, Spain.

Functional loss of the cell-cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin is an essential
event for epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that allows cell
migration during embryonic development and tumour invasion. In most carcinomas,
transcriptional repression has emerged as the main mechanism responsible for
E-cadherin downregulation. Here, we report the identification of class I bHLH
factor E2-2 (TCF4/ITF2) as a new EMT regulator. Both isoforms of E2-2 (E2-2A and 
E2-2B) induce a full EMT when overexpressed in MDCK cells but without affecting
the tumorigenic properties of parental cells, in contrast to other EMT inducers, 
such as Snail1 or class I bHLH E47. E-cadherin repression mediated by E2-2 is
indirect and independent of proximal E-boxes of the promoter. Knockdown studies
indicate that E2-2 expression is dispensable for maintenance of the EMT driven by
Snail1 and E47. Comparative gene-profiling analysis reveals that E2-2 factors
induce similar, yet distinct, genetic programs to that induced by E47 in MDCK
cells. These results, together with the embryonic expression pattern of Tcf4 and 
E2A (which encodes E12/E47), support a distinct role for E2-2 and suggest an
interesting interplay between E-cadherin repressors in the regulation of
physiological and pathological EMT processes.

PMID: 19295128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1298-307. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1307-x. Epub 2009 
Mar 14.

The T allele of rs7903146 TCF7L2 is associated with impaired insulinotropic
action of incretin hormones, reduced 24 h profiles of plasma insulin and
glucagon, and increased hepatic glucose production in young healthy men.

Pilgaard K(1), Jensen CB, Schou JH, Lyssenko V, Wegner L, Brøns C, Vilsbøll T,
Hansen T, Madsbad S, Holst JJ, Vølund A, Poulsen P, Groop L, Pedersen O, Vaag AA.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensens Vej 1, Gentofte, Denmark. kapg@steno.dk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1227-30.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We studied the physiological, metabolic and hormonal mechanisms 
underlying the elevated risk of type 2 diabetes in carriers of TCF7L2 gene.
METHODS: We undertook genotyping of 81 healthy young Danish men for rs7903146 of 
TCF7L2 and carried out various beta cell tests including: 24 h glucose, insulin
and glucagon profiles; OGTT; mixed meal test; IVGTT; hyperglycaemic clamp with
co-infusion of glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 or glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
polypeptide (GIP); and a euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp combined with
glucose tracer infusion to study hepatic and peripheral insulin action.
RESULTS: Carriers of the T allele were characterised by reduced 24 h insulin
concentrations (p < 0.05) and reduced insulin secretion relative to glucose
during a mixed meal test (beta index: p < 0.003), but not during an IVGTT. This
was further supported by reduced late-phase insulinotropic action of GLP-1 (p =
0.03) and GIP (p = 0.07) during a 7 mmol/l hyperglycaemic clamp. Secretion of
GLP-1 and GIP during the mixed meal test was normal. Despite elevated hepatic
glucose production, carriers of the T allele had significantly reduced 24 h
glucagon concentrations (p < 0.02) suggesting altered alpha cell function.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Elevated hepatic glucose production and reduced
insulinotropic effect of incretin hormones contribute to an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes in carriers of the rs7903146 risk T allele of TCF7L2.

PMID: 19288077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2010 Dec;58(6):426-9. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2009.01.003.
Epub 2009 Mar 14.

TCF7L2 is associated with type 2 diabetes in nonobese individuals from Tunisia.

Bouhaha R(1), Choquet H, Meyre D, Abid Kamoun H, Ennafaa H, Baroudi T, Sassi R,
Vaxillaire M, Elgaaied A, Froguel P, Cauchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Immunology and Human Pathologies, Faculty of Sciences 
of Tunis, 2092 Tunis, Tunisia.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele was associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in most populations worldwide. In individuals of European
descent, the association with T2D was recently found to be modulated by obesity
status. However, further studies are necessary to clarify if whether interaction 
exists among subjects of non-European descent. In the present study, we analyzed 
the association of rs7903146 with T2D in 90 nonobese (Body Mass Index [BMI]
<25kg/m(2)), 171 overweight (25=BMI<30kg/m(2)) et 98 obese (BMI=30kg/m(2))
individuals from Tunisia. The T allele was nominally associated with T2D in
nonobese subjects (Odds Ratio [OR]=3.24 [1.10-9.53], P=0.021) whereas no effect
was detected in overweight (P=0.3) and obese (P=0.22) individuals. Consequently, 
the same risk allele decreased susceptibility to obesity in T2D subjects (OR=0.47
[0.23-0.94], P=0.029) but not in normoglycemic controls (P=0.44). When analyzed
all together, no allelic association was observed with T2D (P=0.20) whereas an
artefactual association with decreased obesity (0.59 [0.38-0.90], P=0.013) was
detected. As in Europeans, TCF7L2 is therefore not a risk factor for obesity in
Tunisians, but its effect on T2D risk is modulated by obesity. In conclusion, the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele is nominally associated with T2D susceptibility in
nonobese individuals from Tunisia.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19286335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 1;284(18):12306-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807108200. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Structure and regulation of the versican promoter: the versican promoter is
regulated by AP-1 and TCF transcription factors in invasive human melanoma cells.

Domenzain-Reyna C(1), Hernández D, Miquel-Serra L, Docampo MJ, Badenas C, Fabra
A, Bassols A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.

Versican is a large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan of the extracellular matrix 
that is involved in a variety of cellular processes. We showed previously that
versican, which is overexpressed in cutaneous melanomas as well as in
premalignant lesions, contributes to melanoma progression, favoring the
detachment of cells and the metastatic dissemination. Here, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of the versican promoter in melanoma cell lines with
different levels of biological aggressiveness and stages of differentiation. We
show that versican promoter up-regulation accounts for the differential
expression levels of mRNA and protein detected in the invasive SK-mel-131 human
melanoma cells. The activity of the versican promoter increased 5-fold in these
cells in comparison with that measured in non-invasive MeWo melanoma cells.
Several transcriptional regulatory elements were identified in the proximal
promoter, including AP-1, Sp1, AP-2, and two TCF-4 sites. We show that promoter
activation is mediated by the ERK/MAPK and JNK signaling pathways acting on the
AP-1 site, suggesting that BRAF mutation present in SK-mel-131 cells impinge upon
the up-regulation of the versican gene through signaling elicited by the ERK/MAPK
pathway. This is the first time the AP-1 transcription factor family has been
shown to be related to the regulation of versican expression. Furthermore,
deletion of the TCF-4 binding sites caused a 60% decrease in the promoter
activity in SK-mel-131 cells. These results showing that AP-1 and TCF-4 binding
sites are the main regulatory regions directing versican production provide new
insights into versican promoter regulation during melanoma progression.

PMCID: PMC2673299
PMID: 19269971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Sep;48(9):821-31. doi: 10.1002/mc.20526.

A Tcf4-GFP reporter mouse model for monitoring effects of Apc mutations during
intestinal tumorigenesis.

Boman B(1), Kopelovich L, Siracusa LD, Zhang T, Henderson K, Cofer Z, Buchberg
AM, Fields JZ, Otevrel T.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas Jefferson University, Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA.

Apc mutations cause intestinal tumorigenesis through Tcf4 activation. However,
direct techniques for studying Tcf4 activation in vivo are limited. Here, we
describe the development of a Tcf4-GFP reporter mouse model for directly studying
Tcf4 activation. We first developed a GFP reporter construct (Tcf4-GFP) and
transfected it into SW480 cells that have constitutively activated Tcf4. Reporter
activity increased 47-fold. Next, we created transgenic (Tg) mice by transducing 
the construct into C57BL/6J mice. Fluorescence microscopy did not detect GFP in
intestinal sections, but flow cytometry showed 5% of crypt cells to be GFP(+). We
then established cross-bred mice (Tg x Apc(Min/+)), which have a germline Apc
mutation and sustained Tcf4 activation. Here, fluorescence microscopy showed
GFP(+) cells at or near the base of normal-appearing crypts. In adenomas, in
which Apc is inactivated, GFP(+) signal was even greater. Immunostaining for the 
Tcf4 target genes survivin (BIRC5) and cyclin D1 (CCND1) showed that their
expression also paralleled GFP positivity. We conclude that GFP directly reports 
Tcf4 activation in vivo and tracks the predicted increases in Tcf4 activation
that result from Apc inactivation, and that Apc mutation contributes to survivin 
and cyclin D1 overexpression through Tcf4 activation. Our Tcf4 mouse should be
useful in studying the effects of chemopreventive agents on Wnt signaling and
changes in proliferative crypt cell populations-including stem cells-during
intestinal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19263440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 14;106(15):6309-14. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900427106. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Notch and Wnt signals cooperatively control cell proliferation and tumorigenesis 
in the intestine.

Fre S(1), Pallavi SK, Huyghe M, Laé M, Janssen KP, Robine S, Artavanis-Tsakonas
S, Louvard D.

Author information: 
(1)Morphogenesis and Intracellular Signaling, Institut Curie-Unité Mixte de
Recherche 144 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 75248 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

Notch and Wnt signals play essential roles in intestinal development and
homeostasis, yet how they integrate their action to affect intestinal
morphogenesis is not understood. We examined the interplay between these two
signaling pathways in vivo, by modulating Notch activity in mice carrying either 
a loss- or a gain-of-function mutation of Wnt signaling. We find that the
dramatic proliferative effect that Notch signals have on early intestinal
precursors requires normal Wnt signaling, whereas its influence on intestinal
differentiation appears independent of Wnt. Analogous experiments in Drosophila
demonstrate that the synergistic effects of Notch and Wnt are valid across
species. We also demonstrate a striking synergy between Notch and Wnt signals
that results in inducing the formation of intestinal adenomas, particularly in
the colon, a region rarely affected in available mouse tumor models, but the
primary target organ in human patients. These studies thus reveal a previously
unknown oncogenic potential of Notch signaling in colorectal tumorigenesis that, 
significantly, is supported by the analysis of human tumors. Importantly, our
experimental evidence raises the possibility that Notch activation might be an
essential initial event triggering colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2649205
PMID: 19251639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Vitam Horm. 2009;80:563-81. doi: 10.1016/S0083-6729(08)00619-5.

Role of Wnt signaling in the development of type 2 diabetes.

Bordonaro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Commonwealth Medical College, Department of Basic Sciences, Scranton,
Pennsylvania 18510, USA.

Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance, insulin deficiency, and
hyperglycemia. Susceptibility to type 2 diabetes has been linked to Wnt
signaling, which plays an important role in intestinal tumorigenesis. Carriers of
variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene, an important component of the
Wnt pathway, are at enhanced risk for developing type 2 diabetes. The modulation 
of proglucagon expression by Wnt activity may partially explain the link between 
Wnt signaling and diabetes, and one of the transcriptional and processing
products of the proglucagon gene, the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), exhibits a
wide variety of antidiabetogenic activities. GLP-1 stimulates Wnt signaling in
pancreatic beta cells, enhancing cell proliferation; thus, positive feedback
between GLP-1 and Wnt signaling may result in increased proliferation, and
suppressed apoptosis, of pancreatic cells. Since beta-cell protection is a
potential treatment for type 2 diabetes, stimulation of Wnt activity may
represent a valid therapeutic approach.

PMID: 19251050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Diabetologia. 2009 May;52(5):850-4. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1293-z. Epub 2009 Feb
27.

Unique splicing pattern of the TCF7L2 gene in human pancreatic islets.

Osmark P(1), Hansson O, Jonsson A, Rönn T, Groop L, Renström E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC Malmö University Hospital, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Intronic variation in the TCF7L2 gene exhibits the strongest
association to type 2 diabetes observed to date, but the mechanism whereby this
genetic variation translates into altered biological function is largely unknown.
A possible explanation is a genotype-dependent difference in the complex splicing
pattern; however, this has not previously been characterised in pancreatic or
insulin target tissues. Here, the detailed TCF7L2 splicing pattern in five human 
tissues is described and dependence on risk genotype explored.
METHODS: RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR were employed to characterise
TCF7L2 splicing in pancreatic islets, blood lymphocytes, skeletal muscle and
subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue from non-diabetic individuals.
RESULTS: The mapping of TCF7L2 splice variants shows a specific pattern in
pancreatic islets, with four predominant transcripts and high usage of the
variable exons 4 and 15. The overall concentration of TCF7L2 mRNA is highest in
islets and fat and lower in blood and muscle. No significant difference in
overall amount or splicing pattern was observed between carriers and non-carriers
of the rs7903146 risk (T) allele. However, incorporation of exon 4 in islets
correlates positively with plasma HbA(1c) levels (r = 0.758; p = 0.018).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: There were pronounced tissue-specific differences in 
the splicing of TCF7L2 with forms containing exon 4 and 15 being most abundant in
islets. The incorporation of exon 4 in islets correlated with HbA(1c) levels.
Further experiments will be needed to determine the direction of this
correlation, and larger cohorts needed to unequivocally resolve whether there is 
a relationship between genotype and splicing in islets.

PMID: 19247628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Hum Mutat. 2009 Apr;30(4):669-76. doi: 10.1002/humu.20935.

Mutational, functional, and expression studies of the TCF4 gene in Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome.

de Pontual L(1), Mathieu Y, Golzio C, Rio M, Malan V, Boddaert N, Soufflet C,
Picard C, Durandy A, Dobbie A, Heron D, Isidor B, Motte J, Newburry-Ecob R,
Pasquier L, Tardieu M, Viot G, Jaubert F, Munnich A, Colleaux L, Vekemans M,
Etchevers H, Lyonnet S, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U-781, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, INSERM.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a severe congenital encephalopathy recently ascribed to 
de novo heterozygous TCF4 gene mutations. We report a series of 13 novel PHS
cases with a TCF4 mutation and show that EEG, brain magnetic resonance imagain
(MRI), and immunological investigations provide valuable additional clues to the 
diagnosis. We confirm a mutational hot spot in the basic domain of the E-protein.
Functional studies illustrate that heterodimerisation of mutant TCF4 proteins
with a tissue-specific transcription factor is less effective than that
homodimerisation in a luciferase reporter assay. We also show that the TCF4
expression pattern in human embryonic development is widespread but not
ubiquitous. In summary, we further delineate an underdiagnosed mental retardation
syndrome, highlighting TCF4 function during development and facilitating
diagnosis within the first year of life.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19235238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Feb 19;10:15. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-15.

Association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus: a large Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE) review and
meta-analysis.

Tong Y(1), Lin Y, Zhang Y, Yang J, Zhang Y, Liu H, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Open laboratory, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, PR China. yuer.126@126.com

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been shown to be
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2MD) in multiple ethnic groups in the 
past two years, but, contradictory results were reported for Chinese and Pima
Indian populations. The authors then performed a large meta-analysis of 36
studies examining the association of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with
polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene in various ethnicities, containing rs7903146
C-to-T (IVS3C>T), rs7901695 T-to-C (IVS3T>C), a rs12255372 G-to-T (IVS4G>T), and 
rs11196205 G-to-C (IVS4G>C) polymorphisms and to evaluate the size of gene effect
and the possible genetic mode of action.
METHODS: Literature-based searching was conducted to collect data and three
methods, that is, fixed-effects, random-effects and Bayesian multivariate
mete-analysis, were performed to pool the odds ratio (OR). Publication bias and
study-between heterogeneity were also examined.
RESULTS: The studies included 35,843 cases of T2DM and 39,123 controls, using
mainly primary data. For T2DM and IVS3C>T polymorphism, the Bayesian OR for TT
homozygotes and TC heterozygotes versus CC homozygote was 1.968 (95% credible
interval (CrI): 1.790, 2.157), 1.406 (95% CrI: 1.341, 1.476), respectively, and
the population attributable risk (PAR) for the TT/TC genotypes of this variant is
16.9% for overall. For T2DM and IVS4G>T polymorphism, TT homozygotes and TG
heterozygotes versus GG homozygote was 1.885 (95%CrI: 1.698, 2.088), 1.360 (95%
CrI: 1.291, 1.433), respectively. Four ORs among these two polymorphisms all
yielded significant between-study heterogeneity (P < 0.05) and the main source of
heterogeneity was ethnic differences. Data also showed significant associations
between T2DM and the other two polymorphisms, but with low heterogeneity (P >
0.10). Pooled ORs fit a codominant, multiplicative genetic model for all the four
polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene, and this model was also confirmed in different
ethnic populations when stratification of IVS3C>T and IVS4G>T polymorphisms
except for Africans, where a dominant, additive genetic mode is suggested for
IVS3C>T polymorphism.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis demonstrates that four variants of TCF7L2 gene are
all associated with T2DM, and indicates a multiplicative genetic model for all
the four polymorphisms, as well as suggests the TCF7L2 gene involved in near 1/5 
of all T2MD. Potential gene-gene and gene-environmental interactions by which
common variants in the TCF7L2 gene influence the risk of T2MD need further
exploration.

PMCID: PMC2653476
PMID: 19228405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Diabetologia. 2009 May;52(5):825-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1291-1. Epub 2009 Feb
19.

Interaction between prenatal growth and high-risk genotypes in the development of
type 2 diabetes.

Pulizzi N(1), Lyssenko V, Jonsson A, Osmond C, Laakso M, Kajantie E, Barker DJ,
Groop LC, Eriksson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
drpulizzi@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Dec;52(12):2671-2.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Early environmental factors and genetic variants have been
reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether there is an interaction between birthweight and 
common variants in the TCF7L2, HHEX, PPARG, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes in the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A total of 2,003 participants from the Helsinki Birth Cohort Study, 311 
of whom were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes by an OGTT, were genotyped for the
specified variants. Indices for insulin sensitivity and secretion were
calculated.
RESULTS: Low birthweight was associated with type 2 diabetes (p = 0.008) and
impaired insulin secretion (p = 0.04). Of the tested variants, the risk variant
in HHEX showed a trend towards a low birthweight (p = 0.09) and the risk variant 
in the CDKN2A/2B locus was associated with high birthweight (p = 0.01). The
TCF7L2 risk allele was associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Pooling
across all nine genes, each risk allele increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 
14%. [corrected] Risk variants in the HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes interacted 
with birthweight, so that the risk of type 2 diabetes was highest in those with
lower birthweight (p <or= 0.05). The interaction was also present in the pooled
data.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Low birthweight might affect the strength of the
association of some common variants (HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1) with type 2
diabetes. These findings need to be replicated in independent cohorts.

PMID: 19225753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004496. Epub 2009 Feb 16.

Genetic variants of Wnt transcription factor TCF-4 (TCF7L2) putative promoter
region are associated with small intestinal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Kübler I, Chamaillard M, Schaeffeler E, Reinisch W, Wang G,
Beisner J, Teml A, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Winter S, Herrlinger KR, Rutgeerts P,
Vermeire S, Cooney R, Fellermann K, Jewell D, Bevins CL, Schwab M, Stange EF,
Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany.

Reduced expression of Paneth cell antimicrobial alpha-defensins, human defensin
(HD)-5 and -6, characterizes Crohn's disease (CD) of the ileum. TCF-4 (also named
TCF7L2), a Wnt signalling pathway transcription factor, orchestrates Paneth cell 
differentiation, directly regulates the expression of HD-5 and -6, and was
previously associated with the decrease of these antimicrobial peptides in a
subset of ileal CD. To investigate a potential genetic association of TCF-4 with 
ileal CD, we sequenced 2.1 kb of the 5' flanking region of TCF-4 in a small group
of ileal CD patients and controls (n = 10 each). We identified eight single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), of which three (rs3814570, rs10885394,
rs10885395) were in linkage disequilibrium and found more frequently in patients;
one (rs3814570) was thereby located in a predicted regulatory region. We carried 
out high-throughput analysis of this SNP in three cohorts of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) patients and controls. Overall 1399 healthy individuals, 785
ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, 225 CD patients with colonic disease only and
784 CD patients with ileal involvement were used to determine frequency
distributions. We found an association of rs3814570 with ileal CD but neither
with colonic CD or UC, in a combined analysis (allele positivity: OR 1.27, 95% CI
1.07 to 1.52, p = 0.00737), which was the strongest in ileal CD patients with
stricturing behaviour (allele frequency: OR 1.32, 95% CI 1.08 to1.62, p =
0.00686) or an additional involvement of the upper GIT (allele frequency: OR
1.38, 95% CI 1.03 to1.84, p = 0.02882). The newly identified genetic association 
of TCF-4 with ileal CD provides evidence that the decrease in Paneth cell
alpha-defensins is a primary factor in disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2637978
PMID: 19221600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Nov;41(5):535-43. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0407OC. 
Epub 2009 Feb 12.

beta-Catenin is not necessary for maintenance or repair of the bronchiolar
epithelium.

Zemke AC(1), Teisanu RM, Giangreco A, Drake JA, Brockway BL, Reynolds SD, Stripp 
BR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Regeneration, Department of Environmental and Occupational
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Signaling by Wnt/beta-catenin regulates self-renewal of tissue stem cells in the 
gut and, when activated in the embryonic bronchiolar epithelium, leads to stem
cell expansion. We have used transgenic and cell type-specific knockout
strategies to determine roles for beta-catenin-regulated gene expression in
normal maintenance and repair of the bronchiolar epithelium. Analysis of TOPGal
transgene activity detected beta-catenin signaling in the steady-state and
repairing bronchiolar epithelium. However, the broad distribution and phenotype
of signaling cells precluded establishment of a clear role for beta-catenin in
the normal or repairing state. Necessity of beta-catenin signaling was tested
through Cre-mediated deletion of Catnb exons 2-6 in airway epithelial cells.
Functional knockout of beta-catenin had no impact on expression of Clara cell
differentiation markers, mitotic index, or sensitivity of these cells to the
Clara cell-specific toxicant, naphthalene. Repair of the naphthalene-injured
airway proceeded with establishment of focal regions of beta-catenin-null
epithelium. The size of regenerative epithelial units, mitotic index, and
restoration of the ciliated cell population did not vary between wild-type and
genetically modified mice. Thus, beta-catenin was not necessary for maintenance
or efficient repair of the bronchiolar epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2778160
PMID: 19213872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Apr;89(4):1256-62. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.27058. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

TCF7L2, dietary carbohydrate, and risk of type 2 diabetes in US women.

Cornelis MC(1), Qi L, Kraft P, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is the strongest type 2 diabetes (T2D) locus identified to
date, and evidence suggests it plays an important role in insulin synthesis,
processing, and secretion. Dietary factors that increase the insulin demand might
enhance the risk of T2D associated with TCF7L2 variants.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine whether the risk of T2D associated with
TCF7L2 is modified by the glycemic load (GL), glycemic index (GI), cereal fiber
content, and total carbohydrate content of the diet.
DESIGN: T2D cases (n = 1140) and controls (n = 1915) from the Nurses' Health
Study were genotyped for TCF7L2 (rs12255372). Dietary intake was assessed with a 
semiquantitative food-frequency questionnaire.
RESULTS: Significant differences in odds ratios (ORs) of T2D associated with the 
TCF7L2 genotype between high and low strata of GL (P = 0.03) and GI (P = 0.05)
were suggested. Compared with the GG genotype, multivariate-adjusted ORs (95% CI)
of T2D associated with the TT genotype were 2.71 (1.64, 4.46) and 2.69 (1.64,
4.43) among individuals in the highest tertile of GL and GI, respectively.
Corresponding ORs (95% CIs) among individuals in the lowest tertiles of GL and GI
were 1.66 (0.95, 2.88) and 1.82 (1.11, 3.01). The risk of T2D associated with the
TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphism did not significantly differ by cereal
fiber or carbohydrate intake.
CONCLUSION: Carbohydrate quality and quantity modified risk of T2D associated
with TCF7L2, which suggests that changes in risk attributable to the TCF7L2
variant are magnified under conditions of increased insulin demand.

PMCID: PMC2667467
PMID: 19211816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2009;47(4):383-6. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2009.077.

Risk loci for type 2 diabetes - quo vadis?

Weijers RN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Teaching Hospital OLVG, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. robw01@xs4all.nl

Reduced insulin sensitivity plays a role in the early pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes, and defects in insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells are
instrumental in hyperglycemic progression. There is strong evidence that genetic 
factors play an important role in both of these components. Several of the single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes associated with an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes are hypothesized to influence beta-cell function. The aim of the 
present study was to describe the function of the latter genes, to analyze the
implications of the SNP positions within or near these genes, and to evaluate the
suggested primary role of pancreatic beta-cells in the etiology of type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 19203201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1343-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4153. Epub
2009 Feb 3.

Galectin-3 mediates nuclear beta-catenin accumulation and Wnt signaling in human 
colon cancer cells by regulation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta activity.

Song S(1), Mazurek N, Liu C, Sun Y, Ding QQ, Liu K, Hung MC, Bresalier RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays an essential role in colon carcinogenesis.
Galectin-3, a beta-galactoside-binding protein, has been implicated in Wnt
signaling, but the precise mechanisms by which galectin-3 modulates the Wnt
pathway are unknown. In the present study, we determined the effects of
galectin-3 on the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in colon cancer cells, as well as the 
mechanisms involved. Galectin-3 levels were manipulated in human colon cancer
cells by stable transfection of galectin-3 antisense, short hairpin RNA, or
full-length galectin-3 cDNA, and effects on beta-catenin levels, subcellular
distribution, and Wnt signaling were determined. Galectin-3 levels correlated
with beta-catenin levels in a variety of colon cancer cell lines. Down-regulation
of galectin-3 resulted in decreased beta-catenin protein levels but no change in 
beta-catenin mRNA levels, suggesting that galectin-3 modulates beta-catenin by
another mechanism. Reduction of galectin-3 led to reduced nuclear beta-catenin
with a concomitant decrease in TCF4 transcriptional activity and expression of
its target genes. Conversely, transfection of galectin-3 cDNA into colon cancer
cells increased beta-catenin expression and TCF4 transcriptional activity.
Down-regulation of galectin-3 resulted in AKT and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta 
(GSK-3beta) dephosphorylation and increased GSK activity, increasing beta-catenin
phosphorylation and degradation. Ly294002, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase, and dominant-negative AKT, suppressed TCF4 transcriptional activity
induced by galectin-3 whereas LiCl, a GSK-3beta inhibitor, increased TCF4
activity, mimicking the effects of galectin-3. These results suggest that
galectin-3 mediates Wnt signaling, at least in part, by regulating GSK-3beta
phosphorylation and activity via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway,
and, thus, the degradation of beta-catenin in colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2990400
PMID: 19190323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Diabetologia. 2009 Apr;52(4):614-20. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1266-2. Epub 2009
Jan 31.

TCF7L2 variants are associated with increased proinsulin/insulin ratios but not
obesity traits in the Framingham Heart Study.

Stolerman ES(1), Manning AK, McAteer JB, Fox CS, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Simches Research Building-CPZN 5.250, Diabetes Unit/Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene are associated with type 2
diabetes via impaired insulin secretion. One hypothesis is that variation in
TCF7L2 impairs insulin processing in the beta cell. In contrast, the association 
of related TCF7L2 polymorphisms with obesity is controversial in that it has only
been shown in cohorts susceptible to ascertainment bias. We reproduced the
association of diabetes-associated variants with proinsulin/insulin ratios, and
also examined the association of a TCF7L2 haplotype with obesity in the
Framingham Heart Study (FHS).
METHODS: We genotyped the TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 and
rs12255372 (previously associated with type 2 diabetes) and rs10885406 and
rs7924080 (which tag haplotype A [HapA], a haplotype reported to be associated
with obesity) in 2,512 FHS participants. We used age- and sex-adjusted linear
mixed-effects models to test for association with glycaemic traits,
proinsulin/insulin ratios and obesity measures.
RESULTS: As expected, the T risk allele of rs7903146 was associated with higher
fasting plasma glucose (p = 0.01). T/T homozygotes had a 23.5% increase in the
proinsulin/insulin ratio (p = 1 x 10(-7)) compared with C/C homozygotes. There
was no association of HapA with BMI (p = 0.98), waist circumference (p = 0.89),
subcutaneous adipose tissue (p = 0.32) or visceral adipose tissue (p = 0.92).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We confirmed that the risk allele of rs7903146 is
associated with hyperglycaemia and a higher proinsulin/insulin ratio. We did not 
detect any association of the TCF7L2 HapA with adiposity measures, suggesting
that this may have been a spurious association from ascertainment bias, possibly 
induced by the evaluation of obesity in separate groups of glycaemic cases and
controls.

PMCID: PMC3430962
PMID: 19183934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neuro Oncol. 2009 Oct;11(5):458-67. doi: 10.1215/15228517-2008-115. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

Analysis of microsatellite instability in medulloblastoma.

Viana-Pereira M(1), Almeida I, Sousa S, Mahler-Araújo B, Seruca R, Pimentel J,
Reis RM.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. The
presence of microsatellite instability (MSI) in brain tumors, particularly
medulloblastomas, has not been properly addressed. The aim of the present study
was to evaluate the role of MSI in medulloblastoma carcinogenesis. MSI status was
determined in 36 patients using a pentaplex PCR of quasimonomorphic markers
(NR27, NR21, NR24, BAT25, and BAT26). Methylation status of mismatch repair (MMR)
genes was achieved by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA). In addition, MutS homolog 6 (MSH6) expression was
determined by immunohistochemistry. Mutations of 10 MSI target genes (TCF4,
XRCC2, MBD4, MRE11, ATR, MSH3, TGFBR2, RAD50, MSH6, and BAX) were studied by
pentaplex PCR followed by analysis with GeneScan 3.7 software. Mutation analysis 
of hotspot regions of beta-catenin (CTNNB1) and BRAF (v-raf murine sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog B1) oncogenes was performed by PCR single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis followed by direct sequencing. Among the 36 tumors, we
found four (11%) cases with instability, one with high MSI and three with low
MSI. Methylation analysis of MMR genes in cases presenting shifts on the MSI
markers revealed mild hypermethylation of MSH6 in 75% of cases, yet MSH6 was
expressed in all the tumors. The MSI target genes MBD4 (methyl-CpG binding domain
protein 4) and MRE11 (meiotic recombination 11 homolog A) were mutated in two
different tumors. No CTNNB1 or BRAF mutations were found. This study is the most 
comprehensive analysis of MSI in medulloblastomas to date. We observed the
presence of MSI together with mutations of MSI target genes in a small fraction
of cases, suggesting a new genetic pathway for a role in medulloblastoma
development.

PMCID: PMC2765336
PMID: 19179424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Org Lett. 2009 Feb 5;11(3):737-40. doi: 10.1021/ol802818f.

Synthesis of A83586C analogs with potent anticancer and beta-catenin/
TCF4/osteopontin inhibitory effects and insights into how A83586C modulates E2Fs 
and pRb.

Hale KJ(1), Manaviazar S, Lazarides L, George J, Walters MA, Cai J, Delisser VM, 
Bhatia GS, Peak SA, Dalby SM, Lefranc A, Chen YN, Wood AW, Crowe P, Erwin P,
El-Tanani M.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering and the Centre for Cancer
Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University Belfast (QUB), Stranmillis 
Road, Belfast BT9 5AG, UK.

The synthesis of three potent new antitumor agents is described: the
A83586C-citropeptin hybrid (1), the A83586C-GE3 hybrid (2), and l-Pro-A83586C
(3). Significantly, compounds 1 and 2 function as highly potent inhibitors of
beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling within cancer cells, while simultaneously
downregulating osteopontin (Opn) expression. A83586C antitumor cyclodepsipeptides
also inhibit E2F-mediated transcription by downregulating E2F1 expression and
inducing dephosphorylation of the oncogenic hyperphosphorylated retinoblastoma
protein (pRb).

PMID: 19175352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Feb;8(2):458-68. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0885. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

WIF1, a Wnt pathway inhibitor, regulates SKP2 and c-myc expression leading to G1 
arrest and growth inhibition of human invasive urinary bladder cancer cells.

Tang Y(1), Simoneau AR, Liao WX, Yi G, Hope C, Liu F, Li S, Xie J, Holcombe RF,
Jurnak FA, Mercola D, Hoang BH, Zi X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA 92868,
USA.

Epigenetic silencing of secreted wingless-type (Wnt) antagonists through
hypermethylation is associated with tobacco smoking and with invasive bladder
cancer. The secreted Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF1) has shown consistent
growth-inhibitory effect on various cancer cell lines. Therefore, we assessed the
mechanisms of action of WIF1 by either restoring WIF1 expression in invasive
bladder cancer cell lines (T24 and TSU-PR1) or using a recombinant protein
containing functional WIF1 domain. Both ectopic expression of WIF1 and treatment 
with WIF1 domain protein resulted in cell growth inhibition via G(1) arrest. The 
G(1) arrest induced by WIF1 is associated with down-regulation of SKP2 and c-myc 
and up-regulation of p21/WAF1 and p27/Kip1. Conversely, reexpression of SKP2 in
WIF1-overexpressing TSU-PR1 cells attenuated the WIF1-induced G(1) arrest.
Furthermore, inhibition of nuclear Wnt signaling by either dominant-negative LEF1
or short hairpin RNA of TCF4 also reduced SKP2 expression. The human SKP2 gene
contains two TCF/LEF1 consensus binding sites within the promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation/real-time PCR analysis revealed that both WIF1 and
dominant-negative LEF1 expression decreased the in vivo binding of TCF4 and
beta-catenin to the SKP2 promoter. Together, our results suggest that mechanisms 
of WIF1-induced G(1) arrest include (a) SKP2 down-regulation leading to p27/Kip1 
accumulation and (b) c-myc down-regulation releasing p21/WAF1 transcription.
Additionally, we show that WIF1 inhibits in vivo bladder tumor growth in nude
mice. These observations suggest a mechanism for transformation of bladder
epithelium on loss of WIF1 function and provide new targets such as SKP2 for
intervention in WIF1-deficient bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC2768341
PMID: 19174556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1362-6.

Allele-specific PCR assay to genotype SNP rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene for rapid
screening of diabetes susceptibility.

Dutra LA(1), Costa PG, Velasco LF, Amato AA, Barra GB.

Author information: 
(1)Sabin Institute and Laboratory of Clinical Analysis, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study is to validate a rapid and simple
allele-specific PCR that genotypes TCF7/L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism with
standard PCR instruments.
METHODS: Two forward primers with variations in their 3' nucleotides were
designed in such a way that each was specific for one of the two variants. They
were combined with a common reverse primer into two PCR reactions. Specific
amplification indicates the presence of the allele. One hundred and four DNA
samples were genotyped by this method. To evaluate the assay, the polymorphism
spanning region of 63 DNA samples representing the three possible genotypes was
sequenced.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 allele assignments derived from the allele-specific PCR
were in complete agreement with sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The assay described here is a suitable strategy for the TCF7/L2
rs7903146 (C/T) genotyping also allowing rapid and reliable identification.

PMID: 19169495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):894-905. doi: 10.2337/db08-1187. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

TCF7L2 regulates late events in insulin secretion from pancreatic islet
beta-cells.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Loder MK, McDonald A, Tarasov AI, Carzaniga R, Kronenberger
K, Barg S, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College, London, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):800-2.

OBJECTIVE: Polymorphisms in the human TCF7L2 gene are associated with reduced
insulin secretion and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the
mechanisms by which TCF7L2 affect insulin secretion are still unclear. We define 
the effects of TCF7L2 expression level on mature beta-cell function and suggest a
potential mechanism for its actions.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: TCF7L2 expression in rodent islets and beta-cell
lines was altered using RNAi or adenoviral transduction. Beta-cell gene profiles 
were measured by quantitative real-time PCR and the effects on intracellular
signaling and exocytosis by live cell imaging, electron microscopy, and patch
clamp electrophysiology.
RESULTS: Reducing TCF7L2 expression levels by RNAi decreased glucose- but not
KCl-induced insulin secretion. The glucose-induced increments in both ATP/ADP
ratio and cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) were increased compared
with controls. Overexpression of TCF7L2 exerted minor inhibitory effects on
glucose-regulated changes in [Ca2+]i and insulin release. Gene expression
profiling in TCF7L2-silenced cells revealed increased levels of mRNA encoding
syntaxin 1A but decreased Munc18-1 and ZnT8 mRNA. Whereas the number of
morphologically docked vesicles was unchanged by TCF7L2 suppression, secretory
granule movement increased and capacitance changes decreased, indicative of
defective vesicle fusion.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 is involved in maintaining expression of beta-cell genes
regulating secretory granule fusion. Defective insulin exocytosis may thus
underlie increased diabetes incidence in carriers of the at-risk TCF7L2 alleles.

PMCID: PMC2661588
PMID: 19168596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Exp Diabetes Res. 2008;2008:728763. doi: 10.1155/2008/728763. Epub 2009 Jan 20.

Islet specific Wnt activation in human type II diabetes.

Lee SH(1), Demeterco C, Geron I, Abrahamsson A, Levine F, Itkin-Ansari P.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The Wnt pathway effector gene TCF7L2 has been linked to type II diabetes, making 
it important to study the role of Wnt signaling in diabetes pathogenesis. We
examined the expression of multiple Wnt pathway components in pancreases from
normal individuals and type II diabetic individuals. Multiple members of the Wnt 
signaling pathway, including TCF7L2, Wnt2b, beta-catenin, pGSK3beta, TCF3,
cyclinD1, and c-myc, were undetectable or expressed at low levels in islets from 
nondiabetic individuals, but were also upregulated specifically in islets of type
II diabetic patients. Culture of pancreatic tissue and islet isolation led to Wnt
activation that was reversed by the Wnt antagonist sFRP, demonstrating that Wnt
activation in that setting was due to soluble Wnt factors. These data support a
model in which the Wnt pathway plays a dynamic role in the pathogenesis of type
II diabetes and suggest manipulation of Wnt signaling as a new approach to
beta-cell-directed diabetes therapy.

PMCID: PMC2628766
PMID: 19165345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2329-32. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9452-3. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

In vitro modulation of TCF7L2 gene expression in human pancreatic cells.

Khalooghi K(1), Hashemi S, Mehraban N, Amiri P, Bazzaz JT, Larijani B, Amoli MM.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Centre, Tehran University and Medical
Sciences, Dr. Shariati Hospital, North Karegar St., 14114 Tehran, Iran.

Several studies have recently reported strong association between type 2 diabetes
and variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, which has been 
confirmed by several other genome-wide studies. However, the physiological
implications of this transcription factor on the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes 
is not yet known. The aim of this study was to investigate the alteration in
TCF7L2 gene expression in human pancreatic cell line in response to various
factors in vitro. MIA Paca-2 cell line (Human Pancreas cell line) was cultured in
the presence of curcumin, lipopolysaccaride and glucose (low and high
concentration). TCF7L2 gene expression was determined using quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. Treatment with curcumin significantly increased TCF7L2 gene
expression to 3.24 fold (1.7-log fold) (P = 0.003) compared to the controls while
treatment with LPS decreased TCF7L2 gene expression to 0.88-fold (-0.18-log). On 
the other hand, glucose increased TCF7L2 gene expression in pancreatic cell line.
Our data suggest a role for TCF7L2 in glucose homeostasis. The contrary effect of
curcumin and LPS on expression of TCF7L2 in pancreatic cells supports a role for 
TCF7L2 in their survival and function in inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 19156536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Br J Nutr. 2009 Feb;101(4):478-81. doi: 10.1017/S0007114508020369. Epub 2008 Jul 
17.

Whole-grain consumption and transcription factor-7-like 2 ( TCF7L2) rs7903146:
gene-diet interaction in modulating type 2 diabetes risk.

Fisher E(1), Boeing H, Fritsche A, Doering F, Joost HG, Schulze MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany. fisher@dife.de

Whole grains are known to influence postprandial glucose response and insulin
demand and are inversely associated with diabetes risk. Genetic variation of the 
transcription factor-7-like 2 encoding gene (TCF7L2) is assumed to promote an
early insulin secretory defect and has been consistently attributed to the risk
of developing type 2 diabetes. The present study examined the hypothesis that the
protective effect of whole grains might be attenuated in the presence of the
rs7903146 risk-conferring T-allele. We employed a case-cohort study of 2318
randomised individuals and 724 incident type 2 diabetes cases from the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam cohort.
Multivariate Cox regression was used to estimate relative risks of diabetes
including product terms testing for the genotype-specific effect modification of 
dietary whole grain. Dietary intake of whole grains was assessed by a validated
FFQ. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-allele was associated with type 2 diabetes (hazard
ratio=1.51; 95 % CI 1.21, 1.87) and modified the inverse association between
whole-grain intake and diabetes risk (P=0.016 for interaction). While whole-grain
intake was inversely associated with diabetes risk among rs7903146 CC homozygote 
carriers (hazard ratio for 50 g portion per d=0.86; 95 % CI 0.75, 0.99), the
T-allele negated the protective effect of whole-grain intake (hazard ratio among 
T-allele carriers for 50 g portion per d=1.08; 95 % CI 0.96, 1.23). These data
provide evidence that the beneficial effect of whole-grain intake on diabetes
risk is modified by TCF7L2 rs7903146.

PMID: 19149908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neurochem Res. 2009 Jul;34(7):1278-88. doi: 10.1007/s11064-008-9906-3. Epub 2009 
Jan 16.

Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway activation in malignant progression of rat
gliomas induced by transplacental N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea exposure.

Sareddy GR(1), Challa S, Panigrahi M, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046, India.

Although Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway has been shown to be a crucial
factor in the development of many cancers, little is known about its role in
glioma malignancy. In the present study, we report the first evidence that
Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway is constitutively activated in
experimental gliomas induced by single transplacental dose of
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU). In the present study we analyzed ENU induced rat
gliomas of different stages (P90, P135 and P180) for the expression of
beta-catenin, Lef1, Tcf4 and their targets c-Myc, N-Myc and cyclin D1. Western
blot analysis revealed upregulation of beta-catenin, Lef1, Tcf4, c-Myc, N-Myc and
cyclin D1 in gliomas compared to controls and their levels were progressively
increased from initial stage (P90) to progression stage (P180). In consistent
with this, immunohistochemistry revealed the cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation
of beta-catenin, and nuclear positivity was evident for Lef1, Tcf4, c-Myc, N-Myc 
and cyclin D1. Based on these results, we conclude that Wnt/beta-catenin pathway 
may play a major role in the tumorigenesis and tumor progression in ENU induced
rat gliomas.

PMID: 19148749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 15;15(2):622-31. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0772.

Polyphenon E inhibits the growth of human Barrett's and aerodigestive
adenocarcinoma cells by suppressing cyclin D1 expression.

Song S(1), Krishnan K, Liu K, Bresalier RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA.

PURPOSE: Green tea consumption has been shown to exhibit cancer-preventive
activities in preclinical studies. Polyphenon E (Poly E) is a well-defined green 
tea-derived catechin mixture. This study was designed to determine the effects of
Poly E on the growth of human Barrett's and aerodigestive adenocarcinoma cells
and the mechanisms involved in growth regulation by this agent.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Human adenocarcinoma cells and immortalized Barrett's
epithelial cells were used as model systems.
RESULTS: Poly E inhibited the proliferation of immortalized Barrett's cells as
well as various adenocarcinoma cells, and this was associated with the
down-regulation of cyclin D1 protein expression. Inhibition of cyclin D1 led to
dephosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein in a dose-dependent manner; these
changes were associated with G(1) cell cycle arrest. Poly E down-regulated cyclin
D1 promoter activity and mRNA expression, suggesting transcriptional repression, 
and this correlated with decreased nuclear beta-catenin and beta-catenin/TCF4
transcriptional activity. MG132, an inhibitor of 26S proteosome, blocked the Poly
E-induced down-regulation of cyclin D1, and Poly E promoted cyclin D1
polyubiquitination, suggesting that Poly E also inhibits cyclin D1 expression by 
promoting its degradation.
CONCLUSION: Poly E inhibits growth of transformed aerodigestive epithelial cells 
by suppressing cyclin D1 expression through both transcriptional and
posttranslational mechanisms. These results provide insight into the mechanisms
by which Poly E inhibits growth of Barrett's and adenocarcinoma cells, and
provides a rationale for using this agent as a potential chemopreventive and
therapeutic strategy for esophageal adenocarcinoma and its precursor, Barrett's
esophagus.

PMCID: PMC2925407
PMID: 19147768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Nutr. 2009 Mar;139(3):439-46. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.096461. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids modulate the effect of TCF7L2 gene variants on
postprandial lipemia.

Warodomwichit D(1), Arnett DK, Kabagambe EK, Tsai MY, Hixson JE, Straka RJ,
Province M, An P, Lai CQ, Borecki I, Ordovas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been recently associated with
diabetes risk, and it may exert its effect through metabolic syndrome
(MetS)-related traits and be subjected to modification by environmental factors. 
We investigated the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), rs7903146
and rs12255372, within the TCF7L2 locus on postprandial lipemia and other
MetS-related traits and their modulation by dietary fat. Data were collected from
1083 European Americans participating in the Genetics of Lipid Lowering Drugs and
Diet Network Study. Carriers of the minor T allele at the C/T rs7903146 SNP had
higher fasting plasma glucose (P = 0.012), lower homeostasis model assessment of 
beta cell function (P = 0.041), higher plasma VLDL (P = 0.035), and lower large
LDL particle (P = 0.007) concentrations and higher risk of MetS (P = 0.011) than 
CC individuals. Moreover, we identified significant interactions between this SNP
and PUFA intake modulating fasting VLDL particle concentrations (P = 0.016) and
postprandial triglycerides (TG) (P = 0.028), chylomicrons (P = 0.025), total VLDL
(P = 0.026), and large VLDL (P = 0.018) concentrations. Thus, only T allele
carriers with a PUFA intake > or = 7.36% of energy had elevated fasting plasma
VLDL concentrations and postprandial TG-rich lipoproteins. These variables did
not differ in T allele carriers and noncarriers in the low-PUFA intake group.
Moreover, these significant interactions were due exclusively to (n-6) PUFA
intake. In summary, high (n-6) PUFA intakes (> or = 6.62% of energy intake) were 
associated with atherogenic dyslipidemia in carriers of the minor T allele at the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP and may predispose them to MetS, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC2714378
PMID: 19141698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Feb;89(2):558-67. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.26720. Epub 2009
Jan 13.

Prolonged saturated fat-induced, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
elevation is associated with adipokine imbalance and liver injury in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis: dysregulated enteroadipocyte axis as a novel feature of fatty
liver.

Musso G(1), Gambino R, Pacini G, De Michieli F, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Gradenigo Hospital, Turin, Italy. giovanni_musso@yahoo.it

BACKGROUND: Genetic and acquired mechanisms underlying the association of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) with diabetes are unknown.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) was recently linked to
adipocyte metabolism and obesity-related metabolic disorders, including NAFLD,
induced by an excess of saturated fatty acids (SFAs), but its role in vivo, as
well as underlying mechanisms, is unknown. We hypothesized that altered GIP
secretion may contribute to the pathogenesis of NAFLD.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed GIP response to SFA ingestion and its effect on glucose
and lipid metabolism and on liver injury in patients with nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH).
DESIGN: Thirty-two nonobese, nondiabetic patients with NASH and 32 healthy
controls matched for age, body mass index, and sex underwent a 7-d dietary
record, an oral-glucose-tolerance test (OGTT), and a high-fat-load test.
OGTT-derived indexes of glucose homeostasis were calculated; circulating
lipoproteins, total antioxidant status, GIP, adiponectin, resistin, and
cytokeratin-18 fragments (markers of hepatocyte apoptosis) after a high-fat meal 
were assessed. All subjects were genotyped for transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) polymorphism.
RESULTS: Patients with NASH exhibited a prolonged GIP elevation after fat
ingestion. GIP response correlated directly with hepatic steatosis, postprandial 
resistin, and free fatty acid (FFA) increase and inversely with beta cell
function and incretin effect. Dietary polyunsaturated:saturated fatty acid ratio 
and TCF7L2 polymorphism independently predicted postprandial GIP response.
Cytokeratin-18 fragments increased significantly postprandially in both groups
but more consistently in patients with NASH; their increase was predicted by
postprandial adiponectin and FFA responses.
CONCLUSIONS: GIP response to SFA ingestion is prolonged in nondiabetic patients
with NASH and is correlated with liver disease, an unfavorable dynamic adipokine 
profile, and beta cell dysfunction, which provides a rationale for GIP antagonism
in these subjects.

PMID: 19141695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Blood. 2009 Apr 23;113(17):4016-26. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-08-175901. Epub 2009 
Jan 8.

Gene expression profiling of ATL patients: compilation of disease-related genes
and evidence for TCF4 involvement in BIRC5 gene expression and cell viability.

Pise-Masison CA(1), Radonovich M, Dohoney K, Morris JC, O'Mahony D, Lee MJ,
Trepel J, Waldmann TA, Janik JE, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is an aggressive and fatal disease. We have 
examined 32 patients with smoldering, chronic, lymphoma and acute leukemia using 
Affymetrix HG-U133A2.0 arrays. Using the BRB array program, we identified genes
differentially expressed in leukemia cells compared with normal lymphocytes.
Several unique genes were identified that were overexpressed in leukemic cells,
including TNFSF11, RGS13, MAFb, CSPG2, C/EBP-alpha, and TCF4; 200 of the most
highly overexpressed ATL genes were analyzed by the Pathway Studio, version 4.0
program. ATL leukemia cells were characterized by an increase in genes linked to 
"central" genes CDC2/cyclin B1, SYK/LYN, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and 
BIRC5. Because of its potential therapeutic importance, we focused our studies on
the regulation and function of BIRC5, whose expression was increased in 13 of 14 
leukemia samples. TCF4 reporter assays and transfection of DN-TCF4 demonstrated
that TCF4 regulates BIRC5 gene expression. Functionally, transfection of ATL
cells with BIRC5 shRNA decreased BIRC5 expression and cell viability 80%.
Clinical treatment of ATL patients with Zenapax or bortezomib decreased BIRC5
expression and cell viability. These experiments represent the first direct
experimental evidence that BIRC5 plays an important role in ATL cell viability
and provides important insight into ATL genesis and potential targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC2673128
PMID: 19131553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Neurosci Res. 2009 May 15;87(7):1532-46. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21989.

Expression and molecular diversity of Tcf7l2 in the developing murine cerebellum 
and brain.

Nazwar TA(1), Glassmann A, Schilling K.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut, Anatomie and Zellbiologie,
Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The Wingless family of secreted proteins impinges on multiple aspects of
vertebrate nervous system development, from early global patterning and cell fate
decision to synaptogenesis. Here, we mapped the developmental expression of the
Tcf7l2, which is key to the canonical Wingless signaling cascade, in the
developing cerebellum. The exclusive and transient expression of Tcf7l2 in
ventricular and Olig2-defined precursor cells within the cerebellar anlage, and
its predominant expression in postmitotic neurons in the midbrain/inferior
colliculus allowed us to ask whether cell type-specific differences are also
reflected in splice isoform variability. We also included in this analysis
intestinal epithelia, where Tcf7l2 function has been intensively studied. Our
data reveal extensive variability of Tcf7l2 splicing in the central nervous
system. Additional variability in brain-expressed Tcf7l2 is generated by a length
polymorphism of expressed mRNAs in a stretch of normally nine adenines found at
the beginning of exon 18, reminiscent of variability observed at the same site in
cancers with microsatellite instability. A consensus emerging from our data is
that the expression of isoforms comprising or lacking the C-clamp motif, which
has been linked by in vitro studies to the regulation of cell growth, is indeed
tightly correlated with the proliferative status in vivo.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19125404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Gene. 2009 Mar 1;432(1-2):112-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.12.002. Epub 2008 Dec
16.

The Bcl-w promoter is activated by beta-catenin/TCF4 in human colorectal
carcinoma cells.

Lapham A(1), Adams JE, Paterson A, Lee M, Brimmell M, Packham G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Clinical Centre, Cancer Sciences Division, University of
Southampton School of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road,
Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.

The antiapoptotic BCL-2 family protein BCL-W is often overexpressed in colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) where it correlates with advanced stage and expression of p53. In
this work we have analysed the Bcl-w promoter to identify potential regulators of
BCL-W expression in CRC cells. The Bcl-w promoter was highly active in cell lines
derived from CRC as well as other cancer types. Although expression of p53 and
BCL-W correlate in CRC, overexpression of wild type or mutant p53 did not
significantly alter Bcl-w promoter activity, and deletion of endogenous p53 did
not alter the expression of Bcl-w RNA in HCT116 cells. Promoter deletion analysis
lead to the identification of a potential binding site for TCF/LEF factors,
obligate binding partners for beta-catenin, a downstream target of the WNT
signalling pathway. TCF4 and beta-catenin interacted with the Bcl-w promoter in
intact HCT116 cells and mutation of this site significantly decreased promoter
activity. The activity of the Bcl-w promoter was increased or decreased,
respectively, by overexpression of beta-catenin or dominant negative TCF4.
beta-catenin is activated in the majority of CRC and these results suggest that
BCL-W may function as a downstream effector of inappropriate WNT/beta-catenin
signalling.

PMID: 19124064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hepatology. 2009 Feb;49(2):426-35. doi: 10.1002/hep.22659.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism modulates glucose and lipid
homeostasis, adipokine profile, and hepatocyte apoptosis in NASH.

Musso G(1), Gambino R, Pacini G, Pagano G, Durazzo M, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Gradenigo Hospital, Turin, Italy.

Genetic factors underlying the association of NAFLD with diabetes and
atherosclerosis are unknown. Recent human studies suggest transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism predisposes to diabetes through modulation of
beta-cell function and modulates lipid levels in familial dyslipidemia. Emerging 
experimental evidence connects TCF7L2 to adipocyte metabolism and lipid
homeostasis, as well. We tested if TCF7L2 polymorphism is a risk factor for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and if it modulates liver injury,
glucose homeostasis, lipoprotein, and adipokine profiles in NASH. TCF7L2 genotype
and dietary habits of 78 nondiabetic normolipidemic NAFLD subjects and 156 age-, 
body mass index-, sex-matched healthy controls were assessed. In 39 biopsy-proven
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and matched controls TCF7L2 polymorphism was 
correlated to liver histology and oral glucose tolerance test-derived parameters 
of glucose homeostasis. Patients with NASH and controls consumed a high-fat meal 
and TCF7L2 genotype was correlated to postprandial circulating lipoproteins,
adipokines, and cytokeratin-18 fragments. The TCF7L2 CT/TT genotype was more
frequent in NAFLD and predicted the presence and severity of liver disease, of
beta-cell dysfunction, of reduced incretin effect and hepatic insulin resistance 
in NASH; it also modulated postprandial hepatocyte apoptosis, lipoproteins, and
adipokine profiles in both groups.CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 polymorphism predisposes to 
NAFLD and significantly impacts liver injury, glucose homeostasis, and
postprandial lipoprotein and adipokine responses to fat ingestion. This
polymorphism also modulates a fat-induced increase in circulating markers of
hepatocyte apoptosis in NASH. Targeting postprandial lipemia, at least in at-risk
TCF7L2 genotypes, may improve liver disease and glucose dysmetabolism in these
patients.

PMID: 19105201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mucosal Immunol. 2008 Nov;1 Suppl 1:S67-74. doi: 10.1038/mi.2008.48.

Barrier dysfunction due to distinct defensin deficiencies in small intestinal and
colonic Crohn's disease.

Wehkamp J(1), Koslowski M, Wang G, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Robert Bosch Hospital, Internal Medicine I, Stuttgart, Germany.
jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

Defensins are endogenous antibiotics with broad microbicidal activity. A
disturbed antimicrobial defense, as provided by Paneth and other epithelial
defensins, seems to be a critical factor in the pathogenesis of inflammatory
bowel diseases. Conspicuously, there is a relative lack of Paneth-cell
alpha-defensins in ileal Crohn's disease (CD), both in the absence of a pattern
recognition receptor nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2)
frameshift mutation and, even more pronounced, in its presence. This deficit is
independent of concurrent active inflammation and cannot be seen in active small 
intestinal ulcerative colitis (UC; pouchitis) as well as NOD2 wild-type graft vs.
host ileitis. After intestinal transplantation, in case of NOD2 mutation,
defensins are decreased before the onset of inflammation. In the majority of
patients, the Paneth-cell deficiency is mediated by Wnt-TCF4, which suggests a
disturbed Paneth-cell differentiation. In contrast, colonic CD is characterized
by an impaired induction of mucosal beta-defensins, partly because of a low copy 
number of the beta-defensin gene cluster. In both ileal and colonic CD, the lack 
in defensins results in a broadly diminished antibacterial killing by the mucosa,
which can also be found independent of inflammation. In summary, the main disease
locations can be linked to distinct mechanisms of epithelial barrier dysfunction.

PMID: 19079235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Cancer. 2009 Apr 1;124(7):1526-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24072.

HINT1 inhibits beta-catenin/TCF4, USF2 and NFkappaB activity in human hepatoma
cells.

Wang L(1), Li H, Zhang Y, Santella RM, Weinstein IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Kunming Medical College, Kunming, China.

In this study we explored the relevance of Hint, a novel tumor suppressor gene,
to human hepatoma. The human hepatoma cell lines Hep3B and HepG2 express very low
levels of the HINT1 protein but the Huh7 cells express a relatively high level.
In Hep3B and HepG2 cells, but not in Huh7 cells, the promoter region of Hint1 is 
partially methylated and treatment with 5-azadcdeoxycytidine increased expression
of the HINT1 protein and Hint1 mRNA in Hep3B and HepG2 cells. Increased
expression of HINT1 in HepG2 cells markedly inhibited their growth. It also
inhibited the transcriptional activities of beta-catenin/TCF4, and USF2, and
inhibited the expression of endogenous cyclin D1 and TGFbeta2. Furthermore, HINT1
co-immunoprecipitated with USF2 in extracts of Hep2 cells. HINT1 also inhibited
NFkappaB transcription factor reporter activity and inhibited translocation of
the endogenous p65 protein to the nucleus of HepG2 cells. Therefore, decreased
expression of the Hint1 gene through epigenetic silencing may play a role in
enhancing the growth of a subset of human hepatoma by increasing the expression
of genes controlled by the transcription factors beta-catenin, USF2, and
NFkappaB.

PMCID: PMC2667231
PMID: 19089909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Pharmacol Sci. 2008 Dec;108(4):535-44. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Inhibition of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma promotes
tumorigenesis through activation of the beta-catenin / T cell factor (TCF)
pathway in the mouse intestine.

Fujisawa T(1), Sugiyama M, Tomimoto A, Wada K, Endo H, Takahashi H, Yoneda K,
Yoneda M, Inamori M, Saito S, Terauchi Y, Kadowaki T, Tsuchiya N, Nakagama H,
Nakajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Although peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is strongly
expressed in the intestinal epithelium, the role of PPARgamma in intestinal
tumorigenesis has not yet been elucidated. To address this issue, we investigated
the effect of PPARgamma inhibition and its mechanism on intestinal tumorigenesis 
using a selective antagonist, T0070907. We treated Apc(Min/+) mice and
carcinogen-induced colon cancer model C57BL/6 mice with T0070907 and counted the 
number of spontaneous polyps and aberrant crypt foci and observed cell
proliferation and beta-catenin protein in the colon epithelium. To investigate
its mechanism, the changes of beta-catenin/TCF (T cell factor) transcriptional
activity and location of beta-catenin induced by T0070907 were investigated in
the colon cancer cell lines. T0070907 promoted polyp formation in the small
intestine of Apc(Min/+) mice and aberrant crypt foci in the colon of C57BL/6
mice. PPARgamma inhibition promoted cell proliferation and increased expressions 
of the c-myc and cyclin D1 genes and the beta-catenin protein in the colon
epithelium. In vitro, cell proliferation was promoted, but it was inhibited by
the transfection of dominant-negative Tcf4. T0070907 increased beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional activity and beta-catenin protein in the cytsol and nucleus, but 
relatively decreased it on the cell membrane. PPARgamma antagonist promotes
tumorigenesis in the small intestine and colon through stimulation of epithelial 
cell proliferation. beta-Catenin contributes to the promotion of tumorigenesis by
PPARgamma antagonist due to activation of TCF/LEF (lymphoid enhancer factor)
transcriptional factor.

PMID: 19075513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1894-907. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2206.

Menin promotes the Wnt signaling pathway in pancreatic endocrine cells.

Chen G(1), A J, Wang M, Farley S, Lee LY, Lee LC, Sawicki MP.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-6904, USA.

Menin is a tumor suppressor protein mutated in patients with multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1. We show that menin is essential for canonical Wnt/beta-catenin 
signaling in cultured rodent islet tumor cells. In these cells, overexpression of
menin significantly enhances TCF gene assay reporter activity in response to
beta-catenin activation. Contrastingly, inhibition of menin expression with Men1 
siRNA decreases TCF reporter gene activity. Likewise, multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1 disease associated missense mutations of menin abrogate the
ability to increase TCF reporter gene activity. We show that menin physically
interacts with proteins involved in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway,
including beta-catenin, TCF3 (TCFL1), and weakly with TCF4 (TCFL2). Menin
overexpression increases expression of the Wnt/beta-catenin downstream target
gene Axin2, which is associated with increased H3K4 trimethylation of the Axin2
gene promoter. Moreover, inhibition of menin expression by siRNA abrogates H3K4
trimethylation and Axin2 gene expression. Based on these studies, we hypothesized
that Wnt signaling could inhibit islet cell proliferation because loss of menin
function is thought to increase endocrine tumor cell proliferation. TGP61 rodent 
islet tumor cells treated with a glycogen synthase kinase 3beta inhibitor that
increases Wnt pathway signaling had decreased cell proliferation compared with
vehicle-treated cells. Collectively, these data suggest that menin has an
essential role in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling through a mechanism that eventually 
affects histone trimethylation of the downstream target gene Axin2, and
activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling inhibits islet tumor cell proliferation.

PMID: 19074834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Diabetes. 2009 Mar;58(3):609-19. doi: 10.2337/db08-1180. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Dact1, a nutritionally regulated preadipocyte gene, controls adipogenesis by
coordinating the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling network.

Lagathu C(1), Christodoulides C, Virtue S, Cawthorn WP, Franzin C, Kimber WA,
Nora ED, Campbell M, Medina-Gomez G, Cheyette BN, Vidal-Puig AJ, Sethi JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Metabolic Science-Metabolic Research Laboratories and Department 
of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Wnt signaling inhibits adipogenesis, but its regulation, physiological
relevance, and molecular effectors are poorly understood. Here, we identify the
Wnt modulator Dapper1/Frodo1 (Dact1) as a new preadipocyte gene involved in the
regulation of murine and human adipogenesis.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Changes in Dact1 expression were investigated in
three in vitro models of adipogenesis. In vitro gain- and loss-of-function
studies were used to investigate the mechanism of Dact1 action during
adipogenesis. The in vivo regulation of Dact1 and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling were
investigated in murine models of altered nutritional status, of pharmacological
stimulation of in vivo adipogenesis, and during the development of dietary and
genetic obesity.
RESULTS: Dact1 is a preadipocyte gene that decreases during adipogenesis.
However, Dact1 knockdown impairs adipogenesis through activation of the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, and this is reversed by treatment with the
secreted Wnt antagonist, secreted Frizzled-related protein 1 (Sfrp1). In
contrast, constitutive Dact1 overexpression promotes adipogenesis and confers
resistance to Wnt ligand-induced antiadipogenesis through increased expression of
endogenous Sfrps and reduced expression of Wnts. In vivo, in white adipose
tissue, Dact1 and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling also exhibit coordinated expression 
profiles in response to altered nutritional status, in response to
pharmacological stimulation of in vivo adipogenesis, and during the development
of dietary and genetic obesity.
CONCLUSIONS: Dact1 regulates adipogenesis through coordinated effects on gene
expression that selectively alter intracellular and paracrine/autocrine
components of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. These novel insights into
the molecular mechanisms controlling adipose tissue plasticity provide a
functional network with therapeutic potential against diseases, such as obesity
and associated metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2646059
PMID: 19073771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Physiol. 2009 Feb 1;587(3):641-54. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.162719. Epub 2008
Dec 8.

Dissociation of E-cadherin and beta-catenin in a mouse model of total parenteral 
nutrition: a mechanism for the loss of epithelial cell proliferation and villus
atrophy.

Feng Y(1), Sun X, Yang H, Teitelbaum DH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, University of Michigan, Mott Children's Hospital
F3970, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5245, USA.

Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) leads a loss of epithelial barrier function,
decline in epithelial cell (EC) proliferation, and decreased expression of
E-cadherin. As a large portion of intracellular beta-catenin is tightly
associated with E-cadherin, we hypothesized that the loss of E-cadherin would
result in a redistribution of intracellular beta-catenin, and could be a
contributing mechanism for this TPN-associated loss of EC proliferation. An
assessment of small bowel epithelium was performed in mice given either enteral
nutrition (Control) or intravenous nutrition (TPN). TPN significantly
down-regulated E-cadherin and beta-catenin expression, and resulted in a loss of 
a colocalization of these factors. TPN also up-regulated phosphorylated
(p)-beta-catenin (Ser31/33,Thr41) and down-regulated (p)-beta-catenin(Ser552)
expression. To further address mechanisms driving this, we observed a significant
decrease in the abundance of p-AKT and p-GSK3beta expression, and an associated
decline in tcf-4 transcription factors (cyclin D1, c-myc and Axin2), as well as a
loss of EC proliferation by 7 days. To address whether the mechanism driving
these changes was the absence of nutritional factors, glutamine was added to the 
TPN solution. This resulted in a partial restoration of beta-catenin expression
and EC proliferation, suggesting that an alteration in nutrient delivery may
affect many of these changes. Based on these findings, the loss of EC
proliferation with TPN may well be due to a loss of total beta-catenin, as well
as a concomitant change in the differential expression of beta-catenin
phosphorylation sites, and a reduction in beta-catenin mediated tcf-4
transcription. This potential pathway may well explain many of the findings of
mucosal atrophy associated with TPN.

PMCID: PMC2670086
PMID: 19064618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Lett. 2009 Apr 18;276(2):152-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.11.003. Epub
2008 Dec 6.

Dickkopf-4 is frequently down-regulated and inhibits growth of colorectal cancer 
cells.

Baehs S(1), Herbst A, Thieme SE, Perschl C, Behrens A, Scheel S, Jung A, Brabletz
T, Göke B, Blum H, Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Grosshadern, University of Munich,
Marchioninistrasse 15, Munich, Germany.

Like Dickkopf-1 (DKK1), DKK4 is a target of beta-catenin/Tcf-4 in colorectal
cancer. However, as a negative regulator of Wnt signalling its function in
colorectal cancer cells is not well understood. We report that DKK4 is frequently
down-regulated in colorectal cancer cell lines with deregulated
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 and in primary colorectal cancers. Exposure of cancer cells to
DKK4 strongly inhibits basal beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signalling activity, cancer cell 
growth and cell cycle progression. Therefore, loss of this negative feed-back
loop provides Wnt factor expressing cancer cells with a growth advantage. Our
data demonstrate that DKK4 is an important negative regulator of colon cancer
cell growth.

PMID: 19059704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Feb;17(2):323-9. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.557. Epub
2008 Dec 4.

Association analyses between type 2 diabetes genes and obesity traits in pigs.

Du ZQ(1), Fan B, Zhao X, Amoako R, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

To investigate candidate genes involved in human type 2 diabetes (T2D) for
obesity-related phenotypes in pigs. Statistical association analyses of genes
with fat deposition were realized in a pig reference family constructed by two
breeds, Berkshire and Yorkshire. Extensive sequencing was then attempted to
discover the causative polymorphism. Genes implied in human T2D development,
TCF7L2, WFS1, FTO, SLC30A8, and GCKR, were mapped on Sus scrofa chromosomes 14,
8, 6, 4, and 3, respectively. Only TCF7L2 was significantly associated with five 
fat traits in pigs. Further investigation demonstrated that one haplotype (HapB),
but not the HapA (homologous to the region for human T2D susceptibility where
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 is located), is significantly
associated with the fat-related traits. In HapB, two SNPs in TCF7L2 exon 8 and
intron 10 are significantly associated with five fat traits, and may be in
linkage disequilibrium with the causative variant with additive effects on all
four backfat traits, and the total lipid percentage. Pigs of genotype TT for the 
SNP in exon 8 have only one transcript isoform (the one without exon 4), and
lower backfat depth. Candidate gene analyses could provide novel ideas about how 
these genes function in T2D susceptibility in human, and support that the pig can
be a suitable model for human obesity and T2D research. Further replication of
this research in other pig populations should be considered, so that the
possibility of utilizing these genetic markers in pig breeding or in animal model
research can be explored.

PMID: 19057525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Dec 4;9:106. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-106.

TCF7L2 variant genotypes and type 2 diabetes risk in Brazil: significant
association, but not a significant tool for risk stratification in the general
population.

Marquezine GF(1), Pereira AC, Sousa AG, Mill JG, Hueb WA, Krieger JE.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, University of São Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
g.marq2@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene are strongly associated with
large increments in type 2 diabetes risk in different populations worldwide. In
this study, we aimed to confirm the effect of the TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146
on diabetes risk in a Brazilian population and to assess the use of this genetic 
marker in improving diabetes risk prediction in the general population.
METHODS: We genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) rs7903146 of the 
TCF7L2 gene in 560 patients with known coronary disease enrolled in the MASS II
(Medicine, Angioplasty, or Surgery Study) Trial and in 1,449 residents of
Vitoria, in Southeast Brazil. The associations of this gene variant to diabetes
risk and metabolic characteristics in these two different populations were
analyzed. To access the potential benefit of using this marker for diabetes risk 
prediction in the general population we analyzed the impact of this genetic
variant on a validated diabetes risk prediction tool based on clinical
characteristics developed for the Brazilian general population.
RESULTS: SNP rs7903146 of the TCF7L2 gene was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes in the MASS-II population (OR = 1.57 per T allele, p = 0.0032),
confirming, in the Brazilian population, previous reports of the literature.
Addition of this polymorphism to an established clinical risk prediction score
did not increased model accuracy (both area under ROC curve equal to 0.776).
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele is associated with a 1.57 increased risk
for type 2 diabetes in a Brazilian cohort of patients with known coronary heart
disease. However, the inclusion of this polymorphism in a risk prediction tool
developed for the general population resulted in no improvement of performance.
This is the first study, to our knowledge, that has confirmed this recent
association in a South American population and adds to the great consistency of
this finding in studies around the world. Finally, confirming the biological
association of a genetic marker does not guarantee improvement on already
established screening tools based solely on demographic variables.

PMCID: PMC2632659
PMID: 19055834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Apr;117(4):186-90. doi:
10.1055/s-0028-1100419. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Loci of TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q and the susceptibility of their
genetic polymorphisms to type 2 diabetes.

Nordman S(1), Ostenson CG, Efendic S, Gu HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Sweden.

TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q23-25 reside within the linkage region for 
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Previous studies including ours have demonstrated that
genetic polymorphisms in these three loci are associated with T2D, respectively. 
But, it is unclear whether TCF7L2, independently or interactively with HHEX and
IDE, confer the susceptibility to T2D. In the present study, we first replicated 
genetic association study of the TCF7L2 gene in a Swedish cohort including 528
non-diabetic healthy controls and 243 T2D patients and then evaluated combining
effect from common risk polymorphisms in TCF7L2-HHEX-IDE loci. T2D patients were 
diagnosed in the intermediate study time. To avoid influence from anti-diabetic
treatment, baseline data in all T2D patients were used for analysis. We found
that SNPs rs7901695, rs4506565, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
strongly associated with T2D (p<0.004). In rs7903146, T2D patients carrying
genotypes CT or TT had higher fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels (p=0.042) and
lower HOMA-beta index (p=0.015) and BMI (p=0.015) compared to the patients
carrying CC genotype. Furthermore, the risk alleles from TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism either with IDE rs2251101 polymorphism (p=0.0257, OR=1.398) or with 
HHEX rs1544210 polymorphism (p=0.0024, OR=1.514) were significantly associated
with T2D. When risk alleles from three loci were combined, the association with
T2D remained significant (p=0.0018, OR=1.506). The present study thus provides
evidence that TCF7L2, as the main gene, together with HHEX and IDE loci have
combining effects on genetic predisposition to T2D.

PMID: 19053027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Feb;94(2):504-10. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2694. Epub
2008 Dec 2.

Single nucleotide transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms in
antiislet autoantibody-negative patients at onset of diabetes.

Yu J(1), Steck AK, Babu S, Yu L, Miao D, McFann K, Hutton J, Eisenbarth GS,
Klingensmith G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
jeesuk_yu@yahoo.com

CONTEXT: There is controversy as to whether type 2 diabetes genetic
susceptibility contributes to type 1 diabetes, and it is not known what
proportion of islet autoantibody-negative new onset subjects have type 2 diabetes
risk alleles.
OBJECTIVES: We designed this study to evaluate whether two type 2
diabetes-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with the development of islet
autoantibody-negative diabetes vs. islet autoantibody-positive diabetes in young 
patients and whether these SNPs are associated with specific clinical phenotypes.
DESIGN: Autoantibody against glutamic acid decarboxylase 65, islet cell antibody 
512bdc (form of IA-2), insulin, ZnT8 transporter, and cytoplasmic islet cell
antibody were assayed in patients with new onset diabetes seen at the Barbara
Davis Center using sera obtained within 2 wk of diagnosis. We genotyped two
noncoding variants in the TCF7L2 gene, rs12255372 and rs7903146, in diabetic
subjects and normal controls.
RESULTS: A total of 140 patients (15.7%) were negative for all islet
autoantibodies among 893 subjects less than age 25 at the onset of diabetes. The 
allele and genotype frequencies of two SNPs showed that these are associated
(odds ratio up to 4) with the development of diabetes in the
autoantibody-negative diabetic cohort, but not in the autoantibody-positive
diabetic cohort.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes susceptibility alleles are associated with
islet autoantibody-negative but not autoantibody-positive new onset diabetes in
young patients.

PMCID: PMC2646512
PMID: 19050058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;87(1):1-2. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.93. Epub 2008 Dec 2.

Dendritic cells: transcriptional control of plasmacytoid dendritic cell
development by E2-2.

Esashi E, Watowich SS.

PMID: 19048021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):493-8. doi: 10.2337/db07-1785. Epub 2008 Nov 25.

Replication study of candidate genes associated with type 2 diabetes based on
genome-wide screening.

Tabara Y(1), Osawa H, Kawamoto R, Onuma H, Shimizu I, Miki T, Kohara K, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research and Education, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon City, Ehime, Japan. tabara@m.ehime-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: The present study was conducted to confirm possible associations
between candidate genes from genome-wide association studies and type 2 diabetes 
in Japanese diabetic patients and a community-based general population. A total
of 11 previously reported single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8, and KCNJ11 genes were analyzed.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Candidate SNPs were genotyped in 506 type 2 diabetic
patients and 402 control subjects and meta-analyzed with six previous association
studies in Japanese patients. Associations with fasting plasma insulin levels
were investigated in a general population sample (n = 1,963, 61 +/- 13 years).
RESULTS: In our case-control subjects, susceptibility to type 2 diabetes was
replicated in TCF7L2 (rs12255372), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, rs7754840), HHEX
(rs7923837), IGF2BP2 (rs4402960 and rs1470579), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), and
SLC30A8 (rs13266634). In addition to these polymorphisms, meta-analysis confirmed
the association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility with KCNJ11 rs5219, TCF7L2
rs7903146, and HHEX rs1111875. The TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism showed the
highest odds ratio (OR) for type 2 diabetes (OR 1.714 [1.298-2.263]). Odds ratio 
of other polymorphisms ranged from 1.13 to 1.41. The risk allele of CDKAL1
rs7756992 was significantly associated with lower insulin levels in type 2
diabetic patients after adjustment for other confounding factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Type 2 diabetes susceptibility of seven candidate genes was
confirmed in Japanese. Conservation of susceptible loci for type 2 diabetes was
independent of ethnic background.

PMCID: PMC2628625
PMID: 19033397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(11-12):972-82. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0339-2. Epub 2008 Nov
18.

Common coding variant in the TCF7L2 gene and study of the association with type 2
diabetes in Japanese subjects.

Kunika K(1), Tanahashi T, Numata S, Ueno S, Ohmori T, Nakamura N, Tsugawa K,
Miyawaki K, Moritani M, Inoue H, Itakura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Information, Institute for Genome Research, The University
of Tokushima, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Genetic variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene affect the
risk of type 2 diabetes in populations with multiple ethnic groups. However, a
comprehensive survey of this gene has not been done for a Japanese population.
Thus, we conducted this gene-based association study, in which the common genetic
variants were analyzed. Using 24 Japanese type 2 diabetic subjects, we first
screened a 9.5 kb region, which included the entire coding sequence, to assess
potential functional variants of TCF7L2. Sequencing revealed a common coding
variant (Pro477Thr) in exon 14 of TCF7L2 that was not enrolled in the public SNP 
database. Nineteen SNPs and the microsatellite DG10S478 were genotyped across the
gene in 2,877 unrelated Japanese subjects. This independent screen identified the
previously reported rs7903146 with a strongest association (allele P = 0.0001,
odds ratio = 1.59 [95% confidence interval 1.25-2.01]), but there was no
significant association between Pro477Thr and type 2 diabetes (allele P = 0.64). 
Expression of the Pro477Thr variant did not alter TCF7L2 expression in 30
lymphoblast cells. Although a genotypic effect of Pro477Thr on expression of
TCF7L2 was not apparent, Pro477Thr was identified as a common variant of TCF7L2
in 2,877 Japanese subjects. Further functional studies are required to determine 
the possible effect of this coding variant on type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 19012045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2008;20(8):935-46.

Progesterone regulation of the endometrial WNT system in the ovine uterus.

Satterfield MC(1), Song G, Hayashi K, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

WNT signalling regulates cell proliferation, differentiation, polarity and
organisation. The present study investigated the effects of progesterone (P4) on 
the endometrial WNT system in relation to blastocyst development and growth in
sheep. Ewes received daily intramuscular injections of either corn oil (CO)
vehicle or 25 mg P4 from 36 h after mating (Day 0) until hysterectomy on Day 9 or
12. Another group received P4 until Day 8 and 75 mg mifepristone (RU486) from Day
8 to Day 12. Early P4 treatment increased blastocyst growth on Days 9 and 12,
whereas no blastocysts were recovered from P4 + RU486-treated ewes. Levels of
WNT2 mRNA in the stroma and WNT11 and WNT7A mRNAs in the endometrial luminal
epithelia (LE) were reduced in P4 + RU486-treated ewes on Day 9, whereas WNT11
mRNA was reduced in the endometria of both P4- and P4 + RU486-treated ewes on Day
12. On Day 12, WNT2 mRNA was increased in the stroma, WNT7A mRNA was increased in
the LE and WNT5A mRNA was increased in the LE and stroma of P4 + RU486- compared 
with P4-treated ewes. DKK1 mRNA was absent in the endometrial stroma of P4 +
RU486-treated ewes. Expression of transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2) was
transiently increased in endometrial epithelia of P4-treated ewes on Day 9, but
decreased in these ewes on Day 12. MSX1 mRNA was decreased by P4 treatment on Day
9 and levels of both MSX1 and MSX2 mRNA were higher in P4 + RU486-treated ewes on
Day 12. Thus, P4 modulates the endometrial WNT system and elicits a transient
decline in selected WNT pathways and signalling components, which is hypothesised
to alter tight and adherens junctions, thereby stimulating blastocyst growth and 
development.

PMID: 19007558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Neurosci. 2008 Dec;11(12):1383-91. doi: 10.1038/nn.2226. Epub 2008 Nov 9.

Beta-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling regulates neurogenesis in the ventral
telencephalon.

Gulacsi AA(1), Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300
York Avenue, Box 244, New York, New York, 10065, USA.

Development of the telencephalon involves the coordinated growth of diversely
patterned brain structures. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of 
beta-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling in proliferation and fate determination
during cerebral cortical development. We found that beta-catenin-mediated Wnt
signaling critically maintained progenitor proliferation in the subcortical
(pallidal) telencephalon. Targeted deletion of beta-catenin in mice severely
impaired proliferation in the medial ganglionic eminence without grossly altering
differentiated fate. Several lines of evidence suggest that this phenotype is
primarily the result of a loss of canonical Wnt signaling. As previous studies
have suggested that the ventral patterning factor Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) also
stimulates dorsal telencephalic proliferation, we propose a model whereby Wnt and
Shh signaling promote distinct dorsal-ventral patterning while also having
broader effects on proliferation that serve to coordinate the growth of
telencephalic subregions.

PMCID: PMC2737268
PMID: 18997789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Probes. 2009 Feb;23(1):52-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2008.10.001. Epub 2008
Nov 1.

Rapid and cost effective genotyping method for polymorphisms in PPARG, PPARGC1
and TCF7L2 genes.

Habalová V(1), Klimcáková L, Zidzik J, Tkác I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Safárik University, Tr.
SNP 1, 040 66 Kosice, Slovakia. viera.habalova@upjs.sk

Polymorphisms (rs1801282, rs8192678, rs7903146) of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG), peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PPARGC1A) and transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) have recently been associated with different diseases, mainly type 2
diabetes. An assay using unlabeled probes and the LightCycler or Rotor-Gene
instruments was developed for genotyping of these three polymorphisms. Asymmetric
polymerase chain reaction was used, followed by melting analysis of the unlabeled
probe/ssDNA amplicon duplex. Samples with the target genotypes were accurately
detected and easily distinguishable. Thus, genotyping using unlabeled probes is a
rapid, accurate and cost effective closed-tube method. These assays demonstrated 
100% specificity and sensitivity for the identification of selected polymorphisms
in PPARG, PPARGC1A and TCF7L2 genes.

PMID: 18996470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Jan 1;315(1):97-109. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.10.019. Epub
2008 Oct 29.

beta-Catenin stabilization imparts crypt progenitor phenotype to
hyperproliferating colonic epithelia.

Sellin JH(1), Wang Y, Singh P, Umar S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston TX, USA.

Utilizing the Citrobacter rodentium (CR)-induced transmissible murine colonic
hyperplasia (TMCH) model, we provide mechanistic basis of changes in
beta-catenin/APC/CKIepsilon leading to progression and/or regression of
hyperplasia in vivo. In response to CR-induced TMCH, crypt lengths increased
significantly between days 6-27 post-infection, followed by a steep decline by
day 34. beta-Cat(45)/total beta-catenin were elevated on day 1 post-infection,
preceding changes in crypt length, and persisted for 27 days before declining by 
day 34. Importantly, cellular CKIepsilon and beta-catenin co-immunoprecipitated
and exhibited remarkable parallel changes in kinetics during
hyperplasia/regression phases. beta-catenin, phosphorylated at Ser33,37 and Thr41
(beta-cat(33,37/41)), was low till day 12, followed by gradual increase until day
27 before declining by day 34. GSK-3beta exhibited significant
Ser(9)-phosphorylation/inactivation at days 6-12 with partial recovery at days
27-34. Wild type (wt) APC (p312) levels increased at day 6 with transient
proteolysis/truncation to p130 form between days 12 and 15; p312 reappeared by
day 19 and returned to baseline by day 34. The kinetics of
beta-Cat(45)/beta-catenin nuclear accumulation and acetylation
(Ac-beta-Cat(Lys49)) from days 6 to 27, followed by loss of
phosphorylation/acetylation by day 34 was almost identical; Tcf-4
co-immunoprecipitated with beta-Cat(45)/beta-catenin and localized
immunohistochemically to beta-Cat(41/45)-positive regions leading to elevated
cyclin D1 expression, during the hyperproliferative, but not regression phases of
TMCH. CKIepsilon mediated phosphorylation of beta-Cat(45), resulting in
stabilization/nuclear translocation of beta-Cat(45) may be critical for
maintaining proliferation at days 6-27. Reversal of GSK-3beta phosphorylation and
APC changes may be equally critical during the regression phase from days 27 to
34.

PMCID: PMC2868370
PMID: 18996369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mutat Res. 2009 Jan 15;660(1-2):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.001. Epub
2008 Oct 15.

Colon tumor mutations and epigenetic changes associated with genetic
polymorphism: insight into disease pathways.

Slattery ML(1), Wolff RK, Curtin K, Fitzpatrick F, Herrick J, Potter JD, Caan BJ,
Samowitz WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Variation in genes associated with serum levels of proteins may be useful for
examining specific disease pathways. Using data from a large study of colon
cancer, we examine genetic variants in insulin, inflammation, estrogen,
metabolizing enzymes, and energy homeostasis genes to explore associations with
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG Island methylator phenotype (CIMP),
mutations of p53 in exons 5 through 8, and mutations in codons 12 and 13 of
Ki-ras. Insulin-related genes were associated with CIMP-positive and MSI tumors, 
with the strongest associations among aspirin users. The Fok1 vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) polymorphism was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors; the
Poly A and CDX2 VDR polymorphisms were associated only with Ki-ras-mutated
tumors. NAT2 was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors but not with
MSI tumors. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with p53 mutated
tumors. Most associations varied by recent aspirin/NSAID use: IL6 rs1800796 and
rs1800795 polymorphisms were associated inversely with tumor mutations in the
presence of aspirin/NSAIDs; POMC significantly reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated
tumors when aspirin/NSAIDs were not used; the TCF7L2 rs7903146 was associated
with reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated tumors in the presence of aspirin and
increased risk in the absence of aspirin. These data, although exploratory,
identify specific tumor subsets that may be associated with specific
exposures/polymorphism combinations. The important modifying effects of
aspirin/NSAIDs on associations with genetic polymorphisms reinforce the
underlying role of inflammation in the etiology of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2907671
PMID: 18992263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Cancer. 2008 Nov 8;8:328. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-328.

Clinicopathological significance of expression of p-c-Jun, TCF4 and beta-Catenin 
in colorectal tumors.

Takeda K(1), Kinoshita I, Shimizu Y, Ohba Y, Itoh T, Matsuno Y, Shichinohe T,
Dosaka-Akita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.
kayoko-t@med.hokudai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: A recent study has shown that phosphorylated c-Jun (p-c-Jun)
interacts with TCF4 to form a complex that cooperatively enhances their
transcriptional activity in the presence of beta-Catenin, and that their
interaction is critical for mouse intestinal tumorigenesis. To determine the
significance of these three proteins in human colorectal tumors, we analyzed
their nuclear expression by immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: we analyzed their nuclear expression by immunohistochemistry using
paraffin-embedded specimens of 68 resected colorectal tumors, which consisted of 
19 adenomas, 14 high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia (HGINs) and 35
adenocarcinomas. We also analyzed the expression of MMP7, which has functional
AP-1 and TCF binding sites in its promoter.
RESULTS: Expression of p-c-Jun, TCF4 and beta-Catenin were significantly higher
in adenomas than in the adjacent normal epithelia. Expression of p-c-Jun and
beta-Catenin in HGINs and adenocarcinomas were also significantly higher than in 
the adjacent normal epithelia. p-c-Jun expression, but not TCF4 and beta-Catenin,
was higher in adenomas and HGINs than in adenocarcinomas, in which p-c-Jun
expression was negatively correlated with pT stage progression. Furthermore,
significant correlations of expression were observed between p-c-Jun and TCF4 (r 
= 0.25, p = 0.04), TCF4 and beta-Catenin (r = 0.30, p = 0.01), p-c-Jun and MMP7
(r = 0.26, p = 0.03), and TCF4 and MMP7 (r = 0.39, p = 0.0008), respectively.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that nuclear expression of p-c-Jun, TCF4 and
beta-Catenin have important roles in human colorectal tumor development and that 
p-c-Jun may play a pivotal role in the earlier stages of tumor development.

PMCID: PMC2585585
PMID: 18992165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2008 Nov;8(7):545-53.

The protein acetyltransferase ARD1: a novel cancer drug target?

Arnesen T(1), Thompson PR, Varhaug JE, Lillehaug JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway. 
Thomas.Arnesen@mbi.uib.no

Evasion of apoptosis and active cell proliferation are among the characteristics 
of cancer cells. Triggering the induction of apoptosis or reducing the
proliferative rate will potentially be helpful for cancer treatment. Recently,
several reports demonstrated that knockdown of the protein acetyltransferase
hARD1 significantly reduced the growth rate of human cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, hARD1 knockdown induced apoptosis or sensitized cells to drug
induced apoptosis. hARD1 acts in complex with the NATH protein and catalyzes
cotranslational acetylation of protein N-termini. Thus, it was suggested that the
effects on cell proliferation and apoptosis induction are due to a reduced level 
of N-terminal acetylation of certain substrate proteins. NATH was originally
identified as upregulated in thyroid papillary carcinomas and has lately also
been found to correlate with aggressiveness and differentiation status of
neuroblastic tumours. On the other hand, researchers recently reported that hARD1
acetylates Beta-catenin. Knockdown of hARD1 reduced the transcriptional activity 
of the Beta-Catenin/TCF4 complex, downregulating cyclin D1 and thereby promoting 
G1-arrest and inhibition of cell proliferation of lung cancer cells. Although the
underlying molecular mechanisms need further clarification, several reports
suggest that reduction of hARD1 negatively affects cell growth. Thus, hARD1 or
the hARD1-NATH complex stands out as attractive drug targets in cancer treatment.
One challenge will be to develop specific inhibitors that discriminate between
hARD1 and the many other enzymes, including the histone acetyltransferases, using
acetyl-coenzyme A as acetyl donor. This review focuses on the enzymatic and
biological activities of hARD1, and potential mechanisms of functional
inhibition.

PMID: 18991565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1185-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.115. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Celecoxib-induced degradation of T-cell factors-1 and -4 in human colon cancer
cells.

Takahashi-Yanaga F(1), Yoshihara T, Jingushi K, Miwa Y, Morimoto S, Hirata M,
Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. yanaga@clipharm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

We examined the effect of celecoxib on the expression of T-cell factors (TCFs) to
clarify the mechanism by which celecoxib suppress beta-catenin/TCF-dependent
transcriptional activity without reducing the level of beta-catenin protein,
using HCT-116 cells. Celecoxib suppressed the expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in a 
time-dependent manner. Pretreatment of cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 
inhibited the loss of TCF-1 and TCF-4 induced by celecoxib, suggesting that
celecoxib induced the proteasome-dependent degradation of TCF-1 and TCF-4.
Beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcriptional activity was significantly decreased
after the treatment with celecoxib for 6 h and the pretreatment of the cells with
MG132 attenuated the effect of celecoxib. Further, celecoxib also suppressed the 
expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in another colon cancer cell line, DLD-1. Our
results suggest that TCF-1 and TCF-4 degradation may involve the inhibition of
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway induced by celecoxib.

PMID: 18983819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Dec 10;314(20):3712-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.10.004. Epub
2008 Oct 21.

KLF4 regulation in intestinal epithelial cell maturation.

Flandez M(1), Guilmeau S, Blache P, Augenlicht LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, 111 East 210th St. Bronx, NY 10467, USA. mflandez@montefiore.org

The Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) transcription factor suppresses tumorigenesis in
gastrointestinal epithelium. Thus, its expression is decreased in gastric and
colon cancers. Moreover, KLF4 regulates both differentiation and growth that is
likely fundamental to its tumor suppressor activity. We dissected the expression 
of Klf4 in the normal mouse intestinal epithelium along the crypt-villus and
cephalo-caudal axes. Klf4 reached its highest level in differentiated cells of
the villus, with levels in the duodenum>jejunum>ileum, in inverse relation to the
representation of goblet cells in these regions, the lineage previously linked to
KLF4. In parallel, in vitro studies using HT29cl.16E and Caco2 colon cancer cell 
lines clarified that KLF4 increased coincident with differentiation along both
the goblet and absorptive cell lineages, respectively, and that KLF4 levels also 
increased during differentiation induced by the short chain fatty acid butyrate, 
independently of cell fate. Moreover, we determined that lower levels of KLF4
expression in the proliferative compartment of the intestinal epithelium are
regulated by the transcription factors TCF4 and SOX9, an effector and a target,
respectively, of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling, and independently of CDX2. Thus,
reduced levels of KLF4 tumor suppressor activity in colon tumors may be driven by
elevated beta-catenin/Tcf signaling.

PMCID: PMC2652355
PMID: 18977346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2009;69(2):282-7. doi: 10.1080/00365510802538188.

Comparison of genetic risk in three candidate genes (TCF7L2, PPARG, KCNJ11) with 
traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes in a population-based study--the
HUNT study.

Thorsby PM(1), Midthjell K, Gjerlaugsen N, Holmen J, Hanssen KF, Birkeland KI,
Berg JP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Laboratory, Endocrine Centre, Aker-Ullevål Diabetes Research Centre,
Aker University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 
p.m.thorsby@medisin.uio.no

We studied the impact of genetic and traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes
in a large, population-based study from Nord-Trøndelag county in Norway (HUNT),
in both cross-sectional and prospective design.MATERIAL AND METHODS: 65,905
individuals participated in the HUNT study. We studied a randomly selected group 
of 869 individuals with self-reported diabetes or non-fasting serum glucose
>or=11.1 mmol/L and 2,080 non-diabetic control subjects with non-fasting serum
glucose <5.5 mmol/L. Four candidate polymorphisms in the three genes TCF7L2
(rs12255372 and rs7903146), PPARG (rs1801282), KCNJ11 (rs5219) and traditional
risk factors were studied.
RESULTS: Risk alleles of the TCF7L2 gene showed increased risk of diabetes even
when controlled for traditional diabetes risk factors (diabetes in family, waist 
circumference, physical activity, BMI, SBP and total and HDL-cholesterol) in both
a cross-sectional and prospective setting (cross-sectional: rs12255372 OR 1.61
(1.31-1.99), rs7903146 OR 1.48 (1.20-1.83) and prospective: rs12255372 OR 1.59
(1.22-2.07), rs7903146 OR 1.47 (1.11-1.93)). The risk alleles of TCF7L2 indicated
impaired beta-cell function in patients and control subjects. The population
attributable risks for diabetes with TCF7L2 risk alleles were 15 % and with
diabetes in a first-degree relative 31 %.
CONCLUSION: The risk alleles of the TCF7L2 gene (rs12255372 and rs7903146) were
strongly associated with type 2 diabetes, even after controlling for traditional 
risk factors in both a cross-sectional and prospective setting. These risk
alleles were associated with indices of reduced beta-cell function.

PMID: 18972257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;24(9):486-90. doi: 10.1080/09513590802196379.

Genetic variants in TCF7L2 and KCNJ11 genes in a Greek population with polycystic
ovary syndrome.

Christopoulos P(1), Mastorakos G, Gazouli M, Panidis D, Deligeoroglou E, Katsikis
I, Papadias K, Diamandi-Kandarakis E, Creatsas G.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, University
of Athens, Athens, Greece. dr_christopoulos@yahoo.gr

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), the most common reproductive endocrine disorder
of premenopausal women, is strongly associated with hyperinsulinemia and type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Given the phenotypic overlap between PCOS and T2DM, our
objective was to investigate whether the TCF7L2 rs7903146(C/T) and the KCNJ11
E23K variants are involved in susceptibility to PCOS and related traits in a
Greek population. A total of 183 PCOS patients and 148 healthy controls
participated. All participants were Greeks. Blood was taken before hormonal
therapy. PCOS patients and healthy controls were genotyped for the TCF7L2 and
KCNJ11 variants. The T allele of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant was found to be
marginally over-represented in Greek patients with PCOS. There was no association
between KCNJ11 E23K polymorphism and PCOS in the present study. In addition,
there were no associations observed between hormone levels and insulin resistance
in PCOS carriers of TCF7L2 rs7903146 and KCNJ11 E23K variants. These data provide
evidence that the rs7903146 variant of the TCF7L2 gene might influence PCOS
predisposition, while no association is observed between the E23K variant of
KCNJ11 and susceptibility to PCOS and related traits.

PMID: 18958766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 23;284(4):2012-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805612200. Epub 2008
Oct 27.

Down-regulation of death-associated protein kinase-2 is required for
beta-catenin-induced anoikis resistance of malignant epithelial cells.

Li H(1), Ray G, Yoo BH, Erdogan M, Rosen KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Atlantic Research Centre, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4H7, Canada.

Resistance of solid tumor cells to anoikis, apoptosis induced by cell detachment 
from the extracellular matrix, is thought to be critical for the ability of these
cells to grow anchorage independently within three-dimensional tumor masses and
from metastases. Beta-catenin, a major oncoprotein, can inhibit anoikis of cancer
cells via unknown mechanisms. In an effort to identify these mechanisms we found 
that beta-catenin blocks anoikis of malignant kidney and intestinal epithelial
cells and promotes their anchorage-independent growth by down-regulating
death-associated protein kinase-2 (DAPk-2), a pro-apoptotic protein whose
cellular functions have so far remained unexplored. We found that
beta-catenin-induced down-regulation of DAPk-2 requires the presence of the
transcription factor Tcf-4, a known mediator of beta-catenin signaling. We also
observed that DAPk-2 contributes to the execution of anoikis of the non-malignant
epithelial cells. Thus, beta-catenin-induced down-regulation of DAPk-2 represents
a novel signaling mechanism by which beta-catenin promotes the survival of
malignant epithelial cells following their detachment from the ECM and enables
these cells to grow in an anchorage-independent manner.

PMID: 18957423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. RNA. 2008 Dec;14(12):2538-49. doi: 10.1261/rna.1253408. Epub 2008 Oct 24.

The beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway modifies alternative splicing through modulation of
SRp20 expression.

Gonçalves V(1), Matos P, Jordan P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge,
Lisboa, Portugal.

Gene expression programs can become activated in response to extracellular
signals. One evolutionarily conserved example is binding of Wnt glycoproteins to 
their receptor, which triggers a signal transduction cascade that stabilizes
cytoplasmic beta-catenin protein, allowing it to translocate into the nucleus.
There, beta-catenin binds to TCF/Lef family transcription factors and promotes
the expression of target genes. Mutations in either the beta-catenin gene itself 
or its partner protein APC are responsible for the oncogenic activation of this
pathway in colorectal tumors. Here we report the splicing factor SRp20 as a novel
target gene of beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling. Transfection of activated
beta-catenin mutants into colorectal cells increased expression of endogenous
SRp20 transcript and protein and also stimulated a luciferase reporter construct 
containing the SRp20 gene promoter. In contrast, inhibition of endogenous
beta-catenin signaling by a dominant-negative TCF4 construct down-regulated both 
luciferase reporter and SRp20 expression. We further demonstrate that the
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated increase in SRp20 protein levels is sufficient to
modulate alternative splicing decisions in the cells. In particular, we observed 
a change in the alternative splicing pattern in a control minigene reporter as
well as in the endogenous SRp20-regulated CD44 cell adhesion protein. These
results demonstrate that the beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway not only stimulates gene
transcription, but also promotes the generation of transcript variants through
alternative splicing. Our data support the recent notion that transcription and
alternative splicing represent two different layers of gene expression and that
signaling pathways act upon a coordinated network of transcripts in each layer.

PMCID: PMC2590949
PMID: 18952824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35337-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803342200. Epub 2008
Oct 23.

Novel regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) by transforming
growth factor (beta)1: requirement for Smads, (beta)-CATENIN, AND GSK3(beta).

Clifford RL(1), Deacon K, Knox AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Research, Clinical Sciences Building, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham NG5 1PB, United Kingdom.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a vital angiogenic effector,
regulating key angiogenic processes. Vascular development relies on numerous
signaling pathways, of which those induced by transforming growth factor-beta
(TGFbeta) are critical. The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is emerging as
necessary for vascular development. Although VEGF, TGFbeta, and Wnt signal
transductions are well studied individually, it has not been demonstrated
previously that all three can interact or be dependent on each other. We show
that regulation of VEGF by TGFbeta(1), in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle
cells (PASMCs), depends on a direct interaction between TGFbeta signaling
proteins, Smads, and members of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling family. VEGF
promoter reporter constructs identified a region of the VEGF promoter containing 
two T cell factor (TCF)-binding sites as necessary for TGFbeta(1)-induced VEGF
transcription. Mutation of TCF sites and expression of dominant negative TCF4
abolished TGFbeta(1)-induced VEGF promoter activity. Studies in Smad2 and Smad3
knock-out mouse embryonic fibroblasts demonstrated that one or both are required 
for VEGF regulation by TGFbeta(1), with transfection of dominant negative Smad2
or Smad3 into PASMCs confirming this. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed
in cell interactions of Smad2 and Smad3 with TCF4 and beta-catenin at the VEGF
promoter, whereas co-immunoprecipitation showed a direct physical interaction
between Smad2 and beta-catenin in the nucleus of PASMCs. Finally, we demonstrate 
that TGFbeta(1) regulates TCF by modifying beta-catenin phosphorylation via
regulation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta. These results provide new insight
into the molecular regulation of VEGF by two interacting pathways necessary for
vascular development, maintenance, and disease.

PMID: 18952601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gastroenterology. 2009 Jan;136(1):196-205.e2. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.09.019. 
Epub 2008 Sep 20.

p16INK4a is a beta-catenin target gene and indicates low survival in human
colorectal tumors.

Wassermann S(1), Scheel SK, Hiendlmeyer E, Palmqvist R, Horst D, Hlubek F, Haynl 
A, Kriegl L, Reu S, Merkel S, Brabletz T, Kirchner T, Jung A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisch-Anatomisches Institut der Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Human colorectal carcinomas display an infiltrative front of
invasion where tumor cells undergo an epithelomesenchymal transition associated
with low survival. Epithelomesenchymal transition is regulated by a nuclear
beta-catenin accumulation, and subsequently, activation of beta-catenin/TCF4
target genes similar to CYCLIN D(1). Unexpectedly, these tumor cells are
characterized by low proliferation, which correlates with the expression of the
cell cycle inhibitor p16(INK4A). Therefore, we investigated the molecular
mechanism of the transcriptional regulation of p16(INK4A) in colorectal cancer
and its correlation with survival.
METHODS: Molecular biological techniques were used for investigating the
transcriptional mechanisms of the p16(INK4A) gene regulation. Moreover,
p16(INK4A) expression was correlated with the 10-year survival of patients with
colorectal carcinomas.
RESULTS: In colorectal carcinomas, expression of the p16(INK4A) gene is regulated
by beta-catenin/TCF4 and correlates with low survival rates of patients with
tumors displaying an infiltrative front of invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: beta-catenin/TCF4 regulates cell cycle promoting (c-MYC, CYCLIN
D(1)) and inhibiting genes (p16(INK4A)) at the same time in the mesenchymally
differentiated tumor cells at the front of invasion. The function of p16(INK4A)
seems to supersede in this context thus leading to low proliferation. Moreover,
these tumor cells seem to govern the outcome of colorectal cancer independently
of their proliferation.

PMID: 18951899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Endocrinology. 2009 Mar;150(3):1259-68. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0858. Epub 2008 Oct 
23.

Regulation of myogenic differentiation by androgens: cross talk between androgen 
receptor/ beta-catenin and follistatin/transforming growth factor-beta signaling 
pathways.

Singh R(1), Bhasin S, Braga M, Artaza JN, Pervin S, Taylor WE, Krishnan V, Sinha 
SK, Rajavashisth TB, Jasuja R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Research Centers in Minority Institutions Core
Laboratory, Charles Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles,
California 90059, USA. rajansingh@mednet.ucla.edu

Androgens are important regulators of body composition and promote myogenic
differentiation and inhibit adipogenesis of mesenchymal, multipotent cells. Here,
we investigated the mechanisms by which androgens induce myogenic differentiation
of mesenchymal multipotent cells. Incubation of mesenchymal multipotent C3H
10T1/2 cells with testosterone and dihydrotestosterone promoted nuclear
translocation of androgen receptor (AR)/beta-catenin complex and physical
interaction of AR, beta-catenin, and T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4). Inhibition of
beta-catenin by small inhibitory RNAs significantly decreased
testosterone-induced stimulation of myogenic differentiation. Overexpression of
TCF-4, a molecule downstream of beta-catenin in Wnt signaling cascade, in C3H
10T1/2 cells significantly up-regulated expression of myoD and myosin heavy chain
II proteins and of follistatin (Fst), which binds and antagonizes native ligands 
of the TGF-beta/Smad pathway. Gene array analysis of C3H 10T1/2 cells treated
with testosterone revealed that testosterone up-regulated the expression of Fst
and modified the expression of several signaling molecules involved in the
TGF-beta/Smad pathway, including Smad7. Lowering of testosterone levels in mice
by orchidectomy led to a significant decrease in Fst and Smad7 expression;
conversely, testosterone supplementation in castrated mice up-regulated Fst and
Smad7 mRNA expression in androgen-responsive levator ani muscle.
Testosterone-induced up-regulation of MyoD and myosin heavy chain II proteins in 
C3H 10T1/2 cells was abolished in cells simultaneously treated with anti-Fst
antibody, suggesting an essential role of Fst during testosterone regulation of
myogenic differentiation. In conclusion, our data suggest the involvement of AR, 
beta-catenin, and TCF-4 pathway during androgen action to activate a number of
Wnt target genes, including Fst, and cross communication with the Smad signaling 
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2654730
PMID: 18948405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes. 2009 Jan;58(1):285-9. doi: 10.2337/db08-0569. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and context-specific risk of 
type 2 diabetes in African American and Caucasian adults: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities study.

Yan Y(1), North KE, Ballantyne CM, Brancati FL, Chambless LE, Franceschini N,
Heiss G, Kottgen A, Pankow JS, Selvin E, West SL, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Although variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
are consistently associated with type 2 diabetes, large population-based studies 
of African Americans are lacking. Moreover, few studies have investigated the
effects of TCF7L2 on type 2 diabetes in the context of metabolic risk factors of 
type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated the association between the TCF7L2
rs7903146 polymorphism and type 2 diabetes in 2,727 African American and 9,302
Caucasian participants without diabetes who were inducted into the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study in 1987-1989 and followed for 9 years.
RESULTS: A total of 485 and 923 cases of type 2 diabetes were identified in
African Americans and Caucasians, respectively. Compared with homozygous CC
individuals, heterozygous CT and homozygous TT individuals had higher cumulative 
incidence of type 2 diabetes over 9 years of follow-up: 11.3% (95% CI 10.2-12.4) 
vs. 21.1% (20.8-21.4) and 27.9% (19.3-36.5) in African Americans, respectively,
and 9.7% (8.8-10.6) vs. 11.3% (10.2-12.4) and 13.6% (11.1-16.1), respectively, in
Caucasians. Individuals with the risk allele had the highest hazards of diabetes 
if they were obese and had low HDL cholesterol, followed by individuals with any 
one and none of the traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides the first significant evidence of association
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and type 2 diabetes risk in a large
African American population and also demonstrates that the diabetes risk conveyed
by the rs7903146 risk allele is substantially increased in the context of some
metabolic risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Our study findings need to be
replicated in other large, population-based studies.

PMCID: PMC2606888
PMID: 18931037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell. 2008 Oct 3;135(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.016.

Transcription factor E2-2 is an essential and specific regulator of plasmacytoid 
dendritic cell development.

Cisse B(1), Caton ML, Lehner M, Maeda T, Scheu S, Locksley R, Holmberg D, Zweier 
C, den Hollander NS, Kant SG, Holter W, Rauch A, Zhuang Y, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) represent a unique immune cell type
specialized in type I interferon (IFN) secretion in response to viral nucleic
acids. The molecular control of PDC lineage specification has been poorly
understood. We report that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor (E
protein) E2-2/Tcf4 is preferentially expressed in murine and human PDCs.
Constitutive or inducible deletion of murine E2-2 blocked the development of PDCs
but not of other lineages and abolished IFN response to unmethylated DNA.
Moreover, E2-2 haploinsufficiency in mice and in human Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
patients was associated with aberrant expression profile and impaired IFN
response of the PDC. E2-2 directly activated multiple PDC-enriched genes,
including transcription factors involved in PDC development (SpiB, Irf8) and
function (Irf7). These results identify E2-2 as a specific transcriptional
regulator of the PDC lineage in mice and humans and reveal a key function of E
proteins in the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC2631034
PMID: 18854153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neurology. 2008 Oct 14;71(16):e39-41. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000327614.16569.08.

Pearls & Oy-sters: Oculopalatal tremor with one-and-a-half syndrome after pontine
hemorrhage.

Aladdin Y(1), Scozzafava J, Muayqil T, Saqqur M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, University of Alberta Hospital, 2E3 Walter McKenzie
Center, 8440-112 St., Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

PMID: 18852435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7368-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00744-08. Epub 2008 Oct 
13.

A genome-wide screen for beta-catenin binding sites identifies a downstream
enhancer element that controls c-Myc gene expression.

Yochum GS(1), Cleland R, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute and Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239, USA.
yochumg@ohsu.edu

Mutations in components of the Wnt signaling pathway initiate colorectal
carcinogenesis by deregulating the beta-catenin transcriptional coactivator.
beta-Catenin activation of one target in particular, the c-Myc proto-oncogene, is
required for colon cancer pathogenesis. beta-Catenin is known to regulate c-Myc
expression via sequences upstream of the transcription start site. Here, we
report that a more robust beta-catenin binding region localizes 1.4 kb downstream
from the c-Myc transcriptional stop site. This site was discovered using a
genome-wide method for identifying transcription factor binding sites termed
serial analysis of chromatin occupancy. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-scanning
assays demonstrate that the 5' enhancer and the 3' binding element are the only
beta-catenin and TCF4 binding regions across the c-Myc locus. When placed
downstream of a simian virus 40-driven promoter-luciferase construct, the 3'
element activated luciferase transcription when introduced into HCT116 cells.
c-Myc transcription is negligible in quiescent HCT116 cells but is induced when
cells reenter the cell cycle after the addition of mitogens. Using these cells,
we found that beta-catenin and TCF4 occupancy at the 3' enhancer precede
occupancy at the 5' enhancer. Association of c-Jun, beta-catenin, and TCF4
specifically with the downstream enhancer underlies mitogen stimulation of c-Myc 
transcription. Our findings indicate that a downstream enhancer element provides 
the principal regulation of c-Myc expression.

PMCID: PMC2593444
PMID: 18852287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Diabetologia. 2008 Dec;51(12):2224-32. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1161-2. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene help to differentiate autoimmune from
non-autoimmune diabetes in young (15-34 years) but not in middle-aged (40-59
years) diabetic patients.

Bakhtadze E(1), Cervin C, Lindholm E, Borg H, Nilsson P, Arnqvist HJ, Bolinder J,
Eriksson JW, Gudbjörnsdottir S, Nyström L, Agardh CD, Landin-Olsson M, Sundkvist 
G, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences-Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University
Diabetes Center, Malmö, Sweden. ekaterine.bakhtadze@med.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Type 1 diabetes in children is characterised by autoimmune
destruction of pancreatic beta cells and the presence of certain risk genotypes. 
In adults the same situation is often referred to as latent autoimmune diabetes
in adults (LADA). We tested whether genetic markers associated with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes could help to discriminate between autoimmune and non-autoimmune 
diabetes in young (15-34 years) and middle-aged (40-59 years) diabetic patients.
METHODS: In 1,642 young and 1,619 middle-aged patients we determined: (1)
HLA-DQB1 genotypes; (2) PTPN22 and INS variable-number tandem repeat (VNTR)
polymorphisms; (3) two single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs7903146 and rs10885406)
in the TCF7L2 gene; (4) glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) and IA-2-protein
tyrosine phosphatase-like protein (IA-2) antibodies; and (5) fasting plasma
C-peptide.
RESULTS: Frequency of risk genotypes HLA-DQB1 (60% vs 25%, p = 9.4 x 10(-34); 45%
vs 18%, p = 1.4 x 10(-16)), PTPN22 CT/TT (34% vs 26%, p = 0.0023; 31% vs 23%, p =
0.034), INS VNTR class I/I (69% vs 53%, p = 1.3 x 10(-8); 69% vs 51%, p = 8.5 x
10(-5)) and INS VNTR class IIIA/IIIA (75% vs 63%, p = 4.3 x 10(-6); 73% vs 60%, p
= 0.008) was increased in young and middle-aged GAD antibodies (GADA)-positive
compared with GADA-negative patients. The type 2 diabetes-associated genotypes of
TCF7L2 CT/TT of rs7903146 were significantly more common in young GADA-negative
than in GADA-positive patients (53% vs 43%; p = 0.0004). No such difference was
seen in middle-aged patients, in whom the frequency of the CT/TT genotypes of
TCF7L2 was similarly increased in GADA-negative and GADA-positive groups (55% vs 
56%).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene help to
differentiate young but not middle-aged GADA-positive and GADA-negative diabetic 
patients, suggesting that young GADA-negative patients have type 2 diabetes and
that middle-aged GADA-positive patients are different from their young
GADA-positive counterparts and share genetic features with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18839133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Sep 28;14(36):5499-503.

Crohn's disease--defect in innate defence.

Gersemann M(1), Wehkamp J, Fellermann K, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine I, Robert Bosch Hospital, Auerbachstrasse 110, Stuttgart,
Germany.

Crohn's disease may principally involve the whole gastrointestinal tract. Most
commonly, the inflammation occurs in the small intestine and/or in the colon with
stable disease location over the years. The pathogenesis of both disease
phenotypes is complex, the likely primary defect lies in the innate rather than
adaptive immunity, particularly in the chemical antimicrobial barrier of the
mucosa. Crohn's ileitis is associated with a reduced expression of the Wnt
signalling pathway transcription factor T-cell factor 4 (TCF4), which is
regulating Paneth cell differentiation. As a result, the alpha-defensins and
principal Paneth cell products HD5 and HD6 are deficiently expressed in ileal
disease, independent of current inflammation. In contrast, Crohn's colitis is
typically associated with an impaired induction of the beta-defensins HBD2 and
HBD3 caused by fewer gene copy numbers in the gene locus of the beta-defensins on
chromosome 8. This ileal and colonic defect in innate defence mediated by a
deficiency of the protective alpha- and beta-defensins may enable the luminal
microbes to invade the mucosa and trigger the inflammation. A better
understanding of the exact molecular mechanisms behind ileal and colonic Crohn's 
disease may give rise to new therapeutic strategies based on a stimulation of the
protective innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC2746334
PMID: 18810765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Surg Endosc. 2009 Apr;23(4):700-4. doi: 10.1007/s00464-008-0001-2. Epub 2008 Sep 
21.

TCF7L2 expression in diabetic patients undergoing bariatric surgery.

Hindle AK(1), Brody F, Tevar R, Kluk B, Hill S, McCaffrey T, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The George Washington University Medical Center,
Washington, DC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The cause of diabetes in morbidly obese patients is multifactorial,
including genetic, social, and dietary components. Transcription factor 7-like 2 
(TCF7L2) is a gene that is related to the development of diabetes. This pilot
study examines TCF7L2 expression in liver samples obtained from morbidly obese
patients undergoing bariatric surgery. TCF7L2 expression is compared between
diabetic and nondiabetic patients.
METHODS: Liver samples were obtained from 20 morbidly obese patients undergoing
bariatric surgery. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was
extracted from tissue samples using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Inc, Carlsbad,
CA). Using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,CA),
cDNA was synthesized. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was done
using SYBR Green qPCR Reagents (Stratagene, Cedar Creek TX) and the 7300
Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City CA). Preoperative
demographic and gene expression data were correlated using univariate analysis
and logistic regression models. Only associations with a p-value less than 0.05
were considered significant.
RESULTS: For the entire group, there was no correlation between body mass index
(BMI) and TCF7L2 expression. In morbidly obese nondiabetic patients, there was a 
positive correlation between TCF7L2 expression and BMI (R(2)=0.21). In morbidly
obese diabetic patients, there was an inverse correlation between TCF7L2
expression and BMI (R(2)=0.58). There was no significant relationship between
TCF7L2 expression and age or glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).
CONCLUSIONS: The cause of diabetes is multifactorial but the data from our pilot 
study documents the relationship of TCF7L2 with type 2 diabetes in morbidly obese
patients.

PMID: 18806947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Nov;19(11):4875-87. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-05-0506. Epub 2008
Sep 17.

Snail and Slug promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition through
beta-catenin-T-cell factor-4-dependent expression of transforming growth
factor-beta3.

Medici D(1), Hay ED, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Members of the Snail family of transcription factors have been shown to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a fundamental mechanism of embryogenesis
and progressive disease. Here, we show that Snail and Slug promote formation of
beta-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF)-4 transcription complexes that bind to the
promoter of the TGF-beta3 gene to increase its transcription. Subsequent
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta3 signaling increases LEF-1 gene expression 
causing formation of beta-catenin-lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)-1 complexes that
initiate EMT. TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 stimulates this signaling mechanism by
up-regulating synthesis of Snail and Slug. TGF-beta1- and TGF-beta2-induced EMT
were found to be TGF-beta3 dependent, establishing essential roles for multiple
TGF-beta isoforms. Finally, we determined that beta-catenin-LEF-1 complexes can
promote EMT without upstream signaling pathways. These findings provide evidence 
for a unified signaling mechanism driven by convergence of multiple TGF-beta and 
TCF signaling molecules that confers loss of cell-cell adhesion and acquisition
of the mesenchymal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2575183
PMID: 18799618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Pathol. 2008 Dec;216(4):521-32. doi: 10.1002/path.2404.

Transcription factor Egr1 acts as an upstream regulator of beta-catenin
signalling through up-regulation of TCF4 and p300 expression during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Watanabe J, Kawaguchi M, Okayasu
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 pathway is involved in early signalling for
trans-differentiation towards the morular phenotype of endometrial carcinoma
cells, but little is known about the upstream regulators. Here we show that
transcription factor early growth response 1 (Egr1) acts as an initial mediator
through up-regulating the expression of TCF4 and p300. In an endometrial
carcinoma cell line with abundant oestrogen receptor alpha, Egr1 expression at
both mRNA and protein levels was significantly increased by serum and
17beta-oestradiol stimuli. Serum-stimulated cells also showed increased
expression of TCF4 and p300, while inhibition of Egr1 by specific siRNAs resulted
in decreased expression. Transfection of Egr1 led to transactivation of TCF4 as
well as p300 genes, through specific binding to a promoter region, and thus in
turn resulted in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin mediated by the
up-regulating TCF4. The overexpression also caused inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300-mediated transcription, probably through sequestration of 
p300. Egr1 promoter activity was increased by serum but not 17beta-oestradiol, in
contrast to the marked repression associated with TCF4, p300, and Egr1 itself,
indicating that the regulation involves several feedback loops. In clinical
samples, cells immunopositive for nuclear Egr1, as well as beta-catenin and TCF4,
were found to be sporadically distributed in glandular components of endometrial 
carcinoma with morules. A significant positive correlation between nuclear
beta-catenin and TCF4 was observed, but no such link was evident for Egr1,
probably due to the existence of negative feedback regulation. Together, these
data indicate that Egr1 may participate in modulation of the
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling pathway as an initial event during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells, through its impact on
several signalling networks.

PMID: 18798221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2389-400. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838470.

Development of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells depends on the combined action 
of the basic helix-loop-helix factor E2-2 and the Ets factor Spi-B.

Nagasawa M(1), Schmidlin H, Hazekamp MG, Schotte R, Blom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2386-8.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are central players in the innate and adaptive
immune response against viral infections. The molecular mechanism that underlies 
pDC development from progenitor cells is only beginning to be elucidated.
Previously, we reported that the Ets factor Spi-B and the inhibitors of DNA
binding protein 2 (Id2) or Id3, which antagonize E-protein activity, are
crucially involved in promoting or impairing pDC development, respectively. Here 
we show that the basic helix-loop-helix protein E2-2 is predominantly expressed
in pDC, but not in their progenitor cells or conventional DC. Forced expression
of E2-2 in progenitor cells stimulated pDC development. Conversely, inhibition of
E2-2 expression by RNA interference impaired the generation of pDC suggesting a
key role of E2-2 in development of these cells. Notably, Spi-B was unable to
overcome the Id2 enforced block in pDC development and moreover Spi-B transduced 
pDC expressed reduced Id2 levels. This might indicate that Spi-B contributes to
pDC development by promoting E2-2 activity. Consistent with notion, simultaneous 
overexpression of E2-2 and Spi-B in progenitor cells further stimulated pDC
development. Together our results provide additional insight into the
transcriptional network controlling pDC development as evidenced by the joint
venture of E2-2 and Spi-B.

PMID: 18792017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2386-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838763.

E-box protein E2-2 is a crucial regulator of plasmacytoid DC development.

Esashi E(1), Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Cancer Immunology Research, University
of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
eesashi@mdanderson.org

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2389-400.

DC play central roles in priming both innate and adaptive immune responses.
Multiple DC subsets have been identified on the basis of their phenotype and
function. Plasmacytoid DC (pDC) are professional IFN-producing cells that play an
essential role in anti-viral immunity. A series of recent studies demonstrates
that the regulation of pDC development is different from other types of DC. In
this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, new insight is provided into
how human pDC development is regulated by various transcription factors, in
particular by the Ets family protein Spi-B and E-box protein E2-2.

PMCID: PMC3652573
PMID: 18792016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Dec 15;17(24):3864-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn286. Epub 2008 Sep
9.

Putative direct and indirect Wnt targets identified through consistent gene
expression changes in APC-mutant intestinal adenomas from humans and mice.

Segditsas S(1), Sieber O, Deheragoda M, East P, Rowan A, Jeffery R, Nye E, Clark 
S, Spencer-Dene B, Stamp G, Poulsom R, Suraweera N, Silver A, Ilyas M, Tomlinson 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, London WC2A 3PX, UK. stefania.segditsas@cancer.org.uk

In order to identify new genes with differential expression in early intestinal
tumours, we performed mRNA (messenger ribonucleic acid) expression profiling of
16 human and 63 mouse adenomas. All individuals had germline APC mutations to
ensure that tumorigenesis was driven by 'second hits' at APC. Using stringent
filtering to identify changes consistent between humans and mice, we identified
60 genes up-regulated and 151 down-regulated in tumours. For 22 selected
genes--including known Wnt targets--expression differences were confirmed by
qRT-PCR (quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction). Most, but
not all, differences were also present in colorectal carcinomas. In situ analysis
showed a complex picture. Expression of up-regulated genes in adenomas was
usually uniform/diffuse (e.g. ITGA6) or prominent in the tumour core (e.g. LGR5);
in normal tissue, these genes were expressed at crypt bases or the transit
amplifying zone. Down-regulated genes were often undetectable in adenomas, but in
normal tissue were expressed in mesenchyme (e.g. GREM1/2) or differentiated cells
towards crypt tops (e.g. SGK1). In silico analysis of TCF4-binding motifs showed 
that some of our genes were probably direct Wnt targets. Previous studies, mostly
focused on human tumours, showed partial overlap with our 'expression signature',
but 37 genes were unique to our study, including TACSTD2, SEMA3F, HOXA9 and IER3 
(up-regulated), and TAGLN, GREM1, GREM2, MAB21L2 and RARRES2 (down-regulated).
Combined analysis of our and published human data identified additional genes
differentially expressed in adenomas, including decreased BMPs (bone
morphogenetic proteins) and increased BUB1/BUB1B. Several of the newly
identified, differentially expressed genes represent potential diagnostic or
therapeutic targets for intestinal tumours.

PMCID: PMC2638572
PMID: 18782851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Hum Mutat. 2008 Nov;29(11):E242-51. doi: 10.1002/humu.20859.

TCF4 deletions in Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome.

Giurgea I(1), Missirian C, Cacciagli P, Whalen S, Fredriksen T, Gaillon T, Rankin
J, Mathieu-Dramard M, Morin G, Martin-Coignard D, Dubourg C, Chabrol B, Arfi J,
Giuliano F, Claude Lambert J, Philip N, Sarda P, Villard L, Goossens M, Moncla A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U841, IMRB, Département de Génétique, Equipe 11, Créteil, F-94000,
France. irina.giurgea@inserm.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a probably underdiagnosed, syndromic mental
retardation disorder, marked by hyperventilation episodes and characteristic
dysmorphism (large beaked nose, wide mouth, fleshy lips, and clubbed fingertips).
PHS was shown to be caused by de novo heterozygous mutations of the TCF4 gene,
located in 18q21. We selected for this study 30 unrelated patients whose
phenotype overlapped PHS but which had been initially addressed for Angelman,
Mowat-Wilson, or Rett syndromes. In 10 patients we identified nine novel
mutations (four large cryptic deletions, including one in mosaic, and five small 
deletions), and a recurrent one. So far, a total of 20 different TCF4 gene
mutations have been reported, most of which either consist in deletion of
significant portions of the TCF4 coding sequence, or generate premature stop
codons. No obvious departure was observed between the patients harboring point
mutations and large deletions at the 18q21 locus, further supporting TCF4
haploinsufficiency as the molecular mechanism underling PHS. In this report, we
also further specify the phenotypic spectrum of PHS, enlarged to behavior, with
aim to increase the rate and specificity of PHS diagnosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18781613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Cell. 2008 Sep 9;14(3):226-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.08.004.

RUNX3 attenuates beta-catenin/T cell factors in intestinal tumorigenesis.

Ito K(1), Lim AC, Salto-Tellez M, Motoda L, Osato M, Chuang LS, Lee CW, Voon DC, 
Koo JK, Wang H, Fukamachi H, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore
138673.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2009 Mar 3;15(3):240.

In intestinal epithelial cells, inactivation of APC, a key regulator of the Wnt
pathway, activates beta-catenin to initiate tumorigenesis. However, other
alterations may be involved in intestinal tumorigenesis. Here we found that
RUNX3, a gastric tumor suppressor, forms a ternary complex with beta-catenin/TCF4
and attenuates Wnt signaling activity. A significant fraction of human sporadic
colorectal adenomas and Runx3(+/-) mouse intestinal adenomas showed inactivation 
of RUNX3 without apparent beta-catenin accumulation, indicating that RUNX3
inactivation independently induces intestinal adenomas. In human colon cancers,
RUNX3 is frequently inactivated with concomitant beta-catenin accumulation,
suggesting that adenomas induced by inactivation of RUNX3 may progress to
malignancy. Taken together, these data demonstrate that RUNX3 functions as a
tumor suppressor by attenuating Wnt signaling.

PMID: 18772112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Obes (Lond). 2008 Oct;32(10):1521-4. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2008.146. Epub 2008
Sep 2.

Evidence for an influence of TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 on insulin resistance 
and sensitivity indices in overweight children and adolescents during a lifestyle
intervention.

Reinehr T(1), Friedel S, Mueller TD, Toschke AM, Hebebrand J, Hinney A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nutrition Medicine, Vestische Hospital for Children
and Adolescents, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany.
T.Reinehr@kinderklinik-datteln.de

OBJECTIVE: The T allele of the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 in TCF7L2
(transcription factor 7 like 2 gene) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The aim of this study was to analyze whether there is an allele-dosage effect on 
changes of insulin resistance and sensitivity indices in overweight children
participating in a lifestyle intervention.
METHODS: We genotyped rs7903146 in 236 overweight children (mean age 10.7 years, 
mean body mass index (BMI) 28.1 kg/m2) completing a 1-year lifestyle
intervention. Degree of overweight as BMI-SDS, homeostasis model assessment for
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the insulin sensitivity index QUICKI were
measured before and after intervention.
RESULTS: Lifestyle intervention resulted in an overweight reduction of
-0.29+/-0.02 BMI-SDS. HOMA-IR (-0.63+/-0.22) and QUICKI (+0.008+/-0.003) indices 
improved significantly (P<0.05) in the course of the intervention in the 155
children with a decrease of BMI-SDS. There was an additive negative effect of T
allele on changes of HOMA-IR (P=0.041) and QUICKI (P=0.001) in linear regression 
analyses adjusted to changes of weight status, age, gender and pubertal stage.
CONCLUSION: Overweight children showed a negative dosage-allele effect per T
allele at single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 in TCF7L2 concerning an
improvement of insulin resistance and sensitivity after overweight reduction in a
lifestyle intervention. This finding further suggests that this polymorphism
might be involved in glucose metabolism.

PMID: 18762805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Hum Pathol. 2009 Jan;40(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.06.006. Epub 2008
Aug 27.

Frameshift mutations of Wnt pathway genes AXIN2 and TCF7L2 in gastric carcinomas 
with high microsatellite instability.

Kim MS(1), Kim SS, Ahn CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.

Frameshift mutations of genes with mononucleotide repeats are features of
colorectal and gastric cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI).
Deregulation of Wnt pathway is involved in the mechanisms of cancer development, 
and mutations of the Wnt-pathway genes have frequently been detected in cancers, 
indicating somatic mutations are important deregulation mechanisms of the Wnt
signaling in cancer development. Both AXIN2 and TCF7L2 genes in the Wnt pathway
possess mononucleotide repeats in their coding sequences and are considered as
candidate tumor suppressor genes. The aim of this study was to see whether AXIN2 
and TCF7L2 are altered by frameshift mutations in gastric carcinomas with MSI.
For this, we analyzed human AXIN2 exon 8 and TCF7L2 exon 14 in 32 gastric
carcinomas with high MSI, 13 gastric carcinomas with low MSI, and 47 gastric
carcinomas without MSI by a single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis.
Overall, we detected 9 AXIN2 and 6 TCF7L2 frameshift mutations in the
mononucleotide repeats in the cancers with MSH-H, and all of them were found in
MSH-H cancers (AXIN2, 28.1%; TCF7L2, 18.8%). Of the 32 high MSI cancers, 13
cancers (40.6%) harbored at least one of AXIN2 and TCF7L2 mutation, whereas 19
cancers (59.4%) harbored neither. The present data indicate that frameshift
mutations in both AXIN2 and TCF7L2 genes are common in gastric carcinomas with
high MSI and suggest that these mutations may contribute to development of
gastric cancers with high MSI by deregulating the Wnt signaling in the affected
cancer cells.

PMID: 18755497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Diabetes Care. 2008 Sep;31(9):e66. doi: 10.2337/dc08-0756.

Variation in the CDKAL1 gene is associated with the titer of antibodies to GAD.

Haupt A, Guthoff M, Gallwitz B, Haring HU, Fritsche A.

PMID: 18753662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Med Genet. 2008 Nov;45(11):738-44. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.060129. Epub 2008 Aug 
26.

Further delineation of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: phenotypic and genotypic
description of 16 novel patients.

Zweier C, Sticht H, Bijlsma EK, Clayton-Smith J, Boonen SE, Fryer A, Greally MT, 
Hoffmann L, den Hollander NS, Jongmans M, Kant SG, King MD, Lynch SA, McKee S,
Midro AT, Park SM, Ricotti V, Tarantino E, Wessels M, Peippo M, Rauch A.

BACKGROUND: Haploinsufficiency of the gene encoding for transcription factor 4
(TCF4) was recently identified as the underlying cause of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
(PTHS), an underdiagnosed mental-retardation syndrome characterised by a distinct
facial gestalt, breathing anomalies and severe mental retardation.
METHODS: TCF4 mutational analysis was performed in 117 patients with PTHS-like
features.
RESULTS: In total, 16 novel mutations were identified. All of these proven
patients were severely mentally retarded and showed a distinct facial gestalt. In
addition, 56% had breathing anomalies, 56% had microcephaly, 38% had seizures and
44% had MRI anomalies.
CONCLUSION: This study provides further evidence of the mutational and clinical
spectrum of PTHS and confirms its important role in the differential diagnosis of
severe mental retardation.

PMID: 18728071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Lett. 2009 Mar 8;275(1):9-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.07.001. Epub 2008
Aug 23.

Calcium, calcium-sensing receptor and colon cancer.

Whitfield JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Sciences, National Research Council of Canada,
Building M-54, Montreal Road Campus, Ottawa, Ont. Canada K1A 0R6.
pthosteo@rogers.com

There is much evidence that dietary Ca(2+) loading reduces colon cell
proliferation and carcinogenesis in humans and rodents, but during carcinogenesis
it becomes ineffective or even tumor-promoting. We are beginning to see how
Ca(2+) balances the continuous massive cell production in colon crypts by driving
the terminal differentiation and eventually the apoptosis of the cells mainly on 
the mucosal surface, and how this Ca(2+) control is lost during colon
carcinogenesis. The rapid proliferation of the transit-amplifying (TA) progeny of
the colon stem cells is driven by the so-called "Wnt" signaling mechanism, which 
involves the stimulation of proliferogenic genes such as those for c-Myc and
cyclin D1 and the silencing of the gene for the cell cycle-stopping
p21(Cip1/WAF1) protein by nuclear beta-catenin*Tcf-4 complexes. TA cells avoid
mitotic damage and premature apoptosis by expressing the protein survivin. It
appears that TA cell cycling stops and terminal differentiation starts when the
cells reach a higher level in the crypt where there is enough lumenal Ca(2+) to
stimulate the expression and activation of CaSRs (Ca(2+)-sensing receptors), the 
signals from which stimulate the expression of E-cadherin. Along with this, the
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) protein appears and some of it enters the
nucleus. There it makes the TA cells susceptible to the eventual apoptotic
balancing by stopping survivin expression and the beta-catenin*Tcf-4 complex from
driving further cell cycling by releasing beta-catenin from the nucleus, and
delivering it to cytoplasmic APC*axin*GSK-3beta complexes for ultimate
proteasomal destruction. Cytoplasmic beta-catenin is then prevented from
returning to the nucleus by either being intercepted and destroyed by
APC*axin*GSK-3beta complexes or locked by the emerging E-cadherin into membrane
adherens junctions which tie the cell into the sheet of proliferatively shut-down
cells with APC-dependent cytoskeletons moving to the mouth of the crypt and onto 
the flat mucosal surface. A common first step in sporadic colon carcinogenesis is
the loss of functional APC which disorients upwardly directed migration and
causes the retention of nuclear beta-catenin and proliferogenic
beta-catenin*Tcf-4 complexes as well as genomic instability. Eventually the
balance between cell proliferation and terminal differentiation and death is
radically tipped in favour of proliferation by the appearance of
apoptosis-resistant, survivin-expressing clones of Ca(2+)-insensitive cells which
are locked into the proliferative, mutation-prone mode because of CaSR-disabling 
gene mutations which prevent the stimulation of E-cadherin expression and
terminal differentiation.

PMID: 18725175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):1989-92. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1124-7. Epub 2008 
Aug 22.

Beta cell glucose sensitivity is decreased by 39% in non-diabetic individuals
carrying multiple diabetes-risk alleles compared with those with no risk alleles.

Pascoe L(1), Frayling TM, Weedon MN, Mari A, Tura A, Ferrannini E, Walker M; RISC
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical School, Newcastle University, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Novel type 2 diabetes-susceptibility loci have been identified
with evidence that individually they mediate the increased diabetes risk through 
altered pancreatic beta cell function. The aim of this study was to test the
cumulative effects of diabetes-risk alleles on measures of beta cell function in 
non-diabetic individuals.
METHODS: A total of 1,211 non-diabetic individuals underwent metabolic assessment
including an OGTT, from which measures of beta cell function were derived.
Individuals were genotyped at each of the risk loci and then classified according
to the total number of risk alleles that they carried. Initial analysis focused
on CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 loci, which were individually associated with a
decrease in beta cell function in our cohort. Risk alleles for CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8,
IGF2BP2 and KCNJ11 loci were subsequently included into the analysis.
RESULTS: The diabetes-risk alleles for CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 showed an
additive model of association with measures of beta cell function. Beta cell
glucose sensitivity was decreased by 39% in those individuals with five or more
risk alleles compared with those individuals with no risk alleles (geometric mean
[SEM]: 84 [1.07] vs 137 [1.11] pmol min(-1) m(-2) (mmol/l)(-1), p = 1.51 x
10(-6)). The same was seen for the 30 min insulin response (p = 4.17 x 10(-7)).
The relationship remained after adding in the other four susceptibility loci (30 
min insulin response and beta cell glucose sensitivity, p < 0.001 and p = 0.003, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study shows how individual type 2 diabetes-risk 
alleles combine in an additive manner to impact upon pancreatic beta cell
function in non-diabetic individuals.

PMID: 18719881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):1993-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1129-2. Epub 2008
Aug 19.

Association of variants of the TCF7L2 gene with increases in the risk of type 2
diabetes and the proinsulin:insulin ratio in the Spanish population.

González-Sánchez JL(1), Martínez-Larrad MT, Zabena C, Pérez-Barba M, Serrano-Ríos
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid,
Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has
been related to type 2 diabetes in multiple ethnic groups. Here, we investigate
whether three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TCF7L2 gene are
associated with an impaired proinsulin:insulin ratio.
METHODS: In this study we examined the associations between SNPs rs7901695,
rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene and metabolic variables affecting
type 2 diabetes in a population-based study of 706 unrelated individuals (47% men
and 53% women; aged 35-74 years) from the province of Segovia in central Spain
(Castille), including 180 individuals with type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: The minor allele frequency of rs7901695, rs7903146 and rs12255372 was
significantly higher in diabetic patients compared with that in non-diabetic
individuals. The T (minor) allele of the variant rs7903146 was significantly
associated with a greater OR for type 2 diabetes adjusted for age, sex and BMI in
logistic regression analysis: OR 1.29 (95% CI 1.06-1.57, p = 0.01). This risk
allele was also associated with an increased proinsulin:insulin ratio after OGTT.
Similar results were obtained for the other TCF7L2 SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide further evidence supporting the
belief that the TCF7L2 gene is a major determinant of type 2 diabetes risk in
Spain, as in other southern European populations. The association with increased 
proinsulin:insulin ratio after an OGTT suggests that TCF7L2 might be involved in 
insulin synthesis and processing.

PMID: 18712344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Aug 16;9:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-80.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms do not predict susceptibility to diabetes in tropical
calcific pancreatitis but may interact with SPINK1 and CTSB mutations in
predicting diabetes.

Mahurkar S(1), Bhaskar S, Reddy DN, Prakash S, Rao GV, Singh SP, Thomas V,
Chandak GR.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Group, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, 
Hyderabad, India. mahurkar@ccmb.res.in

BACKGROUND: Tropical calcific pancreatitis (TCP) is a type of chronic
pancreatitis unique to developing countries in tropical regions and one of its
important features is invariable progression to diabetes, a condition called
fibro-calculous pancreatic diabetes (FCPD), but the nature of diabetes in TCP is 
controversial. We analysed the recently reported type 2 diabetes (T2D) associated
polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene using a case-control approach, under the
hypothesis that TCF7L2 variants should show similar association if diabetes in
FCPD is similar to T2D. We also investigated the interaction between the TCF7L2
variants and N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations, since they are strong
predictors of risk for TCP.
METHODS: Two polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were
analyzed by direct sequencing in 478 well-characterized TCP patients and 661
healthy controls of Dravidian and Indo-European ethnicities. Their association
with TCP with diabetes (FCPD) and without diabetes was tested in both populations
independently using chi-square test. Finally, a meta analysis was performed on
all the cases and controls for assessing the overall significance irrespective of
ethnicity. We dichotomized the whole cohort based on the presence or absence of
N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations and further subdivided them into TCP and FCPD
patients and compared the distribution of TCF7L2 variants between them.
RESULTS: The allelic and genotypic frequencies for both TCF7L2 polymorphisms, did
not differ significantly between TCP patients and controls belonging to either of
the ethnic groups or taken together. No statistically significant association of 
the SNPs was observed with TCP or FCPD or between carriers and non-carriers of
N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations. The minor allele frequency for rs7903146 was
different between TCP and FCPD patients carrying the N34S SPINK1 variant but did 
not reach statistical significance (OR = 1.59, 95% CI = 0.93-2.70, P = 0.09),
while, TCF7L2variant showed a statistically significant association between TCP
and FCPD patients carrying the 26V allele (OR = 1.69, 95% CI = 1.11-2.56, P =
0.013).
CONCLUSION: Type 2 diabetes associated TCF7L2 variants are not associated with
diabetes in TCP. Since, TCF7L2 is a major susceptibility gene for T2D, it may be 
hypothesized that the diabetes in TCP patients may not be similar to T2D. Our
data also suggests that co-existence of TCF7L2 variants and the SPINK1 and CTSB
mutations, that predict susceptibility to exocrine damage, may interact to
determine the onset of diabetes in TCP patients.

PMCID: PMC2529279
PMID: 18706099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Circ Res. 2008 Sep 26;103(7):694-701. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.166405. Epub
2008 Aug 14.

E-cadherin/beta-catenin/T-cell factor pathway is involved in smooth muscle cell
proliferation elicited by oxidized low-density lipoprotein.

Bedel A(1), Nègre-Salvayre A, Heeneman S, Grazide MH, Thiers JC, Salvayre R,
Maupas-Schwalm F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U858, Toulouse,
France.

The E-cadherin/beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling pathway plays a crucial
role in embryogenesis and carcinogenesis and has recently emerged in
atherosclerosis. The aim of this work was to investigate whether this signaling
pathway is involved in smooth muscle cell proliferation induced by oxidized
low-density lipoprotein (LDL). In human aortic smooth muscle cells, mitogenic
concentration of mildly oxidized LDL induced the activation of beta-catenin, as
assessed by the dissociation of the beta-catenin/cadherin complex, and the
concomitant rise of active beta-catenin in the cytosol. The oxidized LDL-induced 
rise of active beta-catenin required metalloproteinase activation, as well as
epidermal growth factor receptor and Src signaling, as assessed by the use of
pharmacological inhibitors and cells overexpressing a SrcK-inactive form. The
concomitant phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt activation and glycogen synthase
kinase 3-beta phosphorylation induced the inhibition of the proteasomal
degradation of beta-catenin. Then active beta-catenin associated with Tcf4 and
translocated into the nucleus. This enhanced the expression of the cell cycle
activator cyclin D1. This crucial role of beta-catenin in the mitogenic effect of
oxidized LDL was confirmed by silencing beta-catenin by specific small
interfering RNA that blocked DNA synthesis. Immunohistochemistry staining of
stable and disrupted plaques from carotid endarterectomy sections showed a
correlation between active beta-catenin and Ki67, a proliferation marker, and a
more intense staining in the smooth muscle cell layer surrounding the lipid core 
of disrupted plaques. In conclusion, the beta-catenin pathway is required for the
mitogenic effect of oxidized LDL on human aortic smooth muscle cells. This study 
highlights the putative important role of the E-cadherin/beta-catenin/Tcf
signaling pathway in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18703780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Metabolism. 2008 Sep;57(9):1227-31. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2008.04.016.

TCF7L2 gene expression in human visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue is
differentially regulated but not associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Kovacs P(1), Berndt J, Ruschke K, Klöting N, Schön MR, Körner A, Stumvoll M,
Blüher M.

Author information: 
(1)Junior Research Group N06, Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research
Leipzig, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
peter.kovacs@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Variants in the TCF7L2 gene have been associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM), but the causal variant(s) is still unknown. We studied the TCF7L2
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in paired samples of visceral and subcutaneous
adipose tissue from 49 subjects using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and its relation to obesity and T2DM. All subjects were genotyped for
the previously described TCF7L2 diabetes risk variants. Independent of age, sex, 
obesity, and diabetes status, we found >3-fold higher TCF7L2 mRNA expression in
subcutaneous compared with visceral adipose tissue. There was no correlation
between visceral and subcutaneous TCF7L2 expression. No differences in adipose
tissue TCF7L2 mRNA expression levels were found between diabetic and nondiabetic 
subjects, or between lean and obese subjects (all Ps > .05). In addition, there
was no association between TCF7L2 genetic variants and mRNA expression. Based on 
our data, TCF7L2 mRNA expression is fat-depot specific but does not seem to
provide the mechanistic link explaining genetic association with T2DM.

PMID: 18702948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):3122-8. doi: 10.2337/db08-0425. Epub 2008 Aug 11.

Predicting type 2 diabetes based on polymorphisms from genome-wide association
studies: a population-based study.

van Hoek M(1), Dehghan A, Witteman JC, van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG, Oostra BA, 
Hofman A, Sijbrands EJ, Janssens AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):2911-4.

OBJECTIVE: Prediction of type 2 diabetes based on genetic testing might improve
identification of high-risk subjects. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies
identified multiple new genetic variants that associate with type 2 diabetes. The
predictive value of genetic testing for prediction of type 2 diabetes in the
general population is unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated 18 polymorphisms from recent GWA
studies on type 2 diabetes in the Rotterdam Study, a prospective,
population-based study among homogeneous Caucasian individuals of 55 years and
older (genotyped subjects, n = 6,544; prevalent cases, n = 686; incident cases
during follow-up, n = 601; mean follow-up 10.6 years). The predictive value of
these polymorphisms was examined alone and in addition to clinical
characteristics using logistic and Cox regression analyses. The discriminative
accuracy of the prediction models was assessed by the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curves (AUCs).
RESULTS: Of the 18 polymorphisms, the ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B-rs1412829, FTO,
IGF2BP2, JAZF1, SLC30A8, TCF7L2, and WFS1 variants were associated with type 2
diabetes risk in our population. The AUC was 0.60 (95% CI 0.57-0.63) for
prediction based on the genetic polymorphisms; 0.66 (0.63-0.68) for age, sex, and
BMI; and 0.68 (0.66-0.71) for the genetic polymorphisms and clinical
characteristics combined.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that 9 of 18 well-established genetic risk variants were
associated with type 2 diabetes in a population-based study. Combining genetic
variants has low predictive value for future type 2 diabetes at a
population-based level. The genetic polymorphisms only marginally improved the
prediction of type 2 diabetes beyond clinical characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2570410
PMID: 18694974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Semin Oncol. 2008 Aug;35(4):365-77. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2008.04.007.

Cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and clinical characteristics of acute myeloid
leukemia with a complex karyotype.

Mrózek K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, 
USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu <krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu>

Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring three or more acquired
chromosome aberrations in the absence of the prognostically favorable
t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(6;16)(p13;q22), and t(15;17)(q22;q21)
aberrations form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They
constitute 10% to 12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex
karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using
molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping [SKY], multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization [M-FISH]) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (a-CGH) considerably improved characterization of previously
unidentified, partially identified, or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and
allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern
of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced
rearrangements (translocations, insertions, or inversions), predominance of
aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions, and
unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q,
17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p, and 3p, and the presence of recurrent,
albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced
translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q,
11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as
targets of genomic losses, for example, TP53, CTNNA1, NF1, ETV6, and TCF4, and
amplifications, for example, ERG, ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC,
TRIB1, and CDX2. Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving
chemotherapy are very poor. They can be improved to some extent by allogeneic
stem cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better
understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel
therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC3640813
PMID: 18692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 7;8:77. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-77.

Cold-inducible RNA binding protein (CIRP), a novel XTcf-3 specific target gene
regulates neural development in Xenopus.

van Venrooy S(1), Fichtner D, Kunz M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (TH), 76131 Karlsruhe,
Germany. stephanie.vanvenrooy@zi2.uka.de

BACKGROUND: As nuclear mediators of wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Lef/Tcf
transcription factors play important roles in development and disease. Although
it is well established, that the four vertebrate Lef/Tcfs have unique functional 
properties, most studies unite Lef-1, Tcf-1, Tcf-3 and Tcf-4 and reduce their
function to uniformly transduce wnt/beta-catenin signaling for activating wnt
target genes. In order to discriminate target genes regulated by XTcf-3 from
those regulated by XTcf-4 or Lef/Tcfs in general, we performed a subtractive
screen, using neuralized Xenopus animal cap explants.
RESULTS: We identified cold-inducible RNA binding protein (CIRP) as novel XTcf-3 
specific target gene. Furthermore, we show that knockdown of XTcf-3 by injection 
of an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide results in a general broadening of the
anterior neural tissue. Depletion of XCIRP by antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide injection leads to a reduced stability of mRNA and an enlargement
of the anterior neural plate similar to the depletion of XTcf-3.
CONCLUSION: Distinct steps in neural development are differentially regulated by 
individual Lef/Tcfs. For proper development of the anterior brain XTcf-3 and the 
Tcf-subtype specific target XCIRP appear indispensable. Thus, regulation of
anterior neural development, at least in part, depends on mRNA stabilization by
the novel XTcf-3 target gene XCIRP.

PMCID: PMC2527318
PMID: 18687117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Mar;48(3):212-9. doi: 10.1002/mc.20471.

EB1 acts as an oncogene via activating beta-catenin/TCF pathway to promote
cellular growth and inhibit apoptosis.

Liu M(1), Yang S, Wang Y, Zhu H, Yan S, Zhang W, Quan L, Bai J, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute & Cancer Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR
China.

Previously we showed that end-binding protein 1 (EB1) may promote cellular growth
by activating beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) pathway. To further investigate
the role of EB1 in regulating cellular growth, we established an EB1-inducible
expression system in which the protein level of EB1 was significantly upregulated
upon doxycycline induction. We found that EB1 promoted cellular growth and
resulted in a significant increase in colony formation. In addition, EB1 could
induce tumor formation in nude mice, activate beta-catenin-dependent gene
expression and upregulate the transcriptional activity of c-myc. We also showed
that EB1 in this manner inhibited apoptosis of 293-T-REx cells upon cisplatin and
upregulated expression of Bcl-2, whereas DeltaN TCF4, an inhibitor of
beta-catenin/TCF pathway, could completely or partially abolish the effects of
EB1 on the promotion of cell growth and the inhibition of apoptosis activity.
Moreover, knockdown of c-myc by RNAi could abrogate upregulation of EB1-dependent
induction of Bcl-2 expression. Overall, EB1 acts as a potential oncogene via
activating beta-catenin/TCF pathway to promote cellular growth and inhibit
apoptosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18680107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Hematol. 2008 Sep;88(2):174-80. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0141-0. Epub 2008
Jul 31.

Activation of Wnt signaling in cKit-ITD mediated transformation and imatinib
sensitivity in acute myeloid leukemia.

Tickenbrock L(1), Hehn S, Sargin B, Evers G, Ng PR, Choudhary C, Berdel WE,
Müller-Tidow C, Serve H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of Münster,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Domagkstr. 3, 48149, Münster, Germany.
tickenbr@uni-muenster.de

The Wnt-signaling pathway plays a critical role in directing cell fate during
embryogenesis and also in the pathogenesis of cancer. In leukemia, it is well
described that activating internal tandem duplications (ITD) mutations in
receptor tyrosine kinases like cKit or Flt3 confer to the pathogenesis of cancer.
Here, we analyzed whether Wnt-signaling plays a role in cKit-ITD mediated
transformation. Stably transfected 32D cells with cKit-ITD cells had higher
beta-Catenin protein levels compared to the cKit-WT. Analysis of beta-Catenin
mRNA and protein levels revealed that beta-Catenin was regulated at
post-transcriptional level in cKit-ITD as well as Flt3-ITD compared to the
wildtype. Signaling analyses revealed higher-phosphorylation of GSK3beta by
oncogenic cKit-ITD. Moreover, activation of Wnt signaling was confirmed by
constitutive activation of c-myc luciferase by cKit-ITD cells. Importantly, using
dominant negative TCF4, we show that activation of Wnt signaling plays an
important role in cKit mediated transformation of myeloid cells. Application of
specific receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for Flt3 or cKit result in a
decrease of beta-Catenin that underwent with a decrease of GSK3beta
phosphorylation, suggesting an indirect mechanism of beta-Catenin regulation by
oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases in both ITD mutations. Our study shows the
importance of activation of Wnt signaling in leukemia and suggests as attractive 
target for future therapeutical approaches.

PMID: 18668305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Cell Sci. 2008 Aug 15;121(Pt 16):2718-30. doi: 10.1242/jcs.029660. Epub 2008
Jul 29.

Signalling by neurotrophins and hepatocyte growth factor regulates axon
morphogenesis by differential beta-catenin phosphorylation.

David MD(1), Yeramian A, Duñach M, Llovera M, Cantí C, de Herreros AG, Comella
JX, Herreros J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori d'Investigació, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova,
Departament de Ciències Mèdiques Bàsiques, Universitat de Lleida, IRBLleida,
Spain.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of beta-catenin, a component of adhesion complexes and
of the Wnt pathway, affects cell adhesion, migration and gene transcription. By
reducing beta-catenin availability using shRNA-mediated gene silencing or
expression of intracellular N-cadherin, we show that beta-catenin is required for
axon growth downstream of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signalling and
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signalling. We demonstrate that the receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) Trk and Met interact with and phosphorylate beta-catenin.
Stimulation of Trk receptors by neurotrophins (NTs) results in phosphorylation of
beta-catenin at residue Y654, and increased axon growth and branching.
Conversely, pharmacological inhibition of Trk or expression of a Y654F mutant
blocks these effects. beta-catenin phosphorylated at Y654 colocalizes with the
cytoskeleton at growth cones. However, HGF, which also increases axon growth and 
branching, induces beta-catenin phosphorylation at Y142 and a nuclear
localization. Interestingly, dominant-negative DeltaN-TCF4 abolishes the effects 
of HGF in axon growth and branching, but not that of NTs. We conclude that NT-
and HGF-signalling differentially phosphorylate beta-catenin, targeting this
protein to distinct compartments to regulate axon morphogenesis by
TCF4-transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. These results place
beta-catenin downstream of growth-factor-RTK signalling in axon differentiation.

PMID: 18664491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Gastroenterology. 2008 Oct;135(4):1238-1247, 1247.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.06.045. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Multiple regulatory regions control the complex expression pattern of the mouse
Cdx2 homeobox gene.

Benahmed F(1), Gross I, Gaunt SJ, Beck F, Jehan F, Domon-Dell C, Martin E,
Kedinger M, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Cdx2 homeobox gene exerts multiple functions including
trophectoderm specification, antero-posterior patterning, and determination of
intestinal identity. The aim of this study was to map genomic regions that
regulate the transcription of Cdx2, with a particular interest in the gut.
METHODS: Genomic fragments covering 13 kilobase (kb) of the mouse Cdx2 locus were
analyzed in transgenic mice and in cell assays.
RESULTS: No fragment was active in the trophectoderm. Fragments containing the
first intron and extending up to -5-kb upstream of the transcription start site
became active posteriorly at gastrulation and then inactive at midgestation in
every tissue including the endoderm. Specific persistence of activity in the
intestinal endoderm/epithelium beyond midgestation requires extending the genomic
fragment up to -9 kb. We identified a 250-base pair segment around -8.5-kb
binding and responding to endodermal factors, with a stimulatory effect exerted
synergistically by HNF4alpha, GATA6, Tcf4, and beta-catenin. These factors were
able to activate endogenous expression of Cdx2 in nonintestinal Hela cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple regulatory regions control the complex developmental
pattern of Cdx2, including far upstream sequences required for the persistence of
gene expression specifically in the gut epithelium throughout life. Cooperation
between HNF4alpha, GATA6, beta-catenin, and Tcf4 contributes to the
intestine-specific expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18655789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Jul 26;9:72. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-72.

Weak or no association of TCF7L2 variants with Type 2 diabetes risk in an Arab
population.

Alsmadi O(1), Al-Rubeaan K, Mohamed G, Alkayal F, Al-Saud H, Al-Saud NA,
Al-Daghri N, Mohammad S, Meyer BF.

Author information: 
(1)Saudi Diagnostic Laboratory, Research Centre, King Faisal Specialist Hopital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. oalsmadi@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: The rs7903146 and rs12255372 variants of TCF7L2 have been strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk in most populations studied to date.
Meta-analysis of 27 different studies has resulted in a global OR of 1.46
[1.42-1.51] (rs7903146 variant). Thus far, despite a high incidence of T2D, the
role of this variant in Arabs has not been established.
METHODS: We performed a case-control association study using 522 Saudi T2D
patients (WHO criteria), and 346 controls (age > 60; fasting plasma glucose < 7
mmol/L). Genotyping was performed by pyrosequencing. Statistical analyses were
performed using SPSS version 13.0 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).
RESULTS: For rs7903146, the T allele frequency of the cases (0.415) was not
different from that observed in the controls (0.405). The crude odds ratio (OR)
was 1.04 with a 95% CI of 0.86-1.27 (P = 0.675). For rs12255372, the T allele
frequency of the cases (0.368) was not different from that observed in the
controls (0.355). Retrospective power calculations based upon an OR of 1.46
reported in a comprehensive meta-analysis of TCF7L2 risk, indicated this study
was sufficiently powered (96.92%; alpha = 0.05) to detect an effect of similar
magnitude to that reported for rs7903146.
CONCLUSION: Our study is consistent with weak or no association of T2D in Arabs
with the two TCF7L2 variants, however it cannot rule out an effect of other SNPs 
in this gene. Future studies in this population are required to confirm our
findings and may indicate the presence of yet to be defined genetic risk factors 
for T2D.

PMCID: PMC2515290
PMID: 18655717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1989-99. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007121291. Epub 2008
Jul 23.

TCF7L2 variants associate with CKD progression and renal function in
population-based cohorts.

Köttgen A(1), Hwang SJ, Rampersaud E, Coresh J, North KE, Pankow JS, Meigs JB,
Florez JC, Parsa A, Levy D, Boerwinkle E, Shuldiner AR, Fox CS, Kao WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology &
Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1840-2.

Genetic variants may increase susceptibility to both diabetes and kidney disease.
Whether known diabetes-associated variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene are associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression and
markers of kidney function is unknown. Participants of the Atherosclerosis Risk
in Communities Study (ARIC; n = 11,061 self-identified white and n = 4014 black),
Framingham Heart Offspring Cohort (FHS; n = 2468), and Heredity and Phenotype
Intervention Heart Study (HAPI; n = 861) were genotyped at five (ARIC) and two
(FHS) common TCF7L2 variants. The diabetes-conferring risk alleles at rs7903146
and rs7901695 were significantly associated with CKD progression among ARIC
participants overall and among those without baseline diabetes. The overall
adjusted hazard ratios per rs7903146 T allele were 1.17 (95% confidence interval 
[CI] 1.04 to 1.32) for white individuals and 1.20 (95% CI 1.03 to 1.41) for black
individuals. Similarly, the overall hazard ratios per rs7901695 C allele were
1.19 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.34) for white individuals and 1.27 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.48)
for black individuals. The FHS cohort supported these results: The rs7903146 T
allele was significantly associated with lower estimated GFR (P = 0.01) and
higher cystatin C (P = 0.004) in adjusted analyses overall and among those
without diabetes. In the HAPI cohort, the rs7901695 C allele was significantly
associated with lower estimated GFR in adjusted analyses (P = 0.049), as were
several variants upstream and downstream of TCF7L2 (P < 0.003). No identified
variant in the ARIC or FHS cohorts was associated with albuminuria. In
conclusion, several population-based samples suggest that variants in the TCF7L2 
gene are associated with reduced kidney function or CKD progression, overall and 
specifically among participants without diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2551569
PMID: 18650481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Surg Res. 2009 May 15;153(2):210-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.05.032. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

Thiazolidinediones downregulate Wnt/beta-catenin signaling via multiple
mechanisms in breast cancer cells.

Wang PS(1), Chou FS, Bloomston M, Vonau MS, Saji M, Espinosa A, Pinzone JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) have been demonstrated to possess antitumor
effects in breast cancer cells, although the mechanisms are not well established.
We sought to better define TZDs' antitumor effects and molecular mechanisms to
permit rational utilization of these agents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied the effects of TZDs on DNA synthesis (BrdU
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), gene expression (microarray, quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblot), serine
phosphorylation and localization of beta-catenin (nuclear/cytoplasmic
fractionation and immunoblot), transactivation activity of beta-catenin/T cell
factor 4 (TCF4) (luciferase assay with wild-type and mutant TCF4 responsive
element), and beta-catenin/TCF4 complex (immunoprecipitation) in human breast
cancer cells MDA-MB-231 and T47D.
RESULTS: Troglitazone (TG) down-regulated DNA synthesis in MDA-MB-231 and T47D
and decreased mRNA expression of the Wnt co-receptors frizzled-1 and low-density 
lipoprotein-related protein 6 (LRP6) as well as protein level of LRP6. TG also
targets downstream Wnt signaling molecules in T47D cells. TG down-regulates
p-beta-catenin (S33/S37/T41) and promotes translocation of beta-catenin into the 
nucleus. However, TG inhibits beta-catenin-mediated transactivation by
down-regulating TCF4 protein levels, thereby inhibiting beta-catenin/TCF4 complex
formation. Finally, we found that inhibition of Akt augments TG-mediated
down-regulation of DNA synthesis and this result was accompanied with the
decreased protein levels of Wnt signaling molecules: LRP6, beta-catenin, and
TCF4.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway,
which plays an important role in breast cancer pathogenesis, may be a target for 
TZD treatment. Moreover, a combination of TZDs and a specific Akt inhibitor may
serve as a new approach to target Wnt/beta-catenin directly and via PI3K/Akt
action on glycogen synthase-3beta.

PMID: 18639247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Aug;29(8):1623-31. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn110. Epub 2008 Jul
16.

CpG methylation in exon 1 of transcription factor 4 increases with age in normal 
gastric mucosa and is associated with gene silencing in intestinal-type gastric
cancers.

Kim SK(1), Jang HR, Kim JH, Kim M, Noh SM, Song KS, Kang GH, Kim HJ, Kim SY, Yoo 
HS, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Department of Functional Genomics, University of Science and
Technology, 52 Eoeun-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

Transcriptional factor 4 (TCF4), encoding a basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional factor, has recently been demonstrated as a causative gene for
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disease. Examination of gastric
cancers using the restriction landmark genomic scanning technique revealed
methylation at a NotI enzyme site in TCF4 intron 8 and further identified CpG
dinucleotide hypermethylation in TCF4 exon 1, strongly associated with gene
silencing in gastric cancer cell lines. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
and/or trichostatin A restored TCF4 expression in TCF4-silenced gastric cancer
cell lines. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of
77 paired primary gastric tumor samples revealed that 38% of analyzed tumors had 
a >2-fold decrease in TCF4 expression compared with adjacent normal-appearing
tissue, and the decrease significantly correlated with increased CpG methylation 
in TCF4 exon 1. Clinicopathologic data showed that decreased TCF4 expression
occurred significantly more frequently in intestinal-type (22/37, 59%) than in
diffuse-type (7/37, 19%) gastric cancers (P = 0.0004) and likewise more
frequently in early (12/18, 67%) than in advanced (17/59, 29%) gastric cancers (P
= 0.004). CpG methylation markedly increased with patient age among
normal-appearing tissues, suggesting that CpG methylation in gastric mucosa may
be one of the earliest events in carcinogenesis of intestinal-type gastric
cancers. Furthermore, ectopic expression of TCF4 decreased cell growth in a
gastric cancer cell line, and the knock down of TCF4 using small interfering RNA 
increased cell migration. Based on these results, we propose that the observed
frequent epigenetic-mediated TCF4 silencing plays a role in tumor formation and
progression.

PMCID: PMC2516490
PMID: 18635522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):25988-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800325200. Epub 2008
Jul 16.

Silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor and nuclear receptor
corepressor attenuate transcriptional activation by the beta-catenin-TCF4
complex.

Song LN(1), Gelmann EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, USA.

beta-Catenin is a multifunctional mediator of cellular signaling and an oncogene.
Nuclear beta-catenin, when complexed with members of the T-cell factor
(TCF)/leukocyte enhancer factor family of DNA-binding proteins, mediates
transcriptional activation important for embryonic development and adult cell
homeostasis. Deregulation of intracellular levels of beta-catenin is an early
event in the development of a variety of cancers. We observed that the proteins
silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) and the
nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) are negative regulators of transcription
induced by the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex. Overexpression of SMRT and NCoR
attenuated the transcription of beta-catenin-TCF4-specific reporter gene and of
CCND1, an endogenous beta-catenin target gene. Knockdown of endogenous SMRT or
NCoR by short interfering RNA augmented the beta-catenin-TCF4-mediated reporter
gene expression. Glutathione S-transferase pulldown experiments showed there was 
a direct physical association of SMRT and NCoR with both beta-catenin and TCF4.
DNA-protein interaction studies revealed that the interactions between either
SMRT or NCoR and beta-catenin or TCF4 occurred at the promoter regions of CCND1
and other target genes. These findings demonstrate an important role for
corepressors SMRT and NCoR in the regulation of beta-catenin-TCF4-mediated gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2533793
PMID: 18632669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2008 Oct;54(1):1-17. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00454.x. Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Exported proteins in probiotic bacteria: adhesion to intestinal surfaces, host
immunomodulation and molecular cross-talking with the host.

Sánchez B(1), Bressollier P, Urdaci MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Biochimie Appliquée, UMR 5248 CBMN
CNRS-Université Bordeaux 1-ENITAB, 33175 Gradignan Cedex, France.
b-sanchez@enitab.fr

The group of exported proteins of a bacterium are those proteins that are sorted 
from the cytoplasm to the bacterial surface or to the surroundings of the
microorganism. In probiotic bacteria, these proteins are of special relevance
because they might determine important traits such as adhesion to intestinal
surfaces and molecular cross-talking with the host. Current knowledge about the
presence and biological relevance of exported proteins produced by the main
genera of probiotic bacteria in the gastrointestinal environment is reviewed in
this minireview. As will be seen, some of these proteins are involved in host
adhesion or are able to modify certain signalization pathways within host cells, 
whereas others are important for the physiology of probiotic bacteria in the
gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 18631181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Aug 15;146A(16):2053-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32419.

Disruption of the TCF4 gene in a girl with mental retardation but without the
classical Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Kalscheuer VM(1), Feenstra I, Van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Smeets DF, Menzel C,
Ullmann R, Musante L, Ropers HH.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
kalscheu@molgen.mpg.de

We have characterized a de novo balanced translocation t(18;20)(q21.1;q11.2) in a
female patient with mild to moderate mental retardation (MR) and minor facial
anomalies. Breakpoint-mapping by fluorescence in situ hybridization indicated
that on chromosome 18, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TCF4 gene 
is disrupted by the breakpoint. TCF4 plays a role in cell fate determination and 
differentiation. Only recently, mutations in this gene have been shown to result 
in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS), defined by severe MR, epilepsy, mild growth
retardation, microcephaly, daily bouts of hyperventilation starting in infancy,
and distinctive facial features with deep-set eyes, broad nasal bridge, and wide 
mouth with widely spaced teeth. Breakpoint mapping on the derivative chromosome
20 indicated that here the rearrangement disrupted the chromodomain helicase DNA 
binding protein 6 (CHD6) gene. To date, there is no indication that CHD6 is
involved in disease. Our study indicates that TCF4 gene mutations are not always 
associated with classical PHS but can give rise to a much milder clinical
phenotype. Thus, the possibility exists that more patients with a less severe
encephalopathy carry a mutation in this gene.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18627065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 15;105(28):9697-702. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804709105. Epub 2008 Jul 10.

A genome-wide RNAi screen for Wnt/beta-catenin pathway components identifies
unexpected roles for TCF transcription factors in cancer.

Tang W(1), Dodge M, Gundapaneni D, Michnoff C, Roth M, Lum L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Wnt family of secreted proteins coordinate cell fate decision-making in a
broad range of developmental and homeostatic contexts. Corruption of Wnt signal
transduction pathways frequently results in degenerative diseases and cancer. We 
have used an iterative genome-wide screening strategy that employs multiple
nonredundant RNAi reagents to identify mammalian genes that participate in
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway response. Among the genes that were assigned high
confidence scores are two members of the TCF/LEF family of DNA-binding proteins
that control the transcriptional output of the pathway. Surprisingly, we found
that the presumed cancer-promoting gene TCF7L2 functions instead as a
transcriptional repressor that restricts colorectal cancer (CRC) cell growth.
Mutations in TCF7L2 identified from cancer genome sequencing efforts abolish its 
ability to function as a transcriptional regulator and result in increased CRC
cell growth. We describe a growth-promoting transcriptional program that is
likely activated in CRC tumors with compromised TCF7L2 function. Taken together, 
the results from our screen and studies focused on members of the TCF/LEF gene
family refine our understanding of how aberrant Wnt pathway activation sustains
CRC growth.

PMCID: PMC2453074
PMID: 18621708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Dec;1782(12):800-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.06.007.
Epub 2008 Jun 19.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system in colorectal cancer.

Voutsadakis IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa 41110,
Greece. ivoutsadakis@yahoo.com

The proteasome is a multiprotein complex that regulates the stability of hundreds
of cellular proteins and thus, it is implicated in virtually all cellular
functions. Most of the time, to be recognized and processed by the proteasome, a 
protein has to be linked to a chain of ubiquitin molecules. Cell proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and motility, processes with particular importance for
carcinogenesis are regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). In
colorectal epithelium, UPS plays a role in the regulation of the
Wnt/beta-catenin/APC/TCF4 signaling which regulates proliferation of colorectal
epithelial cells in the bottom of the crypts and the inhibition of this
proliferation as cells move towards colon villi tips. In most colorectal cancers 
APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) disabling mutations interfere with the ability
of the proteasome to degrade beta-catenin leading to uninhibited cell
proliferation. Other key molecules in colorectal carcinogenesis such as p53,
Smad4 and components of the k-ras pathways are also regulated by the UPS. In this
review I discuss the role of UPS in colorectal carcinogenesis and colorectal
cancer prognosis and aspects of its inhibition for therapeutic purposes.

PMID: 18619533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;93(10):4013-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0855. Epub 
2008 Jul 8.

Impact of TCF7L2 rs7903146 on insulin secretion and action in young and elderly
Danish twins.

Wegner L(1), Hussain MS, Pilgaard K, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Vaag A, Poulsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. lwgn@steno.dk

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the regulation and metabolic effects of TCF7L2 gene
expression in human sc fat and skeletal muscle and the impact of the TCF7L2,
rs7903146, T-allele on gene expression and measures of glucose metabolism
including insulin secretion and peripheral and hepatic insulin action.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The rs7903146 was genotyped in 1) a population-based
sample of 587 twins (55-64 yr) with glucose tolerance ranging from normal to type
2 diabetes and 2) a population of 196 nondiabetic young (22-31 yr) and elderly
(57-66 yr) twins. All subjects underwent oral glucose tolerance tests, and
population 2 was additionally examined with iv glucose tolerance tests and
hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamps.
RESULTS: Elderly T-allele carriers had decreased plasma insulin responses and
lower disposition index, whereas insulinogenic index was similar between genotype
groups. Elderly nondiabetic T-allele carriers had increased peripheral insulin
sensitivity (P = 0.03). Young T-allele carriers had impaired hepatic insulin
sensitivity (P = 0.04) independent of plasma insulin levels. TCF7L2 gene
expression in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue was not explained by genotype,
sex, aerobic capacity, birth, or adult anthropometry and was not associated with 
in vivo glucose metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs7903146 T-allele associates with hepatic insulin resistance
and diminished glucose-stimulated plasma insulin secretion. Our study does not
provide evidence of a role of TCF7L2 gene expression in sc fat tissue and muscle 
tissue in the regulation of glucose homeostasis. This suggests that the primary
defect of rs7903146 T-allele carriers is impairment of insulin secretion rather
than a defect in insulin action in peripheral tissues.

PMID: 18611970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2008 Jul;50(7):481. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03022.x.

Hyperventilation and the Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Ouvrier R.

PMID: 18611190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;83(1):130; author reply 131. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.06.002.

Personalized genetics: a responsible approach.

Stephan D, Agus D, Nierenberg M, Silver E.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Mar;82(3):593-9.

PMCID: PMC2443841
PMID: 18606304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Mol Model. 2008 Oct;14(10):879-86. doi: 10.1007/s00894-008-0331-y. Epub 2008
Jul 5.

Computational models for the shuttling motion of the macrocycle in rotaxane-based
molecular switches.

Hirva P(1), Haukka M, Pakkanen TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Joensuu, B.O.Box 111, FI-80101,
Joensuu, Finland. pipsa.hirva@joensuu.fi

The shuttling motion of a macrocycle in rotaxane-based molecular switching
devices has been studied by computational density functional methods. In the test
case, energy profiles corresponding to the dethreading process of different types
of guest molecules in a cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) host verified the
experimental preference of the tetrathiafulvalene recognition site over the
dioxynaphthalene site in a Stoddart-Heath type molecular device. Furthermore,
modification of the redox state of either the macrocycle or the guest molecule
resulted in considerable changes in the computational energy profiles, which can 
be utilized in explaining the behavior of the host-guest system. In order to
study the effect of chemical oxidation/reduction in the guest molecule, we have
investigated a prototypical shaft including two octahedral ruthenium complexes
linked by a conjugated C(14) carbon chain, where the shuttling motion can be
triggered by changing the electronic environment of the active complexes with
ligand exchange reactions. The computational results also indicated effective
communication between the macrocycle and the conjugated carbon chain, therefore
showing the importance of non-covalent host-guest interactions in the control of 
the motion.

PMID: 18604570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cancer Lett. 2008 Nov 18;271(1):85-97. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.05.035. Epub
2008 Jul 7.

beta-Catenin/TCF pathway upregulates STAT3 expression in human esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Yan S(1), Zhou C, Zhang W, Zhang G, Zhao X, Yang S, Wang Y, Lu N, Zhu H, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Panjiayuan, Chaoyang District, Beijing, PR China.

Precise roles of beta-catenin/TCF pathway involved in esophageal tumorigenesis
remain elusive. Here we found STAT3 overexpression in esophageal cancer cells and
tissues, and its overexpression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)
tissues correlated with beta-catenin cytoplasmic/nuclear accumulation. A
functional TCF binding element was detected in STAT3 promoter which specifically 
bound to TCF4. Transfected beta-catenin induced STAT3 transcriptional activity
dose-dependently, and also enhanced STAT3 mRNA and protein levels. These
inductions were specifically abolished by dominant-negative TCF4. These results
suggest that STAT3 is a target of beta-catenin/TCF pathway and might participate 
in esophageal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 18602747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;22(11):2383-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0135. Epub 2008 Jul
3.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Jin T(1), Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Physiology, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. tianru.jin@utoronto.ca

Since the relationship between TCF7L2 (also known as TCF-4) polymorphisms and
type 2 diabetes mellitus was identified in 2006, extensive genome-wide
association examinations in different ethnic groups have further confirmed this
relationship. As a component of the bipartite transcription factor
beta-catenin/TCF, TCF7L2 is important in conveying Wnt signaling during embryonic
development and in regulating gene expression during adulthood. Although we still
do not know mechanistically how the polymorphisms within the intron regions of
TCF7L2 affect the risk of type 2 diabetes, this transcriptional regulator was
shown to be involved in stimulating the proliferation of pancreatic beta-cells
and the production of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 in intestinal 
endocrine L cells. In this review, we introduce background knowledge of TCF7L2 as
a component of the Wnt signaling pathway, summarize recent findings demonstrating
the association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and the risk of type 2 diabetes,
outline experimental evidence of the potential function of TCF7L2 in pancreatic
and intestinal endocrine cells, and present our perspective views.

PMID: 18599616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Jul 3;9:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-59.

Impact of nine common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms in Asian Indian Sikhs:
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala), IGF2BP2, TCF7L2 and FTO variants confer a significant risk.

Sanghera DK(1), Ortega L, Han S, Singh J, Ralhan SK, Wander GS, Mehra NK,
Mulvihill JJ, Ferrell RE, Nath SK, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Dharambir-Sanghera@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified several 
unsuspected genes associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) with previously unknown
functions. In this investigation, we have examined the role of 9 most significant
SNPs reported in GWA studies: [peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2
(PPARG2; rs 1801282); insulin-like growth factor two binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2; 
rs 4402960); cyclin-dependent kinase 5, a regulatory subunit-associated
protein1-like 1 (CDK5; rs7754840); a zinc transporter and member of solute
carrier family 30 (SLC30A8; rs13266634); a variant found near cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A; rs10811661); hematopoietically expressed homeobox
(HHEX; rs 1111875); transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2; rs 10885409);
potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 11(KCNJ11; rs 5219); and
fat mass obesity-associated gene (FTO; rs 9939609)].
METHODS: We genotyped these SNPs in a case-control sample of 918 individuals
consisting of 532 T2D cases and 386 normal glucose tolerant (NGT) subjects of an 
Asian Sikh community from North India. We tested the association between T2D and 
each SNP using unconditional logistic regression before and after adjusting for
age, gender, and other covariates. We also examined the impact of these variants 
on body mass index (BMI), waist to hip ratio (WHR), fasting insulin, and glucose 
and lipid levels using multiple linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Four of the nine SNPs revealed a significant association with T2D;
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala) [odds ratio (OR) 0.12; 95% confidence interval (CI)
(0.03-0.52); p = 0.005], IGF2BP2 [OR 1.37; 95% CI (1.04-1.82); p = 0.027], TCF7L2
[OR 1.64; 95% CI (1.20-2.24); p = 0.001] and FTO [OR 1.46; 95% CI (1.11-1.93); p 
= 0.007] after adjusting for age, sex and BMI. Multiple linear regression
analysis revealed significant association of two of nine investigated loci with
diabetes-related quantitative traits. The 'C' (risk) allele of CDK5 (rs 7754840) 
was significantly associated with decreased HDL-cholesterol levels in both NGT (p
= 0.005) and combined (NGT and T2D) (0.005) groups. The less common 'C' (risk)
allele of TCF7L2 (rs 10885409) was associated with increased LDL-cholesterol (p =
0.010) in NGT and total and LDL-cholesterol levels (p = 0.008; p = 0.003,
respectively) in combined cohort.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is first study reporting the role of some
recently emerged loci with T2D in a high risk population of Asian Indian origin. 
Further investigations are warranted to understand the pathway-based functional
implications of these important loci in T2D pathophysiology in different
ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC2481250
PMID: 18598350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Oct;40(10):722-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1078730. Epub 2008 Jul
2.

Variants of the PPARG, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and TCF7L2 genes confer risk of
type 2 diabetes independently of BMI in the German KORA studies.

Herder C(1), Rathmann W, Strassburger K, Finner H, Grallert H, Huth C, Meisinger 
C, Gieger C, Martin S, Giani G, Scherbaum WA, Wichmann HE, Illig T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Diabetes Research, German Diabetes Centre, Leibniz
Centre at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
christian.herder@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies identified novel gene variants that are
associated with type 2 diabetes. However, results were not always consistent
across different populations. Thus, the aims of this study were (i) to replicate 
findings from previous GWA studies in mainly Northern European populations using 
data from the German KORA 500 K diabetes project and (ii) to assess the impact of
BMI on associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and type 2
diabetes. The KORA 500 K diabetes project includes 433 cases with validated type 
2 diabetes and 1 438 nondiabetic controls from two population-based KORA surveys.
Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 500 K Array 
Set. We investigated associations between SNPs and type 2 diabetes in 10 genes
that have been reported to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes or were in
complete or near-complete linkage disequilibrium with these variants. SNPs in the
CDKAL1 gene showed the strongest association with type 2 diabetes [range of age
and sex-adjusted odds ratios (OR): 1.30-1.39, p-values 0.0008-0.0004]. In
addition, we found evidence for association of SNPs in the genes PPARG, IGF2BP2, 
HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO with type 2 diabetes in the same directions as previously
described (p<0.05), but not for WFS1, CDKN2A/B, KCNJ11, or EXT2. Adjustment for
BMI slightly strengthened the link between CDKAL1 and type 2 diabetes, but had
almost no impact on the other associations. We conclude that gene variants of
CDKAL1, PPARG, IGF2BP2, HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO predispose to type 2 diabetes in
the German KORA 500 K study population. These associations appear to be
independent of BMI.

PMID: 18597214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Signal. 2008 Sep;20(9):1632-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.05.003. Epub
2008 May 18.

Smad2 functions as a co-activator of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway
independent of Smad4 through histone acetyltransferase activity of p300.

Hirota M(1), Watanabe K, Hamada S, Sun Y, Strizzi L, Mancino M, Nagaoka T,
Gonzales M, Seno M, Bianco C, Salomon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Both canonical Wnt/beta-catenin and TGFbeta/Smad signaling pathways coordinately 
regulate pattern formation during embryogenesis as well as tumor progression.
Evidence of cross-talk between these two pathways has been reported. Here we
demonstrated that the Activin-like kinase 4 (Alk4)/Smad2 pathway facilitates the 
transcriptional activity of the oncogenic Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf4 pathway through a
novel Smad4-independent mechanism. Upon activation, Smad2 physically interacted
with Tcf4, beta-catenin and the co-activator p300 to enhance transcriptional
activity of beta-catenin/Tcf4 through the histone acetyltransferase activity of
p300. Transactivation by Smad2 was independent of a Smad-binding element (SBE)
and Smad4. Indeed, the enhancement of beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity 
by activated Smad2 was negatively regulated by the presence of Smad4. Moreover, a
tumor-derived missense mutant of Smad2, lacking the ability to bind to Smad4 was 
still able to enhance the Tcf4 transcriptional reporter in the presence of
beta-catenin and Tcf4. Our findings suggest that Smad2 may function as an
activator of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf4 signaling through a
SBE/Smad4-independent pathway.

PMCID: PMC2578836
PMID: 18595660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;14(13):4045-52. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-5040.

Overexpression of Jab1 in hepatocellular carcinoma and its inhibition by
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor{gamma} ligands in vitro and in vivo.

Hsu MC(1), Huang CC, Chang HC, Hu TH, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Taiwan, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Jun activation domain-binding protein 1 (Jab1) is the fifth subunit of
the COP9 signalosome and exhibits oncogenic activity. We investigated Jab1
expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cell lines and tested
the effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma)
ligands on Jab1 expression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Jab1 expression in HCC tissues and cell lines was studied by
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, immunohistochemical staining, and Western
blotting. Promoter activity and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were done to
address the inhibition of Jab1 promoter by PPARgamma ligands. RNA interference
was used to clarify PPARgamma ligand-induced inhibition of Jab1. Anticancer and
Jab1-suppressing activity of PPARgamma ligands was tested in nude mice.
RESULTS: Jab1 was detected in the nucleus and cytoplasm of HCC tissues and 37%
(37 of 99) of tissues exhibited Jab1 overexpression. Jab1 expression correlated
with sex and hepatitis C virus infection, whereas it was negatively associated
with hepatitis B virus infection. Additionally, Jab1 was overexpressed in HCC
cell lines. PPARgamma ligands troglitazone and rosiglitazone down-regulated Jab1 
expression in HCC cells, and troglitazone directly suppressed Jab1 promoter
activity by inhibiting Sp1- and Tcf4-mediated transcription. This suppression was
mediated via both PPARgamma-dependent and PPARgamma-independent mechanisms.
Ectopic expression of Jab1 counteracted troglitazone-induced growth inhibition.
Animal studies verified that intratumor or i.p. injection of troglitazone
attenuated HCC growth and reduced Jab1 expression in tumor tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that Jab1 is overexpressed in HCC and PPARgamma
ligands may suppress Jab1 to inhibit the proliferation of HCC cells.

PMID: 18593980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5177-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6234.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha obstructs a Wnt signaling pathway by inhibiting
the hARD1-mediated activation of beta-catenin.

Lim JH(1), Chun YS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Chongno-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Although a splice variant of mouse mARD1s was found to acetylate and destabilize 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), human hARD1 has no such activities.
Nonetheless, hARD1 has been reported to bind directly with HIF-1alpha. Here, we
addressed the functional significance of the hARD1-HIF-1alpha interaction.
Because hARD1 acetylates and activates beta-catenin, we examined whether
HIF-1alpha regulates the hARD1-mediated activation of Wnt signaling. It was found
that HIF-1alpha binds hARD1 through the oxygen-dependent degradation domain and, 
in so doing, dissociates hARD1 from beta-catenin, which prevents beta-catenin
acetylation. In LiCl-stimulated HEK293 or cancer cell lines with active Wnt
signaling, beta-catenin acetylation and activity were suppressed in hypoxia, and 
these suppressions were mediated by HIF-1alpha. Moreover, HIF-1alpha disruption
of hARD1/beta-catenin repressed TCF4 activity, resulting in c-Myc suppression and
p21(cip1) induction. In addition, we confirmed that the HIF-1alpha NH(2) terminal
inactivates TCF4 by directly binding beta-catenin. In conclusion, HIF-1alpha was 
found to inactivate the Wnt signaling by binding to hARD1 or beta-catenin, which 
may contribute to the hypoxia-induced growth arrest of tumor cells.

PMID: 18593917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;198(1):17-28. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0085.

Mechanisms underlying proglucagon gene expression.

Jin T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
tianru.jin@utoronto.ca

The proglucagon gene (gcg) encodes a number of peptide hormones that are of
cell-type specifically expressed in the pancreatic islets, the distal ileum and
the large intestine, as well as certain brain neuronal cells. These hormones are 
important in controlling blood glucose homeostasis, intestinal cell
proliferation, and satiety. More importantly, the major hormone generated in the 
pancreas (i.e. glucagon) exerts opposite effects to the ones that are produced in
the intestines (i.e. glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and GLP-2). To understand
the mechanisms underlying cell-type-specific gcg expression may lead to the
identification of novel drug targets to control endogenous hormone production for
therapeutic purposes. Extensive in vitro examinations have shown that more than a
half dozen of homeodomain (HD) proteins are able to interact with the gcg gene
promoter and activate its expression. In vivo 'knock-out' mouse studies, however,
cannot demonstrate the role of some of them (i.e. Cdx-2, Brn-4, and Nkx6.2) in
the development of pancreatic islet alpha-cells, suggesting that these HD
proteins may exert some redundant functions in the genesis of gcg-producing
cells. Investigations have also revealed that gcg expression is controlled by
both protein kinase A and Epac signaling pathways in response to cAMP elevation, 
and cell-type specifically controlled by insulin and the effectors of the Wnt
signaling pathway. This review summarizes our current understanding on the
mechanisms underlying gcg transcription and presented my interpretations on how
the interactions between different signaling networks regulate gcg expression.

PMID: 18577568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(10):2018-22. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.05.002. 
Epub 2008 May 15.

Rho GTPases and p21-activated kinase in the regulation of proliferation and
apoptosis by gastrins.

He H(1), Baldwin GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Studley Road,
Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia.

Gastrins, including amidated gastrin (Gamide) and glycine-extended gastrin
(Ggly), accelerate the growth of gastrointestinal cancer cells by stimulation of 
proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis. Gamide and Ggly activate different G
proteins of the Rho family of small GTPases. For example, Gamide signals
Rac/Cdc42 to activate p21-activated kinase 1 while Ggly signals Rho to activate
Rho-activated kinase. p21-activated kinase 1 and Rho-activated kinase induce
changes in phosphorylation or expression, respectively, of proteins of the Bcl-2 
family, which then affect the caspase cascade with consequent inhibition of
apoptosis. In addition, interaction of p21-activated kinase 1 with beta-catenin
results in phosphorylation of beta-catenin, which enhances its translocation in
to the nucleus, activation of TCF4-dependent transcription, and proliferation and
migration. The central role of the beta-catenin pathway in carcinogenesis
suggests that specific inhibitors of p21-activated kinase 1 may in the future
provide novel therapies for gastrointestinal malignancies.

PMID: 18565785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Feb;19(2):140-5. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.02.009. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

The effect of WNT5B IVS3C>G on the susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in UK
Caucasian subjects.

Salpea KD(1), Gable DR, Cooper JA, Stephens JW, Hurel SJ, Ireland HA, Feher MD,
Godsland IF, Humphries SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, British Heart
Foundation Laboratories, The Rayne Building, Royal Free and University College
Medical School, 5 University Street, London, WC1E 6JF, UK. k.salpea@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The wnt signaling pathway regulates adipogenesis and insulin
secretion. The WNT5B gene has been reported to confer susceptibility to type 2
diabetes (T2D) in the Japanese population, and we therefore evaluated this in
Caucasian subjects with respect to obesity status.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Two thousand seven hundred and one Caucasian middle-aged men
from the prospective Northwick Park Heart Study II (NPHSII) of whom 153 developed
T2D over 15 years and 1268 Caucasian middle-aged patients with T2D (60% male)
were genotyped using a TaqMan assay for the IVS3C>G variant (rs2270031) in the
WNT5B gene. The frequency of the G allele was 0.026 (0.022-0.031) in controls and
0.031 (0.025-0.039) in patients with diabetes, p=0.24. In the prospective
analysis, G allele carriers with BMI below 26 kg/m(2) had significantly higher
T2D hazard risk [3.46 (1.34-8.96), p=0.01]. Comparing T2D cases with NPHSII
controls, the G allele was associated with a significantly higher T2D odds ratio 
(OR) of 1.50 (1.06-2.12), p=0.02 in subjects with BMI lower than 30 kg/m(2).
Increasing BMI had a smaller effect on risk in G allele carriers. The effect on
risk was not explained by genotype being associated with any classical T2D risk
factor. When the combined effect of this SNP and the TCF7L2 IVS3C>T SNP
(rs7903146) was evaluated, a 2.07 (1.40-3.07), p<0.0001 fold higher OR was
observed in carriers of both the rare alleles.
CONCLUSION: Variation in WNT5B predisposes to T2D in the absence of obesity. The 
increase in risk conferred by the presence of both WNT5B and TCF7L2 variants
strengthens the role of wnt signaling in T2D.

PMID: 18555673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Oct;40(10):713-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1078720. Epub 2008 Jun
10.

TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 and predisposition for type 2 diabetes mellitus in 
obese children.

Roth CL(1), Hinney A, Reinehr T, Schreiner F, Nguyen TT, Müller T, Scholl C,
Woelfle J, Karpushova A, Schäfer H, Nöthen MM, Hebebrand J.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology, Seattle Children's Hospital Research Institute, 1900
Ninth Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101, USA. christian.roth@seattlechildrens.org

Polymorphism RS7903146 in transcription factor 7-like2 gene ( TCF7L2) is
associated with type 2-diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in adults. Concerned with
predisposition for diabetes mellitus in obese children, we tested if risk
genotypes TC and TT of rs7903146 are more common in obese children with increased
homeostasis model assessment insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) compared to obese
controls with normal HOMA-IR. As exploratory analysis, we also calculated
beta-cell function for these risk genotypes and measured glucagon-like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) in a subgroup. The cohort was 401 obese children (BMI > 2SDS; 211 female;
59% presenting increased HOMA-IR) from two German outpatient obesity referral
centers. Genotype distributions in patients presenting increased HOMA-IR (TT:
10.18%, CT: 35.65%, CC: 54.17%) and in patients with normal HOMA-IR (TT: 8.66%,
CT: 42.67%, CC: 48.67%) provided no significant effect of these two risk
genotypes (p > 0.2). Correction for possible confounder's gender, age, pubertal
stage, and BMI revealed no association with glucose metabolism parameters
including GLP-1. However, exploratory HOMA-B% index was comparatively higher in
TT-homozygotes (p=0.021) as compared to CC-homozygotes. We conclude that even
though TT and CT genotypes were not higher in patients presenting elevated
HOMA-IR, the higher HOMA-B% index in TT-homozygotes indicates TCF7L2 to be a
susceptibility gene for the development of impaired glucose tolerance in obese
children as demonstrated in several adult cohort studies.

PMID: 18546086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2008 Jul;11(4):385-92. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e328304d970.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 gene and increased risk of type 2 diabetes: an 
update.

Lyssenko V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
Malmoe, Sweden. Valeri.Lyssenko@med.lu.se

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to provide a comprehensive
evaluation of the most important type 2 diabetes gene to date, transcription
factor 7 like-2.
RECENT FINDINGS: An important step to find genetic causes of type 2 diabetes in
2006 was the identification of the fact that variants in the gene encoding
transcription factor 7 like-2 reproducibly increase susceptibility to type 2
diabetes in almost all populations studied. This gene has since then emerged as
the most important type 2 diabetes gene. Genetic variants in transcription factor
7 like-2 confer a strong risk of type 2 diabetes possibly mediated by altering
expression of transcription factor 7 like-2 in pancreatic islets. Risk variants
in the transcription factor 7 like-2 influence insulin secretions both in vitro
and in vivo. The risk T allele of this single nucleotide polymorphism also seems 
to have effects on the enteroinsular axis and the relationship between the
incretin hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide and its target
hormones, glucagon and insulin. Given transcription factor 7 like-2s' central
role in the Wnt signaling pathway, it would be important to define whether the
variant is associated with increased or decreased Wnt signaling.
SUMMARY: The fact that transcription factor 7 like-2 is by far the strongest type
2 diabetes susceptibility gene to date emphasizes the importance of exploring the
potential of manipulating this pathway in future treatment of the disease.

PMID: 18541996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 1;68(11):4258-68. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5805.

Defective claudin-7 regulation by Tcf-4 and Sox-9 disrupts the polarity and
increases the tumorigenicity of colorectal cancer cells.

Darido C(1), Buchert M, Pannequin J, Bastide P, Zalzali H, Mantamadiotis T,
Bourgaux JF, Garambois V, Jay P, Blache P, Joubert D, Hollande F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 5203, Institut de Génomique 
Fonctionnelle, INSERM U661, Université Montpellier 1, 2, Montpellier, France.

Tight junctions have recently emerged as essential signaling regulators of
proliferation and differentiation in epithelial tissues. Here, we aimed to
identify the factors regulating claudin-7 expression in the colon, and analyzed
the consequences of claudin-7 overexpression in colorectal carcinoma (CRC). In
healthy human colonic crypts, claudin-7 expression was found to be low in the
stem/progenitor cell compartment, where Tcf-4 activity is high, but strong in
differentiated and postmitotic cells, where Tcf-4 is inactive. In contrast,
claudin-7 was overexpressed in areas with high Tcf-4 target gene levels in CRC
samples. In vitro, Tcf-4 was able to repress claudin-7 expression, and the high
mobility group-box transcription factor Sox-9 was identified as an essential
mediator of this effect. Claudin-7 was strongly expressed in the intestine of
Sox-9-deficient mice and in CRC cells with low Sox transcriptional activity.
Sox-9 overexpression in these cells reinstated claudin-7 repression, and residual
claudin-7 was no longer localized along the basolateral membrane, but was instead
restricted to tight junctions. Using HT-29Cl.16E CRC cell spheroids, we found
that Sox-9-induced polarization was completely reversed after virus-mediated
claudin-7 overexpression. Claudin-7 overexpression in this context increased
Tcf-4 target gene expression, proliferation, and tumorigenicity after injection
in nude mice. Our results indicate that Tcf-4 maintains low levels of claudin-7
at the bottom of colonic crypts, acting via Sox-9. This negative regulation seems
to be defective in CRC, possibly due to decreased Sox-9 activity, and the
resulting claudin-7 overexpression promotes a loss of tumor cell polarization and
contributes to tumorigenesis.

PMID: 18519685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):826-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.139. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Expression of Id and ITF-2 genes in the mammary gland during pregnancy.

Itahana Y(1), Piens M, Fong S, Singh J, Sumida T, Desprez PY.

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center, Cancer Research Institute, 475 Brannan
Street, Suite 220, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA.

Id-1 is one of the four related helix-loop-helix Id proteins that act as
inhibitors of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that
control cell differentiation, development and carcinogenesis. We previously found
that Id-1 regulated the growth, differentiation, apoptosis and invasion of mouse 
mammary epithelial cells in culture. Using the techniques of immunohistochemistry
and in situ hybridization, we now show that Id-1 gene expression is specifically 
detected in the epithelial cells of growing ductal structures during early
pregnancy. Using adjacent sections, we determined that Id-1 was expressed in
keratin 8/18 positive cells. We also demonstrated that the up-regulation of Id-2 
during late pregnancy correlated with the down-regulation of Id-1. Using the
yeast-two hybrid system, we identified the bHLH transcription factors, ITF-2A and
ITF-2B, as the Id-interacting proteins. The levels of expression of these two
splice variants did not change during the transition from growing ductal
structures to differentiated alveoli. Therefore Id-1 and Id-2, but not the
ubiquitous bHLH proteins, appear to represent the key factors whose expression is
modulated during different stages of pregnancy in mouse mammary glands.

PMCID: PMC2497456
PMID: 18519032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Oct;1783(10):1943-54. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.04.016. Epub 2008 May 3.

PAK1 interacts with beta-catenin and is required for the regulation of the
beta-catenin signalling pathway by gastrins.

He H(1), Shulkes A, Baldwin GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Studley Road,
Heidelberg, Melbourne, Victoria 3084, Australia. hong.he@unimelb.edu.au

Beta-catenin regulates cell-cell adhesion by binding to E-cadherin at the cell
membrane and, when translocated into the nucleus, mediates signalling by
activation of transcription factors such as TCF4. Mutations of the components of 
the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway are found in many gastrointestinal cancers.
Gastrins, including amidated (Gamide) and glycine-extended (Ggly) gastrin(17),
stimulate the proliferation of gastrointestinal cancer cells. Gastrins also
regulate beta-catenin signalling through multiple pathways which seem to converge
on p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1). In this study, we have investigated the role of
PAK1 in the regulation of beta-catenin signalling by gastrins. Here we report for
the first time that PAK1 associated with beta-catenin. Both Gamide and Ggly
stimulated the phosphorylation and activation of beta-catenin in a PAK1-dependent
manner. A kinase-inactive mutant PAK1(K299A) blocked the gastrin-stimulated
dissociation of beta-catenin from E-cadherin, translocation of beta-catenin from 
the cell membrane to the nucleus, and association of beta-catenin with the
transcription factor TCF4. The PAK1(K299A) mutant also inhibited the stimulation 
of the expression of c-myc and cyclin D1, and of cell proliferation and
migration, by gastrins. The results indicate that gastrins regulate beta-catenin 
signalling through a PAK1-dependent pathway. PAK1 seems to be the point of
convergence of multiple signalling pathways activated by gastrins.

PMID: 18515095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 1;123(3):561-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23600.

FRAT1 overexpression leads to aberrant activation of beta-catenin/TCF pathway in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Liu S, Zhu H, Zhang W, Zhang G, Zhou X, Zhou C, Quan L, Bai J, Xue L, 
Lu N, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100021, China.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is an aggressive tumor with a poor
prognosis. Although aberrant activation of beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)
pathway has been observed in ESCC, mechanisms underlying this phenomenon remain
unknown. Frequently rearranged in advanced T-cell lymphomas-1 (FRAT1),
overexpressed in some ESCC lines, is a positive regulator of beta-catenin/TCF
pathway. However, little is known about the molecular relationship between FRAT1 
and beta-catenin/TCF in ESCC. In this study, we analyzed freshly resected ESCC
specimens and demonstrated that FRAT1 was overexpressed in approximately 74% of
tumor samples compared with matched normal tissue. Overexpression of FRAT1
significantly promoted esophageal cancer cells growth, whereas suppression of
FRAT1 level by RNAi markedly inhibited their growth. In addition, FRAT1
overexpression induced the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and promoted the 
transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/TCF. These effects were reversed by
coexpression of GSK 3beta or DeltaN TCF4. Furthermore, accumulation of
beta-catenin was correlated with FRAT1 overexpression in ESCC and the basal layer
of normal esophageal epithelium. Finally, continued expression of c-Myc is
necessary and sufficient for maintenance of the growth state in cells expressing 
FRAT1. Taken together, these results support the novel hypothesis that aberrant
activation of beta-catenin/TCF pathway in esophageal cancer appears to be due to 
upstream events such as FRAT1 overexpression, and c-Myc may be an important
element in oncogenesis of human ESCC induced by FRAT1.

PMID: 18498136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1146-52. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1039-3. Epub 2008
May 21.

Exon sequencing and association analysis of polymorphisms in TCF7L2 with type 2
diabetes in a Chinese population.

Ren Q(1), Han XY, Wang F, Zhang XY, Han LC, Luo YY, Zhou XH, Ji LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing, 100044, China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recently, variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene have been found to be consistently associated with type 2 diabetes in
different populations. In this study, we hypothesized that TCF7L2 also
contributed to genetic susceptibility for type 2 diabetes in a Chinese
population.
METHODS: We looked for new variants by direct sequencing of all exons and
intron-exon junctions of TCF7L2 in 100 Chinese type 2 diabetic patients, and then
we genotyped five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by Snapshot technology
in 1,000 Chinese individuals.
RESULTS: By sequencing, we identified six SNPs (c.1,637C>A; c.1,674C>G;
c.1,709G>A; c.1,846C>G; c.1,888C>T; and c.1,876T>G), and three of them led to
non-synonymous polymorphisms (c.1,637C>A, His-->Gln or Pro-->Thr; c.1,674C>G,
Pro-->Arg; and c.1,709G>A, Ala-->Thr). All of them are rare except c.1,637C>A,
which had a frequency of 0.23 for the minor A allele in 98 sequenced individuals.
In a case-control study, one of the newly discovered SNPs (c.1,637C>A), together 
with four reported ones (rs7903146, rs12255372, rs290487 and rs3814573) were
genotyped. Comparison between allele and genotype frequencies of these SNPs in
patients and controls showed marginal association for rs7903146 and rs290487 with
type 2 diabetes (p = 0.063, OR 1.982, 95% CI 1.128-3.485; p = 0.071, OR 1.237,
95% CI 0.983-1.557, respectively). No association was found for rs12255372,
rs3814573, c.1,637C>A and type 2 diabetes (p = 0.278-1.000).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: With the current sample size, we did not find any
mutation in the coding sequence of TCF7L2 that confers a genetic risk for type 2 
diabetes in a Chinese population, and did not replicate some of the major
positive results obtained in other populations.

PMID: 18493736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(16):4963-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00266-08. Epub 2008 May 
19.

Feedback regulation between zipcode binding protein 1 and beta-catenin mRNAs in
breast cancer cells.

Gu W(1), Wells AL, Pan F, Singer RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA. wgu@aecom.yu.edu

ZBP1 (zipcode binding protein 1) is an RNA-binding protein involved in many
posttranscriptional processes, such as RNA localization, RNA stability, and
translational control. ZBP1 is abundantly expressed in embryonic development, but
its expression is silenced in most adult tissues. Reactivation of the ZBP1 gene
has been reported in various human tumors. In this study, we identified a
detailed molecular mechanism of ZBP1 transactivation in breast cancer cells. We
show that beta-catenin, a protein that functions in both cell adhesion and
transcription, specifically binds to the ZBP1 promoter via a conserved
beta-catenin/TCF4 response element and activates its gene expression. ZBP1
activation is also closely correlated with nuclear translocation of beta-catenin 
in human breast tumors. We further demonstrate feedback regulation by finding
that ZBP1 physically associates with beta-catenin mRNA in vivo and increases its 
stability. These experiments suggest that in breast cancer cells, the expression 
of ZBP1 and the expression of beta-catenin are coordinately regulated.
beta-Catenin mediates the transcription of the ZBP1 gene, while ZBP1 promotes the
stability of beta-catenin mRNA.

PMCID: PMC2519696
PMID: 18490442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochem Soc Trans. 2008 Jun;36(Pt 3):357-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0360357.

TCF7L2 controls insulin gene expression and insulin secretion in mature
pancreatic beta-cells.

Loder MK(1), da Silva Xavier G, McDonald A, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, Sir
Alexander Fleming Building, Exhibition Road, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ,
UK. m.loder@imperial.ac.uk

Genetic studies have linked the risk of Type 2 diabetes with SNPs (single
nucleotide polymorphisms) in the gene encoding the Wnt signalling-associated
transcription factor, TCF7L2 (T-cell factor 7-like 2). The risk alleles have been
associated with reduced glucose and GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide 1)-stimulated
insulin secretion. Recent evidence has suggested that inheritance of the at-risk 
T allele at SNP rs7903146 may increase the expression of TCF7L2 in adult human
islets. However, the cellular mechanisms by which changes in TCF7L2 levels may
affect insulin secretion are unclear. In the present paper, we describe the use
of RNA silencing to investigate the role of TCF7L2 on insulin secretion and gene 
expression in rodent islets. We find that reduced TCF7L2 expression reduces
glucose-simulated insulin secretion and insulin gene expression while slightly
potentiating glucose stimulated changes in intracellular free Ca(2+)
concentrations.

PMID: 18481957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Causes Control. 2008 Nov;19(9):975-80. doi: 10.1007/s10552-008-9164-3.
Epub 2008 May 14.

Association of the TCF7L2 polymorphism with colorectal cancer and adenoma risk.

Hazra A(1), Fuchs CS, Chan AT, Giovannucci EL, Hunter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. ahazra@hsph.harvard.edu

We evaluated the association of a polymorphism in TCF7L2 (RS12255372) in the WNT 
signaling pathway, which previously has been strongly associated with risk of
Type II Diabetes, with colorectal cancer (CRC) and adenoma in the prospective
Nurses' Health Study (NHS) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS)
cohorts. Hyperinsulinemia may be related to the risk of colon adenoma and cancer,
therefore this variant associated with reduced insulin secretion would be
predicted to be inversely associated with colorectal cancer. Overall, in the NHS 
and HPFS, there was suggestive evidence for an inverse association associated
with homozygosity for the minor allele of RS12255372 (TCF7L2 TT) and CRC
(conditional and covariate adjusted OR = 0.63, 95% CI: 0.37-1.08; P for
heterogeneity 0.52 for the association in women and men). In summary, the
marginal association of the TCF7L2 SNP with CRC might be due to chance, but
warrants further laboratory and epidemiological investigation.

PMCID: PMC2719293
PMID: 18478343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2226-33. doi: 10.2337/db07-1583. Epub 2008 May 9.

Implication of genetic variants near TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B,
IGF2BP2, and FTO in type 2 diabetes and obesity in 6,719 Asians.

Ng MC(1), Park KS, Oh B, Tam CH, Cho YM, Shin HD, Lam VK, Ma RC, So WY, Cho YS,
Kim HL, Lee HK, Chan JC, Cho NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified six novel genes
for type 2 diabetes and obesity and confirmed TCF7L2 as the major type 2 diabetes
gene to date in Europeans. However, the implications of these genes in Asians are
unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 13 associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms from these genes in 3,041 patients with type 2 diabetes and 3,678
control subjects of Asian ancestry from Hong Kong and Korea.
RESULTS: We confirmed the associations of TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, and FTO with risk for type 2 diabetes, with odds ratios
ranging from 1.13 to 1.35 (1.3 x 10(-12) < P(unadjusted) < 0.016). In addition,
the A allele of rs8050136 at FTO was associated with increased BMI in the control
subjects (P(unadjusted) = 0.008). However, we did not observe significant
association of any genetic variants with surrogate measures of insulin secretion 
or insulin sensitivity indexes in a subset of 2,662 control subjects. Compared
with subjects carrying zero, one, or two risk alleles, each additional risk
allele was associated with 17% increased risk, and there was an up to 3.3-fold
increased risk for type 2 diabetes in those carrying eight or more risk alleles. 
Despite most of the effect sizes being similar between Asians and Europeans in
the meta-analyses, the ethnic differences in risk allele frequencies in most of
these genes lead to variable attributable risks in these two populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the important but differential contribution of 
these genetic variants to type 2 diabetes and obesity in Asians compared with
Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2494677
PMID: 18469204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Sep;51(3):349-55. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21595.

Wnt10b induces chemotaxis of osteosarcoma and correlates with reduced survival.

Chen K(1), Fallen S, Abaan HO, Hayran M, Gonzalez C, Wodajo F, MacDonald T,
Toretsky JA, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma (OS) is a primary malignant tumor of the bone that
typically presents in the second decade of life and has a poor prognosis,
especially in metastatic cases. Wnt signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of 
tumors such as colon cancer and malignant melanoma. Wnt signaling controls normal
bone formation during embryogenesis and homeostasis in adult organisms, thus we
evaluated Wnt signaling in OS.
PROCEDURE: We surveyed the expression of Wnts, their receptors, Frizzleds and
LRPs, and soluble Wnt inhibitors (sFRPs) in four OS cell lines by RT-PCR. We also
tested biological response of OS cell lines to exogenous Wnts by measuring
beta-catenin stabilization, Dvl phosphorylation, TOPFLASH activity and
chemotaxis. Human OS tumor microarrays were evaluated for expression of Wnt10b by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: All cell lines tested showed expression of at least three Wnts and one
Frizzled. Exogenous Wnt3a and Wnt10b treatment induced Dvl phosphorylation,
beta-catenin stabilization and TCF4 transcriptional activity in both metastatic
and non-metastatic murine OS cell lines. Metastatic OS cell lines showed better
chemotaxis response to Wnts than the non-metastatic OS cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry studies of 44 human OS samples demonstrated that Wnt10b
expression correlated with decreased overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These results further supports a possible autocrine or paracrine Wnt
pathway in metastatic potential of OS.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18465804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 May;31(5):916-20.

Growth inhibition of human colon cancer cell line HCT116 by
bis[2-(acylamino)phenyl] disulfide and its action mechanism.

Yamakawa S(1), Demizu A, Kawaratani Y, Nagaoka Y, Terada Y, Maruyama S, Uesato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Material
and Bioengineering, Kansai University, 3-3-35 Yamate-cho, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, 
Japan.

Our laboratory has been investigating the use of compounds which disrupt
beta-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) binding to treat human colon cancer. There are
several cysteine residues on the surface of beta-catenin where it binds to TCF.
Some bis[2-(acylamino)phenyl] disulfides might have the ability to form a
disulfide bond with the cysteine residues of beta-catenin, leading to inhibition 
of the growth of human colon cells. Bis[2-(acylamino)phenyl] disulfides were
screened to inhibit the growth of cancer cells. Among them,
bis[2-(2,2-dimethylpropanoylamino)phenyl] disulfide (1) had promising inhibitory 
effects (HCT116, IC50: 9.7 microM; DLD-1, IC50: 6.9 microM) on cell
proliferation, and did not show any cytotoxicity among normal human fibroblast
CCD-1059SK cells even at 200 microM. This derivative reduced the
beta-catenin/TCF4 association in the HCT116 cells to ca. 50% at 150 microM.
Furthermore, it activated markedly the phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) connected to stress-activated apoptosis at a lower concentration (30
microM). In view of cell cycle analyses, Hoechst staining, and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin Nick end-labeling (TUNEL)
assays along with the above results, it is likely that 1 inhibited the growth of 
HCT116 cells through pathways including the JNK-mediated apoptosis.

PMID: 18451518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Curr Diab Rep. 2008 Apr;8(2):149-55.

TCF7L2 genetic defect and type 2 diabetes.

Cauchi S, Froguel P.

After two decades of limited success, the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes
(T2D) is finally being revealed. Within only 2 years, an avalanche of studies
identified several genes expressed in pancreatic beta cells and involved in the
control of insulin secretion, such as transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), a
key element of the Wnt signaling pathway. In Europeans, genome-wide association
scans showed that TCF7L2 has been the most important locus predisposing to T2D so
far. For the first time, a gene is consistently involved in T2D susceptibility in
all major ethnic groups. At the individual level, carrying the TCF7L2 risk allele
increases T2D risk 50%. However, at the population level, the attributable risk
is lower than 25% and varies with the allele frequency. The presence of the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 risk allele increases TCF7L2 gene expression in beta cells,
possibly impairing glucagon-like peptide-1-induced insulin secretion and/or the
production of new mature beta cells. The tremendous association of TCF7L2
polymorphisms with T2D provides new insights into future genetic predisposition
tests but remains the tip of the T2D genetic iceberg.

PMID: 18445358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2220-5. doi: 10.2337/db07-1319. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Association analysis in african americans of European-derived type 2 diabetes
single nucleotide polymorphisms from whole-genome association studies.

Lewis JP(1), Palmer ND, Hicks PJ, Sale MM, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Divers J,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Several whole-genome association studies have reported identification 
of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in various European-derived study
populations. Little investigation of these loci has been reported in other ethnic
groups, specifically African Americans. Striking differences exist between these 
populations, suggesting they may not share identical genetic risk factors. Our
objective was to examine the influence of type 2 diabetes genes identified in
whole-genome association studies in a large African American case-control
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 loci
(e.g., TCF7L2, IDE/KIF11/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, PKN2, IGF2BP2, FLJ39370, and
EXT2/ALX4) associated with type 2 diabetes in European-derived populations were
genotyped in 993 African American type 2 diabetic and 1,054 African American
control subjects. Additionally, 68 ancestry-informative markers were genotyped to
account for the impact of admixture on association results.
RESULTS: Little evidence of association was observed between SNPs, with the
exception of those in TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in African Americans. One
TCF7L2 SNP (rs7903146) showed compelling evidence of association with type 2
diabetes (admixture-adjusted additive P [P(a)] = 1.59 x 10(-6)). Only the
intragenic SNP on 11p12 (rs9300039, dominant P [P(d)] = 0.029) was also
associated with type 2 diabetes after admixture adjustments. Interestingly, four 
of the SNPs are monomorphic in the Yoruba population of the HAPMAP project, with 
only the risk allele from the populations of European descent present.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that these variants do not significantly contribute 
to interindividual susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in African Americans.
Consequently, genes contributing to type 2 diabetes in African Americans may, in 
part, be different from those in European-derived study populations. High
frequency of risk alleles in several of these genes may, however, contribute to
the increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC2494685
PMID: 18443202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Apr 28;14(16):2487-93.

Effect and mechanism of the Twist gene on invasion and metastasis of gastric
carcinoma cells.

Luo GQ(1), Li JH, Wen JF, Zhou YH, Hu YB, Zhou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Basic School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha 410008, Hunan Province, China.

AIM: To study the effect of the transfected Twist gene on invasion and metastasis
of gastric carcinoma cells and the possible mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Human gastric carcinoma MKN28 cells were stably transfected with Twist
sense plasmid, and MKN45 cells were stably transfected with Twist antisense
plasmid using the lipofectamine transfection technique. RT-PCR, Western blotting,
EMSA, gelatin zymography assay, and in vitro invasion and migration assays were
performed. Nude mice metastasis models were established by the abdominal cavity
transfer method.
RESULTS: Cell models (TwistS-MKN28) that steadily expressed high Twist protein
were obtained. Compared with MKN28 and pcDNA3-MKN28 cells, adherence, migration
and invasion ability of TwistS-MKN28 cells were clearly raised. The number of
cancer nodules was increased significantly in the abdominal cavity and liver of
nude mice inoculated with TwistS-MKN28 cells. Overexpression of Twist in MKN28
cells increased Tcf-4/Lef DNA binding activity, and promoted expression of
Tcf-4's downstream target genes cyclin D1 and MMP-2. However, suppression of
Twist (TwistAS-MKN45) inhibited MKN45 cell invasion and the expression of cyclin 
D1 was reduced. The activity of MMP-2 was also decreased.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that Twist promotes gastric cancer cell
migration, invasion and metastasis, and Twist may play an important role in
Wnt/Tcf-4 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2708358
PMID: 18442194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hum Pathol. 2008 Jun;39(6):925-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.10.024. Epub 2008 
Apr 28.

Gastric cancer with high-level microsatellite instability: target gene mutations,
clinicopathologic features, and long-term survival.

Falchetti M(1), Saieva C, Lupi R, Masala G, Rizzolo P, Zanna I, Ceccarelli K,
Sera F, Mariani-Costantini R, Nesi G, Palli D, Ottini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University La Sapienza, 00161 Rome,
Italy.

Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death worldwide, and
although the incidence has decreased in Western countries, specific high-risk
areas are present in Italy. Gastric cancer with high-level microsatellite
instability (MSI-H) represents a well-defined subset of carcinomas showing
distinctive clinicopathologic features. We examined clinicopathologic
associations and long-term survival in a series of 159 gastric cancer cases from 
a high-risk population in Tuscany (central Italy). MSI-H was associated with
antral location of the tumor (P = .001), intestinal type according to Lauren
classification (P = .002), expanding type according to Ming classification (P =
.0001), and mucinous histologic type according to the Japanese Research Society
for Gastric Cancer classification (P = .002). In addition, MSI-H was strongly
associated with a higher survival at 15 years (P = .01) and with loss of hMLH1
expression, evaluated by immunohistochemistry (P = .001). Multivariate analyses
showed a significant association between the absence of hMLH1 reactivity and the 
expanding tumor type (P = .002). We also investigated the MSI-H-related genetic
changes by analyzing coding repeats within target genes involved in pathways that
control cell growth (TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, RIZ, TCF4, DP2), apoptosis (BAX, BCL10, 
FAS, CASPASE5, APAF1), and DNA repair genes (hMSH6, hMSH3, MED1, RAD50, BLM, ATR,
BRCA2, MRE11). Gastric cancer cases with MSI-H were found to accumulate
heterozygous mutations affecting multiple molecular pathways and multiple genes
within each pathway. Intriguingly, in this subset, TGFbetaRII mutations appeared 
to be inversely related to BLM mutations (P = .006), whereas RAD50 mutation
carriers showed significantly reduced survival (P = .03).

PMID: 18440592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jun;134(7):1961-71, 1971.e1-4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.010. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Regulation of Wnt signaling by the nuclear pore complex.

Shitashige M(1), Satow R, Honda K, Ono M, Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The function of beta-catenin as a transcriptional coactivator 
of T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) is crucial for colorectal carcinogenesis. However,
beta-catenin has no nuclear localization signal, and the mechanisms by which
beta-catenin is imported into the nucleus and forms a complex with the TCF-4
nuclear protein are poorly understood.
METHODS: Proteins of 2 colorectal cancer cell lines, HCT-116 and DLD1, were
immunoprecipitated with anti-TCF-4 antibody and analyzed directly by nanoflow
liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. The functional significance of
nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins in Wnt signaling was evaluated by in vitro
and in vivo sumoylation, luciferase reporter, and colony formation assays.
RESULTS: TCF-4 interacted with a large variety of NPC proteins including
ras-related nuclear protein (Ran), Ran binding protein-2 (RanBP2), and Ran
GTPase-activating protein-1 (RanGAP1). The NPC protein RanBP2 functioned as the
small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase of TCF-4, and sumoylation of
TCF-4 enhanced the interaction between TCF-4 and beta-catenin. The overexpression
of NPC proteins increased the nuclear import of the TCF-4 and beta-catenin
proteins and enhanced the transcriptional activity. NPC proteins increased the
growth of colorectal cancer cells, whereas sentrin-specific protease-2 inhibited 
it.
CONCLUSIONS: Through a comprehensive proteomics approach, we revealed that NPC
functions as a novel regulator of Wnt signaling and is possibly involved in
colorectal carcinogenesis. A new drug targeting the interactions of TCF-4 with
NPC proteins as well as their sumoylation activity might be effective for
suppressing aberrant Wnt signaling and the proliferation of colorectal cancer
cells.

PMID: 18439914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Diabetologia. 2008 Jun;51(6):968-70. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1004-1. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms, cardiovascular disease and all-cause
mortality: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study.

Bielinski SJ(1), Pankow JS, Folsom AR, North KE, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota, 1300
South 2nd Street, Suite 300, Minneapolis, MN 55454, USA. suzetteb@umn.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesised that TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) are associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) and that the associations
differ in diabetic and non-diabetic persons.
METHODS: Our analysis included black and white participants from the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study who were free of prevalent CVD at
baseline and had been genotyped for rs7903146, rs12255372, rs7901695, rs11196205 
and rs7895340 (n=13,369). Cox proportional hazard regression was used to estimate
the associations between polymorphisms and incident events; logistic and linear
regression were used for associations with baseline risk factor levels.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 SNPs were not significantly associated with incident coronary
heart disease, ischaemic stroke, CVD, prevalent peripheral artery disease (PAD)
or all-cause mortality in the full cohort or when stratified by race.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In the whole cohort, TCF7L2 SNPs were not associated 
with incident CVD, all-cause mortality or prevalent PAD. This result suggests
that the increased health risk associated with rs7903146 genotype is specific to 
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2597203
PMID: 18437354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jun;99(6):1139-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00814.x. Epub
2008 Apr 21.

Human homolog of NOTUM, overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma, is regulated
transcriptionally by beta-catenin/TCF.

Torisu Y(1), Watanabe A, Nonaka A, Midorikawa Y, Makuuchi M, Shimamura T,
Sugimura H, Niida A, Akiyama T, Iwanari H, Kodama T, Zeniya M, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

The Drosophila Notum gene, which is regulated by the Wingless pathway, encodes a 
secreted hydrolase that modifies heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In comparative
analysis of the gene expression profiles in primary human hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) and normal organs, we observed that the human ortholog of
Drosophila Notum was overexpressed markedly in a subset of HCC, but expressed
rarely in adult normal tissues. Immunoblotting confirmed the overexpression of
NOTUM protein in 12 of 40 primary HCC cases (30%). High levels of NOTUM protein
were significantly associated with intracellular (nuclear or cytoplasmic)
accumulation of beta-catenin protein: all 10 HCC with high intracellular
beta-catenin also had high NOTUM expression, whereas only 2 of 30 cases (6.7%)
without intracellular beta-catenin had high NOTUM expression (P < 0.00001). NOTUM
expression in HepG2 cells was downregulated significantly by induction of a
dominant-negative mutant of TCF4, a beta-catenin partner. In vivo binding of the 
beta-catenin/TCF complex to the NOTUM promoter was demonstrated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation in HepG2 and SW480 cells, where canonical Wnt signaling is
activated constitutively. These findings provide evidence that NOTUM is a novel
target of beta-catenin/TCF4 and is upregulated in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling-activated HCC.

PMID: 18429952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Apr;17(4):978-82. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-2687.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism and colon cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Folsom AR, Wolff R, Herrick J, Caan BJ, Potter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. mslattery@hrc.utah.edu

Polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
associated with insulin sensitivity and diabetes, and the TCF7L2 gene is involved
in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, all factors thought to be important in
the etiology of colon cancer. In this confirmatory study, we evaluated the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism with colon cancer using previously collected data
on 1,578 cases and 1,966 controls. We did not observe a statistically significant
association between the rs7903146 polymorphisms and risk of colon cancer [odds
ratio (OR), 1.12; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 0.98-1.28] when evaluating
the total population. We did, however, observe a statistically significant
interaction between the rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism and recent use of
aspirin/nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID; P = 0.001). Increased colon 
cancer risk associated with the T allele was restricted to those without recent
use of aspirin/NSAIDs (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.35-2.02, relative to recent aspirin
users, i.e., use of aspirin/NSAIDS within the 2 years before diagnosis, with the 
CC genotype). Among individuals who reported recent use of aspirin/NSAIDs, the T 
allele reduced risk of colon cancer (OR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62-0.98) in a
dose-response fashion (P for linear trend across genotypes = 0.03). These data
suggest that colon cancer risk associated with the rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism 
is modified by use of aspirin/NSAIDs.

PMCID: PMC2587179
PMID: 18398040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Ann Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;72(Pt 4):499-509. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2008.00443.x. 
Epub 2008 Apr 7.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes in Khatri Sikhs from
North India: genetic variation affects lipid levels.

Sanghera DK(1), Nath SK, Ortega L, Gambarelli M, Kim-Howard X, Singh JR, Ralhan
SK, Wander GS, Mehra NK, Mulvihill JJ, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. dharambir-sanghera@ouhsc.edu

Recently, the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been identified as 
the most important type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) susceptibility gene. Common
intronic polymorphisms in this gene have been found to be strongly associated
with T2DM susceptibility showing marked reproducibility in multiple populations. 
The purpose of this study was to confirm the reported association of six TCF7L2
variants in a Khatri Sikh diabetic sample from North India. We genotyped
six-associated SNPs in a case-control sample consisting of 556 T2DM cases and 537
controls. We also examined the impact of these variants on body mass index (BMI),
waist to hip ratio (WHR), fasting insulin, and glucose and lipid levels. We
report replication of association of four of the six SNPs with T2DM in this
Khatri Sikh sample [rs7903146, (p = 0.010); rs11196205, (p = 0.011); rs10885409, 
(p = 0.002) and rs4918789, (p = 0.029)], under a dominant model conferring odds
ratios (ORs) of 1.39, 1.44, 1.57 and 1.36, respectively. Haplotype analysis
provided further evidence of association by showing a significant difference
between cases and controls as revealed by the global omnibus test (chi(2)= 19.36;
p = 0.0036). Multiple linear regression analysis also revealed the risk allele
carriers of three of four significant SNPs (rs7903146, rs11196205, rs10885409) to
be significantly associated with increased fasting total cholesterol (p value =
0.019, 0.025, 0.006) and LDL cholesterol levels (p value = 0.021, 0.018, 0.005), 
respectively. Our findings confirm that the TCF7L2 gene is a major risk factor
for development of T2DM in Khatri Sikhs. It also provides new information about
the significant impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on plasma cholesterol levels that 
appear to be independent of BMI.

PMID: 18397358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3302-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.012. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

A role for E2-2 at the DN3 stage of early thymopoiesis.

Wikström I(1), Forssell J, Penha-Goncalves MN, Bergqvist I, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå
University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

Roles for the E-proteins E2A and HEB during T lymphocyte development have been
well established. Based on our previous observations of counter selection against
T cells lacking E2-2, it seemed reasonable to assume that there would be a
function also for E2-2 in thymocyte development. Aiming at assigning such a role 
for E2-2, we analyzed the expression of E2-2, E2A, HEB as well as Id mRNA during 
T cell development. Interestingly, whereas all three E-proteins were expressed
during early thymocyte development, significant expression beyond the DP stage
was detected only for E2A. Among the Id proteins, Id2 displayed a prominent
expression exclusively in DN1, whereas Id3 showed some expression in DN1,
followed by a down regulation and then a prominent induction, peaking in the DP
stage. E2-2 was expressed during the DN stages, as well as in the DP stage,
suggesting that E2-2 operates in concert with the other E-proteins during early
thymocyte development. We found that E2-2 null thymocytes displayed a partial
block at the DN3 stage of development, as well as a reduced expression of pre-T
alpha, known to be regulated also by E2A and HEB. The fact that E2-2 deficient
thymocytes develop without gross abnormalities is likely to stem from redundancy 
due to the co-expression of E2A and HEB.

PMID: 18384878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2275-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6493.

A novel lung cancer signature mediates metastatic bone colonization by a dual
mechanism.

Vicent S(1), Luis-Ravelo D, Antón I, García-Tuñón I, Borrás-Cuesta F, Dotor J, De
Las Rivas J, Lecanda F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Adhesion and Metastasis Laboratory, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Bone is a frequent target of lung cancer metastasis, which is associated with
significant morbidity and a dismal prognosis. To identify and functionally
characterize genes involved in the mechanisms of osseous metastasis, we developed
a murine lung cancer model. Comparative transcriptomic analysis identified genes 
encoding signaling molecules (such as TCF4 and PRKD3) and cell anchorage-related 
proteins (MCAM and SUSD5), some of which were basally modulated by transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) in tumor cells and in conditions mimicking
tumor-stromal interactions. Triple gene combinations induced not only high
osteoclastogenic activity but also a marked enhancement of global
metalloproteolytic activities in vitro. These effects were strongly associated
with robust bone colonization in vivo, whereas this gene subset was ineffective
in promoting local tumor growth and cell homing activity to bone. Interestingly, 
global inhibition of metalloproteolytic activities and simultaneous TGF-beta
blockade in vivo led to increased survival and a remarkable attenuation of bone
tumor burden and osteolytic metastasis. Thus, this metastatic gene signature
mediates bone matrix degradation by a dual mechanism of induction of
TGF-beta-dependent osteoclastogenic bone resorption and enhancement of
stroma-dependent metalloproteolytic activities. Our findings suggest the
cooperative contribution of host-derived and cell autonomous effects directed by 
a small subset of genes in mediating aggressive osseous colonization.

PMID: 18381434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 30;370(2):327-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.081. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

A conserved domain in the transcription factor ITF-2B attenuates its activity.

Herbst A(1), Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377
Munich, Germany. Andreas.Herbst@med.uni-muenchen.de

The immunoglobulin transcription factor-2B (ITF-2B) belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors. It is ubiquitously
expressed and plays a prominent role in the regulation of differentiation
processes. Protein sequence alignment of the closely related bHLH transcription
factors ITF-2B, HeLa E box protein (HITF4), and the E2A proteins E12 and E47
revealed the presence of a highly conserved protein domain. Functional analysis
of this domain demonstrated that it plays an important role in repressing the
transcriptional activity of the ITF-2B protein. Moreover, this domain comprises a
self-contained transcriptional repressor whose activity depends on specific amino
acid residues.

PMID: 18371301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Cell Biol. 2008 Mar 24;180(6):1087-100. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200710050. Epub 2008
Mar 17.

Nuclear Dvl, c-Jun, beta-catenin, and TCF form a complex leading to stabilization
of beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Gan XQ(1), Wang JY, Xi Y, Wu ZL, Li YP, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

In canonical Wnt signaling, Dishevelled (Dvl) is a critical cytoplasmic regulator
that releases beta-catenin from degradation. Here, we find that Dvl and c-Jun
form a complex with beta-catenin-T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4) on the promoter of Wnt
target genes and regulate gene transcription. The complex forms via two
interactions of nuclear Dvl with c-Jun and beta-catenin, respectively, both of
which bind to TCF. Disrupting the interaction of Dvl with either c-Jun or
beta-catenin suppresses canonical Wnt signaling-stimulated transcription, and the
reduction of Dvl diminished beta-catenin-TCF-4 association on Wnt target gene
promoters in vivo. Expression of a TCF-Dvl fusion protein largely rescued the
c-Jun knockdown Wnt signaling deficiency in mammalian cells and zebrafish. Thus, 
we confirm that c-Jun functions in canonical Wnt signaling and show that c-Jun
functions as a scaffold in the beta-catenin-TCFs transcription complex bridging
Dvl to TCF. Our results reveal a mechanism by which nuclear Dvl cooperates with
c-Jun to regulate gene transcription stimulated by the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2290839
PMID: 18347071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):49-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.006. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Expression of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) in human adipocytes
is down regulated by insulin.

Ahlzén M(1), Johansson LE, Cervin C, Tornqvist H, Groop L, Ridderstråle M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Clinical Obesity, Entrance 72, Building
91, Floor 12, CRC, Lund University, Malmö University Hospital, S-205 02 Malmö,
Sweden. maja.j.ahlzen@skane.se

Variants in the TCF7L2 gene (transcription factor 7-like 2) have shown strong
association with type 2 diabetes with two defined risk haplotypes, HapA and
HapB(T2D). TCF7L2 may play a role in both glucose homeostasis and adipogenesis.
Our aim was to characterize the TCF7L2 mRNA expression and regulation in human
adipose tissue. We quantified TCF7L2 mRNA levels in cultured human adipocytes and
in biopsies from visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue from 38
obese non-diabetic subjects, using real-time PCR. The influence of haplotype and 
clinical traits on TCF7L2 mRNA levels were investigated. In vitro, insulin
decreased TCF7L2 mRNA expression. This effect was attenuated in cells incubated
with the free fatty acids palmitate or oleate. In vivo, we found significantly
higher expression in SAT from more insulin resistant subjects. No correlations
between TCF7L2 mRNA expression and obesity measures were observed. TCF7L2
expression was higher in VAT than in SAT and when stratifying for haplotype, this
difference was seen in HapA carriers but not in non-HapA carriers. In conclusion,
TCF7L2 mRNA levels in adipocytes are decreased by insulin and seem to increase in
insulin resistant subjects and in HapA carriers.

PMID: 18342627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Feb 21;9:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-8.

Common variants of the TCF7L2 gene are associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes mellitus in a UK-resident South Asian population.

Rees SD(1), Bellary S, Britten AC, O'Hare JP, Kumar S, Barnett AH, Kelly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
s.d.rees@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have implicated variants of the transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene in genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus in
several different populations. The aim of this study was to determine whether
variants of this gene are also risk factors for type 2 diabetes development in a 
UK-resident South Asian cohort of Punjabi ancestry.
METHODS: We genotyped four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF7L2
(rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205 and rs12255372) in 831 subjects with diabetes
and 437 control subjects.
RESULTS: The minor allele of each variant was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes; the greatest risk of developing the disease was conferred by
rs7903146, with an allelic odds ratio (OR) of 1.31 (95% CI: 1.11 - 1.56, p = 1.96
x 10(-3)). For each variant, disease risk associated with homozygosity for the
minor allele was greater than that for heterozygotes, with the exception of
rs12255372. To determine the effect on the observed associations of including
young control subjects in our data set, we reanalysed the data using subsets of
the control group defined by different minimum age thresholds. Increasing the
minimum age of our control subjects resulted in a corresponding increase in OR
for all variants of the gene (p < or= 1.04 x 10(-7)).
CONCLUSION: Our results support recent findings that TCF7L2 is an important
genetic risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes in multiple ethnic
groups.

PMCID: PMC2276194
PMID: 18291022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Feb;8(1):38-50.

The role of LEF/TCF factors in neoplastic transformation.

Ravindranath A(1), O'Connell A, Johnston PG, El-Tanani MK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK.

The T cell factor 4 (Tcf-4) interacts with beta-catenin in the Wnt signalling
pathway and coactivates downstream target genes in diverse systems including the 
breast. This activity is important during normal development but its deregulation
plays a pivotal role in cancer progression. In a rat model for breast cancer it
has been shown that metastasis-inducing DNA (Met-DNA) sequesters the endogenous
inhibitory Tcf-4 and thereby promotes transcription of the secreted extracellular
matrix glycophosphoprotein, osteopontin, the direct effector of metastasis in
this model system. Permanent transfection of the benign rat mammary cell line
with a fragment from the Met-DNA containing the Tcf recognition sequence CAAAG
induces the cells to metastasize in syngeneic rats in vivo. Tcf-4 expression in
human breast carcinomas is inversely associated with osteopontin protein levels. 
High Tcf-4 expression impedes both OPN promoter activity and protein expression
in rat mammary carcinoma cells. Understanding the role of Tcf-4 in cancer
development and its transcription regulation should lay the foundation for novel 
therapeutic approaches in the future.

PMID: 18289012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008 Jun;80(3):392-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2008.01.008. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphism with diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome,
and markers of beta cell function and insulin resistance in a population-based
sample of Emirati subjects.

Saadi H(1), Nagelkerke N, Carruthers SG, Benedict S, Abdulkhalek S, Reed R, Lukic
M, Nicholls MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
United Arab Emirates University, United Arab Emirates. saadih@uaeu.ac.ae

AIMS: The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) among Emirati subjects is
one of the highest in the world. This has been attributed to rising prevalence of
obesity acting on genetically susceptible individuals. We analyzed the
associations between TCF7L2 polymorphism and DM, metabolic syndrome, and markers 
of beta cell function and insulin resistance in a population-based sample of
Emirati subjects.
METHODS: We genotyped the two TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
rs12255372 and rs7903146 in 368 adult subjects. Homeostatic model assessment
(HOMA) was used to assess beta cell function (HOMA2-%B) and insulin resistance
(HOMA2-IR). The SNP genotypes were analyzed against disease stage [normal
glucose=0 (n=188), pre-diabetes=1 (n=85), and DM=2 (n=95)] and against clinical
and biochemical measures. Age and sex were included as covariates in all
association analyses. Additional adjustments were made for body mass index (BMI) 
and waist circumference in several analyses.
RESULTS: Diabetes disease stage was marginally significantly associated with the 
frequency of the T variant at rs12255372 (p=0.057; adjusted p=0.017) but not at
rs7903146 (p=0.5; adjusted p=0.2). Comparison between subjects with normal
glucose and the combined DM/pre-diabetes showed a significant association with
rs12255372 (OR 1.47, CI 1.04-2.08; p=0.03) but not with rs7903146 (OR 1.16, CI
0.81-1.64; p=0.4). We found no association with metabolic syndrome, or with
insulin and glucose levels, HOMA2-%B or HOMA2-IR. The age-standardized prevalence
rate for metabolic syndrome was 43.9% in men and 42.1% in women.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that TCF7L2 variants are associated with increased
risk for DM in Emirati subjects. We also demonstrate a high prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome in this population.

PMID: 18282631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Diabetes Care. 2008 May;31(5):905-9. doi: 10.2337/dc07-2131. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Variation in TCF7L2 and increased risk of colon cancer: the Atherosclerosis Risk 
in Communities (ARIC) Study.

Folsom AR(1), Pankow JS, Peacock JM, Bielinski SJ, Heiss G, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, School of Public Health,
University of Minnesota, Suite 300, 1300 S. Second St., Minneapolis, MN
55454-1015, USA. folsom@epi.umn.edu

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether a variation in the 
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, which influences diabetes risk, is
associated with incidence of cancers.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We related diabetes and TCF7L2 variation with
occurrence of several common cancers in a prospective cohort study of 13,117
middle-aged adults initially free of cancer in 1987-1989. We assessed five single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 including the putative SNP (rs7903146) 
for diabetes. We identified incident cancers through 2000 via cancer registries, 
supplemented by hospital records.
RESULTS: Diabetes was associated marginally inversely with incidence of prostate 
cancer but not with incidence of colorectal, colon, lung, or breast cancer. The T
allele of rs7903146 (frequency 30%) was associated with increased risk of
colorectal cancer and, more specifically, colon cancer, with adjusted hazard
ratios (95% CI) of 1.0 for CC, 1.25 (0.85-1.83) for CT, and 2.15 (1.27-3.64) for 
TT genotypes (P(trend) = 0.009). TCF7L2 variation also was associated with lung
cancer incidence in whites but not blacks, but residual confounding by smoking
may be present.
CONCLUSIONS: Subjects who were initially cancer-free and carrying certain genetic
variants of TCF7L2, most notably the T allele of rs7903146, have an increased
risk of colon cancer. This association appears to be an independent gene effect
not explained by diabetes. Because the T allele of rs7903146 is common, if a
causal link is established, this variant could account for a sizable proportion (
approximately 17% here) of cases of colon cancer in the general population.

PMCID: PMC2577771
PMID: 18268068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2732-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02175-07. Epub 2008 Feb
11.

Genome-wide pattern of TCF7L2/TCF4 chromatin occupancy in colorectal cancer
cells.

Hatzis P(1), van der Flier LG, van Driel MA, Guryev V, Nielsen F, Denissov S,
Nijman IJ, Koster J, Santo EE, Welboren W, Versteeg R, Cuppen E, van de Wetering 
M, Clevers H, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signaling activates gene expression through the induced formation of
complexes between DNA-binding T-cell factors (TCFs) and the transcriptional
coactivator beta-catenin. In colorectal cancer, activating Wnt pathway mutations 
transform epithelial cells through the inappropriate activation of a TCF7L2/TCF4 
target gene program. Through a DNA array-based genome-wide analysis of TCF4
chromatin occupancy, we have identified 6,868 high-confidence TCF4-binding sites 
in the LS174T colorectal cancer cell line. Most TCF4-binding sites are located at
large distances from transcription start sites, while target genes are frequently
"decorated" by multiple binding sites. Motif discovery algorithms define the in
vivo-occupied TCF4-binding site as evolutionarily conserved A-C/G-A/T-T-C-A-A-A-G
motifs. The TCF4-binding regions significantly correlate with Wnt-responsive gene
expression profiles derived from primary human adenomas and often behave as
beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent enhancers in transient reporter assays.

PMCID: PMC2293123
PMID: 18268006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetologia. 2008 Apr;51(4):597-601. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0926-y. Epub 2008
Feb 9.

Polymorphisms in the TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8 genes are associated with
impaired proinsulin conversion.

Kirchhoff K(1), Machicao F, Haupt A, Schäfer SA, Tschritter O, Staiger H, Stefan 
N, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-Universität 
Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str. 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variation within six novel genetic loci has been reported to
confer risk of type 2 diabetes and may be associated with beta cell dysfunction. 
We investigated whether these polymorphisms are also associated with impaired
proinsulin to insulin conversion.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,065 German participants for single nucleotide
polymorphisms rs7903146 in TCF7L2, rs7754840 in CDKAL1, rs7923837 and rs1111875
in HHEX, rs13266634 in SLC30A8, rs10811661 in CDKN2A/B and rs4402960 in IGF2BP2. 
All participants underwent an OGTT. Insulin, proinsulin and C-peptide
concentrations were measured at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min during the OGTT.
Insulin secretion was estimated from C-peptide or insulin levels during the OGTT 
using validated indices. We used the ratio proinsulin/insulin during the OGTT as 
indicator of proinsulin conversion.
RESULTS: In our cohort, we confirmed the significant association of variants in
TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and HHEX with reduced insulin secretion during the OGTT (p<0.05
for all). Variation in SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 was not associated with
insulin secretion. The risk alleles of the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8
reduced proinsulin to insulin conversion (p<0.05 for all), whereas the risk
alleles in HHEX, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 were not associated with reduced proinsulin
to insulin conversion (p>0.6).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Diabetes-associated variants in TCF7L2 and CDKAL1
impair insulin secretion and conversion of proinsulin to insulin. However, both
aspects of beta cell function are not necessarily linked, as impaired insulin
secretion is specifically present in variants of HHEX and impaired proinsulin
conversion is specifically present in a variant of SLC30A8.

PMID: 18264689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genesis. 2008 Feb;46(2):81-6. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20363.

Autoregulation of XTcf-4 depends on a Lef/Tcf site on the XTcf-4 promoter.

Koenig SF, Lattanzio R, Mansperger K, Rupp RA, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

The restricted expression of XTcf-4 in the anterior midbrain is regulated via an 
active wnt/beta-catenin pathway (Kunz et al.,2004, Dev Biol 273:390-401). The
molecular mechanism of this autoregulatory loop, however, remained elusive. Here 
we show that the activity of a 1,775 bp promoter fragment containing a consensus 
Lef/Tcf binding site at position -1,437 to -1,428 is upregulated by activating
transcription factors of the Lef/Tcf family. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that endogenous beta-catenin is bound to the Lef/Tcf
site on the promoter. Thus, regulation of XTcf-4 by canonical wnt-signaling is
directly controlled by binding to and activating a consensus Lef/Tcf binding site
within its own promoter.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18257044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Oct;6(10):1638-43. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Aberrant activation of gamma-catenin promotes genomic instability and oncogenic
effects during tumor progression.

Pan H(1), Gao F, Papageorgis P, Abdolmaleky HM, Faller DV, Thiagalingam S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Genetics Program and Cancer Research Center), Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Gamma-catenin (plakoglobin) exists in cells either as a component of adherens
junctions, along with beta-catenin and alpha-catenin, or in association with
desmoplakin in desmosomes, which are in turn coupled to the cytoskeleton linking 
to the plasma membrane. Although gamma-catenin overexpression is observed in many
cancers, the molecular basis of its contribution to tumor progression remains
unclear. In this study, we examined gamma-catenin overexpression-mediated effects
leading to altered regulation of effector genes such as PTTG and c-Myc, as well
as differential activation of signaling pathways. We found that overexpression of
gamma-catenin caused: (1) a reduction in E-cadherin and corresponding increase in
vimentin levels concomitant with increased cell mobility and migration; (2)
enhancement in the levels of phosphorylated Akt and Erk in the presence of EGF
and (3) an increase in PTTG and c-Myc protein levels, which are likely to
accelerate chromosomal instability and uncontrolled proliferation, respectively, 
in the affected cells. These effects resulting from overexpression of
gamma-catenin were further validated in converse experiments with the aid of
siRNA knockdown of the endogenous gamma-catenin gene. In conclusion, our studies 
provide a molecular basis for the promotion of genomic instability and the
oncogenic effects due to overexpression of gamma-catenin in human cancer.

PMID: 18245958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Feb;16(2):476-82. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.77.

Effects of TCF7L2 polymorphisms on obesity in European populations.

Cauchi S(1), Choquet H, Gutiérrez-Aguilar R, Capel F, Grau K, Proença C, Dina C, 
Duval A, Balkau B, Marre M, Potoczna N, Langin D, Horber F, Sørensen TI,
Charpentier G, Meyre D, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 8090, Institute of Biology,
Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele was previously
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and decreased BMI whereas haplotypes
carrying the rs7903146 C and rs10885406 A alleles (HapA) were associated with
increased BMI. The functional relevance of TCF7L2 polymorphisms and their effects
on T2D and obesity remained to be further investigated. In white European
populations, we found that the rs7903146 T allele was more associated with T2D in
3,547 non-obese individuals (odds ratio (OR) = 1.88 (1.69-2.10)) than in 1,110
class III obese subjects (OR = 1.24 (1.03-1.50)). No direct effect of the
rs7903146 C allele and HapA was found on any form of obesity in 3,507 normal
glucose tolerant (NGT) individuals, 1,106 pedigrees with familial obesity and
5,512 individuals from the French general population. However, in T2D subjects,
the rs7903146 C allele was less prevalent in the 1,111 non-obese individuals
(55.2%) compared to 659 class III obese subjects (67.5% OR = 1.69 (1.46-1.95)).
Functional studies showed that the rs7903146 T allele is less prone to be bound
by protein factors than the C allele in 3T3-L1, HepG2 and beta-TC3 cell lines and
that TCF7L2 expression decreases in subcutaneous adipose tissue from NGT obese
T/T carriers under calorie restriction. In conclusion, TCF7L2 is not a risk
factor for obesity in European populations, but its effect on T2D risk is
modulated by obesity. Furthermore, our data suggest that the rs7903146 T allele
may be possibly functional and associated with a nominal decrease in TCF7L2
expression in adipose tissue of individuals under calorie restriction.

PMID: 18239663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Front Horm Res. 2008;36:12-36. doi: 10.1159/0000115335.

Polygenic contribution to obesity: genome-wide strategies reveal new targets.

Körner A(1), Kiess W, Stumvoll M, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Research Laboratory,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. antje.koerner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Obesity results from the complex interaction of environmental factors that act on
a genetic background that determines the susceptibility to obesity. The
identification of such obesity susceptibility genes can provide important
insights into the mechanism underlying this condition. While candidate gene
approaches have not been tremendously successful in identifying relevant genetic 
contributors to obesity, except PPAR , the advent of genome-wide strategies has
recently revealed novel and unexpected genetic factors with strong associations
with obesity and/or diabetes, i.e. FTO, TCF7L2, INSIG2, ENPP1, or FASN (reviewed 
herein), although some of them are not undebated. Considering the function of the
encoded proteins, it will now be of interest to investigate the cellular and
molecular mechanisms, how these genetic variations affect body weight, energy
metabolism and/or obesity-associated morbidity.

PMID: 18230892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):172-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.12.002. Epub 
2008 Jan 14.

Deletion 18q21.2q21.32 involving TCF4 in a boy diagnosed by CGH-array.

Andrieux J(1), Lepretre F, Cuisset JM, Goldenberg A, Delobel B, Manouvrier-Hanu
S, Holder-Espinasse M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoires de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, 
France. j-andrieux@chru-lille.fr

We report on a 12 year-old boy presenting with severe developmental delay,
dysmorphic features, limb anomalies, growth retardation, hypoplastic vermis and
corpus callosum. Conventional and high-resolution cytogenetic analyses were
normal. CGH-array allowed characterisation of a de novo 6.2 Mb 18q21.2q21.32
interstitial deletion involving TCF4, the recently identified gene responsible
for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS). No tachypnoea-apnoea paroxysms were observed. We
discuss the dysmorphic features particularly involving the ears, which might be
helpful towards PHS and 18q21 deletion diagnosis.

PMID: 18222743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8723-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706105200. Epub 2008 
Jan 23.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 activation of TCF7L2-dependent Wnt signaling enhances
pancreatic beta cell proliferation.

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

The insulinotropic hormone GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1) is a new therapeutic
agent that preserves or restores pancreatic beta cell mass. We report that GLP-1 
and its agonist, exendin-4 (Exd4), induce Wnt signaling in pancreatic beta cells,
both isolated islets, and in INS-1 cells. Basal and GLP-1 agonist-induced
proliferation of beta cells requires active Wnt signaling. Cyclin D1 and c-Myc,
determinants of cell proliferation, are up-regulated by Exd4. Basal endogenous
Wnt signaling activity depends on Wnt frizzled receptors and the protein kinases 
Akt and GSK3beta but not cAMP-dependent protein kinase. In contrast, GLP-1
agonists enhance Wnt signaling via GLP-1 receptor-mediated activation of Akt and 
beta cell independent of GSK3beta. Inhibition of Wnt signaling by small
interfering RNAs to beta-catenin or a dominant-negative TCF7L2 decreases both
basal and Exd4-induced beta cell proliferation. Wnt signaling appears to mediate 
GLP-1-induced beta cell proliferation raising possibilities for novel treatments 
of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2417166
PMID: 18216022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Oct;45(10):727-31.

[Effect of Radix Astragali on signal transducer and activator of transcription
activator-4 and its mRNA expression in a rat model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CC(1), Ye LP, Su MS, Li MR, Zhang HL, Cai XH, Dong L, Luo YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yuying Chidren's Hospital Affiliated to
Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325027, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Radix Astragali (RA) on the expression of
signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 (STAT4) and its mRNA in the
bronchus of a rat model of asthma.
METHODS: Forty male SD rats were randomly divided into four groups: the control
group, asthma group, high dosage of RA group and low dosage of RA group. In the
experiment, the rat model of asthma was established by the ovalbumin (OVA)
challenge methods. The lung tissue was gainedfrom the left lung, bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid (BALF) was gained from the right lung. The eosinophils (EOS) numbers
and differentiated cell numbers in BALF were counted by different counting
fluids; the protein expressions of STAT4 were detected by immunohistochemistry;
the mRNA expressions of STAT4 were detected by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: (1) In the BALF of the asthma group, the absolute numbers of EOS, the
ratios of EOS to the total cell numbers (EOS%) of asthma group [(35.81 +/- 7.30) 
x 10(7)/L, (8. 20 +/- 1.75)%] were all significantly higher than those of the
control group [(1.51 +/- 1.04) x 10(7)/L, (0.70 +/- 0.48)%] (P < 0.01); the total
cell numbers in BALF, the absolute numbers of EOS and EOS% of RA groups [(14.89
+/- 2.35) x 10(7)/L, (4.70 +/- 0.82)%; (10.98 +/- 1.81) x 10(7)/L, (3.56 +/-
0.53)%] were all significantly lower than those of asthma group (P < 0.01); (2)
The concentration of IL-4 in BALF of asthma group (25.70 +/- 7.36) was
significantly higher than that of the control group (8.55 +/- 2.97) (P < 0.01);
the concentration of IL-4 of BALF of RA groups [(31.89 +/- 5.46), (35.26 +/-
6.03)] was significantly lower than that of asthma group (P < 0.01); the
concentration of IL-12 of BALF of asthma group (16.10 +/- 3.38) was significantly
lower than that of the control group (42.33 +/- 9.66) (P < 0.01); the
concentration of IL-12 of BALF of the RA groups [(31.89 +/- 5.46), (35.26 +/-
6.03)] was significantly higher than that of the asthma group (P < 0.01); (3)
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization showed that the protein content of
STAT4 and the STAT4 mRNA expression around the bronchus of asthma group [(0.096
+/- 0.012), (0.098 +/- 0.011)] were lower than those of the control group [(0.216
+/- 0.034), (0.228 +/- 0.032)], while those of RA groups [(0.176 +/- 0.012),
(0.185 +/- 0.023); (0.183 +/- 0.011), (0.201 +/- 0.019)] were all significantly
higher than that of the asthma group (P < 0.01), the airway smooth muscle cells, 
the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells were the chief
expression cells; (4) the STAT4 and the STAT4mRNA expression around the bronchus 
had positive correlation with the concentration of IL-12 in BALF while had
negative correlation with the concentration of IL-4, absolute numbers of EOS in
BALF.
CONCLUSIONS: RA has an inhibitory effect on airway inflammation cells
infiltration such as EOS, it raises the STAT4 protein and its mRNA expression in 
the airway smooth muscle cells, the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells and
endothelial cells, and the key mechanism may be that the IL-12 composition is
increased.

PMID: 18211752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9136-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708968200. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

The effects of myostatin on adipogenic differentiation of human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells are mediated through cross-communication
between Smad3 and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways.

Guo W(1), Flanagan J, Jasuja R, Kirkland J, Jiang L, Bhasin S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston Medical Center, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
wguo@bu.edu

The effects of myostatin on adipogenic differentiation are poorly understood, and
the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We determined the effects of human
recombinant myostatin protein on adipogenesis of bone marrow-derived human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and adipose tissue-derived preadipocytes. For both
progenitor cell types, differentiation in the presence of myostatin caused a
dose-dependent reduction of lipid accumulation and diminished incorporation of
exogenous fatty acid into cellular lipids. Myostatin significantly down-regulated
the expression of adipocyte markers PPARgamma, C/EBPalpha, leptin, and aP2, but
not C/EBPbeta. Overexpression of PPARgamma, but not C/EBPbeta, blocked the
inhibitory effects of myostatin on adipogenesis. Myostatin induced
phosphorylation of Smad3 in hMSCs; knockdown of Smad3 by RNAi or inhibition of
its upstream kinase by an Alk5 inhibitor blocked the inhibitory effect of
myostatin on adipogenesis in hMSCs, implying an important role of Smad3
activation in this event. Furthermore, myostatin enhanced nuclear translocation
of beta-catenin and formation of the Smad3-beta-catenin-TCF4 complex, together
with the altered expression of a number of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway genes in
hMSCs. The inhibitory effects of myostatin on adipogenesis were blocked by RNAi
silencing of beta-catenin and diminished by overexpression of dominant-negative
TCF4. The conclusion is that myostatin inhibited adipogenesis in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and preadipocytes. These effects were
mediated, in part, by activation of Smad3 and cross-communication of the
TGFbeta/Smad signal to Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway, leading to down-regulation 
of PPARgamma.

PMCID: PMC2431017
PMID: 18203713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Dec;32(6):985-91.

[Effects of NGX6 on the transcriptional activation of beta-catenin/TCF/LEF in
Wnt/beta-catenin signal pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Shen SR, Li HT, Wang XY, Peng Y, Liao MT, Guo Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410013, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of NGX6 on the transcriptional activation of
beta-catenin/TCF/LEF in Wnt/beta-catenin signal pathway, and to identify the role
of NGX6 in Wnt signal pathway.
METHODS: The eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1(+)-beta-catenin (WT) was
constructed. pcDNA3.1(+)-beta-catenin (WT) and pCMV-myc-NGX6 were cotransfected
to COS-7 and the transcriptional activity of TCF/LEF was detected by TCF-4
luciferase report system. Without extro-genous beta-catenin, pCMV-myc-NGX6 was
transfected alone to COS-7 and colon cancer cell line SW620, and the
transcriptional activity of TCF/LEF was detected by TCF-4 luciferase report
system, and then the expression of nucleus beta-catenin and TCF-4 was detected by
Western blot.
RESULTS: The eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1(+)-beta-catenin (WT) was
successfully constructed. The activation of TCF-4 luciferase report gene in the
cotransfection group in COS-7 was less than that in NGX6 alone transfection group
(P<0.05). The activation of TCF-4 luciferase report gene in NGX6 alone
transfection group without extro-genous beta-catenin was less than that in
pCMV-myc transfection group in COS-7 and SW620. The expression of beta-catenin
and TCF-4 was decreased after the NGX6 transfection in COS-7 and SW620 cells.
CONCLUSION: NGX6 can inhibit the transcriptional activation of
beta-catenin/TCF/LEF in Wnt signal pathway by its negative regulation in the
nuclear translocation of beta-catenin.

PMID: 18182714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Sci. 2008 Apr;99(4):631-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00716.x. Epub
2008 Jan 2.

Wnt signaling inside the nucleus.

Shitashige M(1), Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuoh-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Accumulation of the beta-catenin protein and transactivation of a certain set of 
T-cell factor (TCF)-4 target genes by accumulated beta-catenin have been
considered crucial in colorectal carcinogenesis. In the present review, we
summarize nuclear proteins that interact with, and regulate, the beta-catenin and
TCF and lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) transcriptional complexes. Our recent
series of proteomic studies has also revealed that various classes of nuclear
proteins participate in the beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex and modulate its
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the protein composition of the
TCF-4-containing nuclear complex is not fixed, but is regulated dynamically by
endogenous programs associated with intestinal epithelial cell differentiation
and exogenous stimuli. Restoration of the loss-of-function mutation of the
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in colorectal cancer cells does not seem to
be a realistic approach with currently available medical technologies, and only
signaling molecules downstream of the APC gene product can be considered as
targets of pharmacological intervention. Nuclear proteins associated with the
beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex may include feasible targets for molecular therapy
against colorectal cancer. Recently, an inhibitor of the interaction between
CREB-binding protein and beta-catenin was shown to efficiently shut down the
transcriptional activity of TCF-4 and induce apoptosis of colorectal cancer
cells. We also summarize current strategies in the development of drugs against
Wnt signaling.

PMID: 18177486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biomol Tech. 2007 Dec;18(5):298-305.

Electrophoretic techniques applied to the detection and analysis of the human
microsatellite DG10s478.

Taylor CY(1), Guillén IA, Nazabal M, Fernández JR, Silva JA.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Diagnostic Division, Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, PO Box 6162, 10600, Havana, Cuba.

Short nucleotide repetitions (STRs) are commonly used as genetic markers; thus
their detection and analysis constitutes a very important tool for the mapping of
genetic diseases, as well as for gathering information about genetic
polymorphisms at the population level. STRs can be detected with agarose- or
acrylamide-based electrophoretic techniques, followed by visualization of the DNA
sample with ethidium bromide, silver nitrate, or fluorophore labeling. In this
work, we analyzed genomic DNA from five individuals affected with type II
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and five controls (unaffected individuals) in order to
know the most precise and reproducible technique for the analysis of the existing
polymorphism in the STR DG10S478 of the TCF7L2 gene. The combination of PCR with 
labeling of the products with the CY5 fluorophore, followed by detection on an
ALFexpress sequencer, offered the required resolution to detect the variability
in this STR, based solely on size analysis. Our methodology offers similar
accuracy and reproducibility at lower costs than existing methods based on the
sequencing of PCR products, and is a faster alternative when applied to
genotyping studies.

PMCID: PMC2392994
PMID: 18166673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jan;134(1):56-64. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2007.10.009. Epub 
2007 Oct 10.

Functional characterization of the novel APC N1026S variant associated with
attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis.

Menéndez M(1), González S, Obrador-Hevia A, Domínguez A, Pujol MJ, Valls J,
Canela N, Blanco I, Torres A, Pineda-Lucena A, Moreno V, Bachs O, Capellá G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Departament de Prevenció i Control del
Càncer, Servei d'Epidemiologia i Registre del Càncer, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge-Institut Català d'Oncologia, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We identified the APC N1026S variant of unknown malignant
potential in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in a Spanish attenuated
familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) family. The variant was located in the
first of the 4 highly conserved 15-amino acid (AA) repeats within the
beta-catenin union domain. Our aim was to determine its functional relevance to
establish its pathogenicity.
METHODS: N1026S variant was analyzed in 22 members of the AFAP family studied, in
236 sporadic colorectal cancer cases, 203 matched controls, and 205 unrelated
familial colorectal cancer cases. To assess its effects on beta-catenin binding, 
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transcription and beta-catenin subcellular
distribution we performed affinity chromatography experiments, BIAcore 1000
(BIAcore AB, Uppsala, Sweden) assays, luciferase reporter assays, assessment of
c-myc messenger RNA levels, and cell fractionation.
RESULTS: N1026S variant cosegregated with the disease in the AFAP family studied.
None of the sporadic or familial cases as well as the controls analyzed was
positive for the variant. N1026S variant completely precluded beta-catenin
binding to the first 15-AA repeat and diminished it when all four 15-AA repeats
were present. Expression of APC N1026S in SW480 and DLD-1 cells did not diminish 
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transcription as effectively as APC wild-type. N1026S
did not decrease c-myc transcription in DLD1 cells and nuclear beta-catenin in
SW480 cells as effectively as WT.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings strongly support a pathogenic role of the APC N1026S 
variant in the AFAP phenotype, reinforcing the importance of functional
characterization of APC variants for genetic counseling.

PMID: 18166348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(2):174-80. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in
4,087 Japanese subjects.

Miyake K(1), Horikawa Y, Hara K, Yasuda K, Osawa H, Furuta H, Hirota Y, Yamagata 
K, Hinokio Y, Oka Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y, Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H,
Kashiwagi A, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Takeda J, Makino H, Nanjo K, Kadowaki T,
Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho,
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been shown to be associated with type 
2 diabetes mellitus in multiple ethnic groups. Regarding the Asian population,
Horikoshi et al. (Diabetologia 50:747-751, 2007) and Hayashi et al. (Diabetologia
50:980-984, 2007) reported that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 
were associated with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population, while
contradictory results were reported for Han Chinese populations. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the associations of the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes
using a relatively large sample size: 2,214 Japanese individuals with type 2
diabetes and 1,873 normal controls. The minor alleles of rs7903146, rs11196205,
and rs12255372 showed significant associations with type 2 diabetes (OR=1.48,
P=2.7 x 10(-4); OR=1.39, P=4.6 x 10(-4); OR=1.70, P=9.8 x 10(-5), respectively)
in the combined sample sets. However, neither rs11196218 nor rs290487 showed a
significant association. These results indicate that TCF7L2 is an important
susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

PMID: 18097733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Blood. 2008 Mar 1;111(5):2833-42. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Increasing Wnt signaling in the bone marrow microenvironment inhibits the
development of myeloma bone disease and reduces tumor burden in bone in vivo.

Edwards CM(1), Edwards JR, Lwin ST, Esparza J, Oyajobi BO, McCluskey B, Munoz S, 
Grubbs B, Mundy GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. claire.edwards@vanderbilt.edu

There is increasing evidence to suggest that the Wnt signaling pathway plays a
critical role in the pathogenesis of myeloma bone disease. In the present study, 
we determined whether increasing Wnt signaling within the bone marrow
microenvironment in myeloma counteracts development of osteolytic bone disease.
C57BL/KaLwRij mice were inoculated intravenously with murine 5TGM1 myeloma cells,
resulting in tumor growth in bone and development of myeloma bone disease.
Lithium chloride (LiCl) treatment activated Wnt signaling in osteoblasts,
inhibited myeloma bone disease, and decreased tumor burden in bone, but increased
tumor growth when 5TGM1 cells were inoculated subcutaneously. Abrogation of
beta-catenin activity and disruption of Wnt signaling in 5TGM1 cells by stable
overexpression of a dominant-negative TCF4 prevented the LiCl-induced increase in
subcutaneous growth but had no effect on LiCl-induced reduction in tumor burden
within bone or on osteolysis in myeloma-bearing mice. Together, these data
highlight the importance of the local microenvironment in the effect of Wnt
signaling on the development of myeloma bone disease and demonstrate that,
despite a direct effect to increase tumor growth at extraosseous sites,
increasing Wnt signaling in the bone marrow microenvironment can prevent the
development of myeloma bone disease and inhibit myeloma growth within bone in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2254537
PMID: 18094333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2008 Apr;116(4):211-4. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

The DG10S478 variant in the TCF7L2 gene is not associated with microvascular
complications in type 2 diabetes.

Buchbinder S(1), Rudofsky G Jr, Humpert PM, Schilling T, Zorn M, Bierhaus A,
Nawroth PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I and Clinical Chemistry, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. Susanne.Buchbinder@med.uni-heidelberg.de

OBJECTIVE: The DG10S478 variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene is a tetranucleotide repeat with six alleles. Alleles 0, 8 and 12 were found
to account for 98% of chromosomes in population based controls. The composite
allele X (non zero) has been associated with type 2 diabetes while allele 0 (no
insertion) was described as protective. However, no data exist about the
influence of DG10S478 variants on manifestation of diabetes and development of
diabetic complications.
METHODS: 250 patients with type 2 diabetes were tested for the DG10S478 allele X 
and its association with diabetic complications, age at diagnosis of diabetes and
BMI.
RESULTS: Allele 0 was found in 42.4% of the examined patients, 45.2% of the
participants were found to be heterozygous and 12.4% homozygous for the composite
allele X. The correlation of allele X with the age at diagnosis of diabetes was
not significant. There was also no association of allele X with retinopathy,
nephropathy or neuropathy. Only the correlation with BMI was statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The DG10S478 variant seems to have no influence on manifestation of 
diabetes and the development of microvascular complications.

PMID: 18072015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):645-53. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 regulates beta-cell survival and function in human 
pancreatic islets.

Shu L(1), Sauter NS, Schulthess FT, Matveyenko AV, Oberholzer J, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Larry L. Hillblom Islet Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2014 Nov;63(11):3974.

OBJECTIVE: Type 2 diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin secretion in
response to increased metabolic demand. This defect in beta-cell compensation
seems to result from the interplay between environmental factors and genetic
predisposition. Genome-wide association studies reveal that common variants in
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with increased risk of type
2 diabetes. The aim of the present study was to establish whether TCF7L2 plays a 
role in beta-cell function and/or survival.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: To investigate the effects of TCFL7L2 depletion,
isolated islets were exposed to TCF7L2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) versus
scrambled siRNA, and beta-cell survival and function were examined. For TCF7L2
overexpression, islets were cultured in glucose concentrations of 5.5-33.3 mmol/l
and the cytokine mix interleukin-1 beta/gamma-interferon with or without
overexpression of TCF7L2. Subsequently, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion
(GSIS), beta-cell apoptosis [by transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling assay
and Western blotting for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and Caspase-3 cleavage], and
beta-cell proliferation (by Ki67 immunostaining) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Depleting TCF7L2 by siRNA resulted in a 5.1-fold increase in beta-cell
apoptosis, 2.2-fold decrease in beta-cell proliferation (P < 0.001), and 2.6-fold
decrease in GSIS (P < 0.01) in human islets. Similarly, loss of TCF7L2 resulted
in impaired beta-cell function in mouse islets. In contrast, overexpression of
TCF7L2 protected islets from glucose and cytokine-induced apoptosis and impaired 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 is required for maintaining GSIS and beta-cell survival.
Changes in the level of active TCF7L2 in beta-cells from carriers of at-risk
allele may be the reason for defective insulin secretion and progression of type 
2 diabetes.

PMID: 18071026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jan;29(1):84-92. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Downregulation of Dkk3 activates beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling in lung cancer.

Yue W(1), Sun Q, Dacic S, Landreneau RJ, Siegfried JM, Yu J, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology.

Although the oncogenic role of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is well defined, it
remains unclear how this pathway is aberrantly activated in lung cancer. We found
that Dickkopf (Dkk)-3, a member of Dkk family of Wnt antagonists, is frequently
inactivated in lung cancer and plays a role in suppressing lung cancer cell
growth through inhibition of beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)-4 signaling. Dkk3
is the only Dkk family member abundantly expressed in normal lung, but silenced
by promoter hypermethylation in a large fraction of lung cancer cell lines and
lung tumors. Downregulation of Dkk3 was correlated with tumor progression and
expression of nuclear beta-catenin in lung tumors. Ectopic expression of Dkk3 in 
lung cancer cells with Dkk3 hypermethylation induced apoptosis and inhibited
TCF-4 activity as well as nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and expression of 
TCF-4 targets c-Myc and cyclin D1. Furthermore, small interference RNA knock down
of Dkk3 in cells lacking Dkk3 hypermethylation was sufficient to promote cell
proliferation, beta-catenin nuclear translocation and expression of c-Myc. These 
observations suggested that epigenetic inactivation of Dkk3 activates the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, thereby promoting the growth of lung cancer cells.

PMID: 18048388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):e22; author reply e23.

Comment on: Chang et al. (2007) Association study of the genetic polymorphisms of
the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and type 2 diabetes in the
Chinese population: Diabetes 56:2631-2637.

Ku CS, Khaw M, Chia KS.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7.

PMID: 18042757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(3):977-87. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Myeloid translocation gene family members associate with T-cell factors (TCFs)
and influence TCF-dependent transcription.

Moore AC(1), Amann JM, Williams CS, Tahinci E, Farmer TE, Martinez JA, Yang G,
Luce KS, Lee E, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 512 Preston Research Building, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Ave., Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Canonical Wnt signaling is mediated by a molecular "switch" that regulates the
transcriptional properties of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding
proteins. Members of the myeloid translocation gene (MTG) family of
transcriptional corepressors are frequently disrupted by chromosomal
translocations in acute myeloid leukemia, whereas MTG16 may be inactivated in up 
to 40% of breast cancer and MTG8 is a candidate cancer gene in colorectal
carcinoma. Genetic studies imply that this corepressor family may function in
stem cells. Given that mice lacking Myeloid Translocation Gene Related-1 (Mtgr1) 
fail to maintain the secretory lineage in the small intestine, we surveyed
transcription factors that might recruit Mtgr1 in intestinal stem cells or
progenitor cells and found that MTG family members associate specifically with
TCF4. Coexpression of beta-catenin disrupted the association between these
corepressors and TCF4. Furthermore, when expressed in Xenopus embryos, MTG family
members inhibited axis formation and impaired the ability of beta-catenin and
XLef-1 to induce axis duplication, indicating that MTG family members act
downstream of beta-catenin. Moreover, we found that c-Myc, a transcriptional
target of the Wnt pathway, was overexpressed in the small intestines of mice
lacking Mtgr1, thus linking inactivation of Mtgr1 to the activation of a potent
oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2223385
PMID: 18039847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1569-78. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Functional interaction of DNA topoisomerase IIalpha with the beta-catenin and
T-cell factor-4 complex.

Huang L(1), Shitashige M, Satow R, Honda K, Ono M, Yun J, Tomida A, Tsuruo T,
Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Wnt signaling pathway is activated constitutively in the
majority of colorectal cancers as a result of mutation in either the adenomatous 
polyposis coli or the CTNNB1 gene, and blockage of the pathway has been
considered feasible as molecular therapy against colorectal cancer. DNA
topoisomerase IIalpha (Topo IIalpha) is a component of the beta-catenin/T-cell
factor-4 (TCF-4) nuclear complex. We examined the functional significance of Topo
IIalpha in Wnt signaling.
METHODS: The physical and functional interaction between Topo IIalpha and the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 nuclear complex was evaluated by immunoprecipitation,
immunofluorescence microscopy, 2-hybrid assay, and luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Amino acids 951-1301 of Topo IIalpha were necessary for binding to
beta-catenin. Over expression of Topo IIalpha enhanced the TCF/lymphoid enhancer 
factor transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, and knockdown of Topo
IIalpha by RNA interference conversely attenuated the transcriptional activity.
The Topo II inhibitors, merbarone and etoposide, suppressed the
beta-catenin-mediated TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional activity. The 
catalytic activity of Topo II was augmented by overexpression of beta-catenin as 
measured by the decatenation of kinetoplast DNA. Topo IIalpha was highly
expressed and colocalized with beta-catenin in tumor cells of patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and patients with sporadic colorectal
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Topo IIalpha interacts with beta-catenin as a novel transcriptional 
co-activator. A new drug targeting the interaction of Topo IIalpha with
beta-catenin as well as its catalytic activity might be more effective for
suppressing aberrant Wnt signaling and proliferation of colorectal cancer cells
than the current Topo II inhibitors.

PMID: 17983804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):62-9. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

TCF7L2 is associated with high serum triacylglycerol and differentially expressed
in adipose tissue in families with familial combined hyperlipidaemia.

Huertas-Vazquez A(1), Plaisier C, Weissglas-Volkov D, Sinsheimer J,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Cruz-Bautista I, Nikkola E, Herrera-Hernandez M,
Davila-Cervantes A, Tusie-Luna T, Taskinen MR, Aguilar-Salinas C, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common DNA variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) are associated with type 2 diabetes. Familial combined hyperlipidaemia
(FCHL) is characterised by hypertriacylglycerolaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, or
both. Additionally, disturbances in glucose metabolism are commonly seen in FCHL.
Therefore, we hypothesised that TCF7L2 may contribute to the genetic
susceptibility for this common dyslipidaemia.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of the TCF7L2 variants, rs7903146 and
rs12255372, on FCHL and its component traits triacylglycerol (TG), total
cholesterol (TC) and apolipoprotein B (ApoB) in 759 individuals from 55 Mexican
families. As a replication sample, 719 individuals from 60 Finnish FCHL families 
were analysed. We also used quantitative RT-PCR to evaluate the transcript levels
of TCF7L2 in 47 subcutaneous fat biopsies from unrelated Mexican FCHL and
normolipidaemic participants.
RESULTS: Significant evidence for association was observed for high TG for the T 
alleles of rs7903146 and rs12255372 (p = 0.005 and p = 0.01) in Mexican FCHL
families. No evidence for association was observed for FCHL, TC, ApoB or glucose 
in Mexicans. When testing rs7903146 and rs12255372 for replication in Finnish
FCHL families, these single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with TG (p =
0.01 and p = 0.007). Furthermore, we observed statistically significant decreases
in the mRNA levels (p = 0.0002) of TCF7L2 in FCHL- and TG-affected individuals.
TCF7L2 expression was not altered by the SNP genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data show that rs7903146 and rs12255372 are
significantly associated with high TG in FCHL families from two different
populations. In addition, significantly decreased expression of TCF7L2 was
observed in TG- and FCHL-affected individuals.

PMID: 17972059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):304-9. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with reduced acute insulin response in
Hispanic Americans.

Palmer ND(1), Lehtinen AB, Langefeld CD, Campbell JK, Haffner SM, Norris JM,
Bergman RN, Goodarzi MO, Rotter JI, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

CONTEXT: Genetic variation at the transcription factor 7-like 2 locus has been
linked to type 2 diabetes in predominantly European-derived populations. The
biological basis of these associations remains to be determined.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate previously associated
variants for association with measures of glucose homeostasis in
Hispanic-Americans and African-Americans and determine the biological
mechanism(s) through which these variants exert their effect.
DESIGN: This study was the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Family Study
(IRAS-FS).
SETTING: The IRAS-FS is a community-based study of Hispanic-Americans (San
Antonio, TX, and San Luis Valley, CO) and African-Americans (Los Angeles, CA).
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1040 Hispanic-American and 500 African-American
individuals from the IRAS-FS formed the basis of this study. MAIN OUTCOMES
MEASURES(S): The primary glucose homeostasis phenotypes of interest in this study
were derived from the frequently sampled iv glucose tolerance test and include
insulin sensitivity, acute insulin response, and disposition index.
RESULTS: In Hispanic-Americans, significant evidence of association was observed 
between single-nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs112255372 with reduced
insulin secretion as measured by acute insulin response and adjusted for the
degree of insulin sensitivity (P = 0.032 and 0.036, respectively). Other
quantitative measures, e.g. insulin sensitivity or disposition index, were not
associated with the single nucleotide polymorphisms examined. In
African-Americans there was no evidence of association observed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that transcription factor 7-like 2 variants
could play a role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes in the Hispanic-American
population through a mechanism involving insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC2190750
PMID: 17971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 14;282(50):36571-81. Epub 2007 Oct 21.

Connective tissue growth factor is overexpressed in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma and promotes tumorigenicity through beta-catenin-T-cell factor/Lef
signaling.

Deng YZ(1), Chen PP, Wang Y, Yin D, Koeffler HP, Li B, Tong XJ, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF or CCN2), a member of the CCN family, is
involved in diverse biological processes such as cell adhesion, proliferation,
and angiogenesis. In this study, we show that overexpression of CTGF occurred in 
a significant proportion of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) samples
that were of a high tumor grade and metastatic. Forced expression of CTGF in
Eca109 ESCC cells accelerated their growth in culture and significantly increased
tumor formation in nude mice, whereas RNA interference-mediated knockdown of CTGF
in ESCC cells significantly inhibited cell growth and colony formation, as well
as tumorigenicity in vivo. Moreover, overexpression of CTGF in ESCC cells
resulted in the accumulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, leading
to activation of beta-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF)/Lef signaling. Up-regulation of
c-Myc and cyclin D1, two target genes of beta-catenin-TCF/Lef signaling, was also
observed in the CTGF-overexpressing cells. These effects of CTGF in ESCC cells
were abolished by transfection with either dominant negative beta-catenin or
dominant negative TCF4. Furthermore, we identified a beta-catenin-TCF/Lef-binding
site (TBE) in the promoter region of CTGF and found that CTGF is a
transcriptional target of beta-catenin-TCF/Lef signaling. Taken together, these
results revealed that the interaction of CTGF and beta-catenin-TCF/Lef forms a
positive feedback loop, which could contribute to the tumorigenicity of ESCC.

PMID: 17951630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Diabetes Care. 2008 Jan;31(1):63-8. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

A variant of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and the risk of
posttransplantation diabetes mellitus in renal allograft recipients.

Kang ES(1), Kim MS, Kim YS, Hur KY, Han SJ, Nam CM, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim SI, Lee
HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134
Shinchon-Dong Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a major complication
associated with kidney transplantation. Defects in insulin secretion play a
pivotal role in the pathogenesis of PTDM. A polymorphism in the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene was reported to be associated with type 2 diabetes 
and possibly associated with an insulin secretion defect. The aim of this study
was to investigate the association between genetic variations in TCF7L2 and PTDM 
in renal allograft recipients.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 511 unrelated renal allograft recipients 
without previously known diabetes were enrolled. Six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (rs11196205, rs4506565, rs12243326, rs7903146, rs12255372, and
rs7901695) were genotyped in the cohort, which consisted of 119 PTDM patients and
392 non-PTDM subjects. The genotyping of TCF7L2 polymorphisms was performed using
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: rs4506565, rs7901695, and rs7903146 were found to be in complete linkage
disequilibrium. The rs7903146 genotype distribution was CC 94.3% and CT 5.7%. The
incidence of PTDM was significantly higher in patients with the CT genotype than 
in patients with the CC genotype (41.4 vs. 22.2%) (odds ratio 2.474 [95% CI
1.146-5.341]; P = 0.024). The effect of this genotype remains significant after
adjustment for age, sex, amount of body weight gain, and type of
immunosuppressant (2.655 [1.168-6.038]; P = 0.020).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic variation is
associated with an increased risk of PTDM in renal allograft recipients.

PMID: 17934151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Prostate. 2007 Dec 1;67(16):1751-60.

Modulation of beta-catenin-mediated TCF-signalling in prostate cancer cell lines 
by wild-type and mutant p53.

Prowald A(1), Cronauer MV, von Klot C, Eilers T, Rinnab L, Herrmann T, Spindler
KD, Montenarh M, Jonas U, Burchardt M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Urologie und Kinderurologie, Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Deregulation of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin-pathway is known to
play an important role in the progression of various tumour cell types including 
prostate cancer (PCa). Recently, the tumour-suppressor p53 was shown to
down-regulate beta-catenin-signalling in colon cancer. As p53 is frequently
mutated in late stage PCa we investigated the effect of wild-type p53 (p53wt) as 
well as p53-mutants on beta-catenin-signalling in PCa-cell lines.
METHODS: The effects of p53wt and p53-mutants on Wnt/beta-catenin-signalling were
studied using reporter gene assays. Expression of beta-catenin levels was
monitored by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Overexpression of p53wt as well as p53(249Ser) (a structural mutant) and
p53(273His) (a DNA-contact-mutant) almost completely inhibited
beta-catenin-mediated transcriptional activity of the T-cell factor (TCF) whereas
p53(175His), a structural mutant, and a p53-mutant with a C-terminal deletion in 
the tetramerization domain (Deltap53) were unable to do so. Co-transfection
experiments with p53wt and a dominant negative p53-mutant reversed the
down-regulation of TCF-signalling, while Deltap53 was unable to interfere with
p53wt-function. Down-regulation of TCF-signalling by p53wt and p53(273His) was
accompanied by a reduction in beta-catenin protein level.
CONCLUSIONS: p53wt, p53(273His)- and p53(249Ser)-mutants are able to
down-regulate beta-catenin-signalling in PCa-cells probably via degradation of
beta-catenin. The degradation of beta-catenin in PCa by p53 is not linked to
transcriptional activity of p53. So far the mechanism how p53 interferes with
beta-catenin-signalling is unknown. For the first time we provide experimental
evidence that the C-terminus of p53 plays an important role in the
down-regulation of beta-catenin-mediated TCF-signalling in PCa-cell lines
possibly via p53 transrepressional function.

PMID: 17929268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(23):8164-77. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Differential control of Wnt target genes involves epigenetic mechanisms and
selective promoter occupancy by T-cell factors.

Wöhrle S(1), Wallmen B, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg,
Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Canonical Wnt signaling and its nuclear effectors, beta-catenin and the family of
T-cell factor (TCF) DNA-binding proteins, belong to the small number of
regulatory systems which are repeatedly used for context-dependent control of
distinct genetic programs. The apparent ability to elicit a large variety of
transcriptional responses necessitates that beta-catenin and TCFs distinguish
precisely between genes to be activated and genes to remain silent in a specific 
context. How this is achieved is unclear. Here, we examined patterns of Wnt
target gene activation and promoter occupancy by TCFs in different mouse cell
culture models. Remarkably, within a given cell type only Wnt-responsive
promoters are bound by specific subsets of TCFs, whereas nonresponsive Wnt target
promoters remain unoccupied. Wnt-responsive, TCF-bound states correlate with DNA 
hypomethylation, histone H3 hyperacetylation, and H3K4 trimethylation. Inactive, 
nonresponsive promoter chromatin shows DNA hypermethylation, is devoid of active 
histone marks, and additionally can show repressive H3K27 trimethylation.
Furthermore, chromatin structural states appear to be independent of Wnt pathway 
activity. Apparently, cell-type-specific regulation of Wnt target genes comprises
multilayered control systems. These involve epigenetic modifications of promoter 
chromatin and differential promoter occupancy by functionally distinct TCF
proteins, which together determine susceptibility to Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC2169180
PMID: 17923689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1554-68. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Beta-catenin/Tcf-4 inhibition after progastrin targeting reduces growth and
drives differentiation of intestinal tumors.

Pannequin J(1), Delaunay N, Buchert M, Surrel F, Bourgaux JF, Ryan J, Boireau S, 
Coelho J, Pélegrin A, Singh P, Shulkes A, Yim M, Baldwin GS, Pignodel C, Lambeau 
G, Jay P, Joubert D, Hollande F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5203, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Aberrant activation of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 transcriptional 
complex represents an initiating event for colorectal carcinogenesis, shifting
the balance from differentiation toward proliferation in colonic crypts. Here, we
assessed whether endogenous progastrin, encoded by a target gene of this complex,
was in turn able to regulate beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity in adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC)-mutated cells, and we analyzed the impact of topical progastrin
depletion on intestinal tumor growth in vivo.
METHODS: Stable or transient RNA silencing of the GAST gene was induced in human 
tumor cells and in mice carrying a heterozygous Apc mutation (APCDelta14), which 
overexpress progastrin but not amidated or glycine-extended gastrin.
RESULTS: Depletion of endogenous progastrin production strongly decreased
intestinal tumor growth in vivo through a marked inhibition of constitutive
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity in tumor cells. This effect was mediated by the de
novo expression of the inhibitor of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 (ICAT), resulting from
a down-regulation of integrin-linked kinase in progastrin-depleted cells.
Accordingly, ICAT down-regulation was correlated with progastrin overexpression
and Tcf-4 target gene activation in human colorectal tumors, and ICAT repression 
was detected in the colon epithelium of tumor-prone, progastrin-overexpressing
mice. In APCDelta14 mice, small interfering RNA-mediated progastrin depletion not
only reduced intestinal tumor size and numbers, but also increased goblet cell
lineage differentiation and cell apoptosis in the remaining adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, depletion of endogenous progastrin inhibits the tumorigenicity
of APC-mutated colorectal cancer cells in vivo by promoting ICAT expression,
thereby counteracting Tcf-4 activity. Progastrin targeting strategies should
provide an exciting prospect for the differentiation therapy of colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 17920061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):396-407. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

TCF4 deficiency expands ventral diencephalon signaling and increases induction of
pituitary progenitors.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Potok MA, Davis SW, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Human Genetics, 4909 Buhl Building, 1241
E. Catherine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA.

The anterior and intermediate lobes of the pituitary gland are formed from
Rathke's pouch. FGF, BMP and WNT signals emanating from the ventral diencephalon 
influence pouch growth and development. In order to examine the role of canonical
WNT signaling during pituitary development we examined the pituitary expression
of the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors, which mediate WNT signaling
through the binding of beta-catenin. We report here the expression of several
members of this family during pituitary development and the functional role of
one member, TCF4 (TCF7L2), in the induction of the pituitary primordium. TCF4 is 
expressed in the ventral diencephalon early in pituitary development, rostral to 
a domain of BMP and FGF expression. Tcf4 deficient mice express Fgf10 and Bmp4;
however, the Bmp and Fgf expression domains are expanded rostrally. As a result, 
additional pituitary progenitor cells are recruited into Rathke's pouch in Tcf4
mutants. Mutants also exhibit an expansion of the Six6 expression domain within
Rathke's pouch, which may increase the number of proliferating pouch cells,
resulting in a greatly enlarged anterior pituitary gland. This suggests that TCF4
negatively regulates pituitary growth through two mechanisms. The first mechanism
is to restrict the domains of BMP and FGF signaling in the ventral diencephalon, 
and the second mechanism is the restriction of Six6 within Rathke's pouch. Thus, 
TCF4 is necessary both intrinsically and extrinsically to Rathke's pouch to
ensure the proper growth of the pituitary gland.

PMCID: PMC2693283
PMID: 17919533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Stem Cells. 2008 Jan;26(1):35-44. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

SFRP2 regulates cardiomyogenic differentiation by inhibiting a positive
transcriptional autofeedback loop of Wnt3a.

Deb A(1), Davis BH, Guo J, Ni A, Huang J, Zhang Z, Mu H, Dzau VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases and Mandel Center for Hypertension &
Atherosclerosis Research, Department of Medicine, GSRB 2, Box 3178, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
arjundeb@med.unc.edu

Wnts comprise a family of 20 lipid-modified glycoproteins in mammals and play
critical roles during embryological development and organogenesis of several
organ systems, including the heart. They are required for mesoderm formation and 
have been implicated in promoting cardiomyogenic differentiation of mammalian
embryonic stem cells, but the underlying mechanisms regulating Wnt signaling
during cardiomyogenesis remain poorly understood. In this report, we show that in
a pluripotent mouse embryonal carcinoma stem cell line, SFRP2 inhibits
cardiomyogenic differentiation by regulating Wnt3a transcription. SFRP2 inhibited
early stages of cardiomyogenesis, preventing mesoderm specification and
maintaining the cells in the undifferentiated state. Using a gain- and
loss-of-function approach, we demonstrate that although addition of recombinant
SFRP2 decreased Wnt3a transcription and cardiomyogenic differentiation, silencing
of Sfrp2 led to enhanced Wnt3a transcription, mesoderm formation, and increased
cardiomyogenesis. We show that the inhibitory effects of SFRP2 on Wnt
transcription are secondary to interruption of a positive feedback effect of
Wnt3a on its own transcription. Wnt3a increased its own transcription via the
canonical pathway and TCF4 family of transcription factors, and the inhibitory
effects of SFRP2 on Wnt3a transcription were associated with disruption of
downstream canonical Wnt signaling. The inhibitory effects of Sfrp2 on Wnt3a
expression identify Sfrp2 as a "checkpoint gene," which exerts its control on
cardiomyogenesis through regulation of Wnt3a transcription.

PMCID: PMC3045733
PMID: 17916803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Dec 1;505(4):379-403.

A model of early molecular regionalization in the chicken embryonic pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), Sánchez-Arrones L, Sandoval JE, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
Spain.

The pretectal region of the brain is visualized as a dorsal region of prosomere 1
in the caudal diencephalon, including derivatives from both the roof and alar
plates. Its neuronal derivatives in the adult brain are known as pretectal
nuclei. The literature is inconsistent about the precise anteroposterior
delimitation of this region and on the number of specific histogenetic domains
and subdomains that it contains. We performed a cross-correlated gene-expression 
map of this brain area in chicken embryos, with the aim of identifying
differently fated pretectal domains on the basis of combinatorial gene expression
patterns. We examined in detail Pax3, Pax6, Pax7, Tcf4, Meis1, Meis2, Nkx2.2,
Lim1, Dmbx1, Dbx1, Six3, FoxP2, Zic1, Ebf1, and Shh mRNA expression, as well as
PAX3 and PAX7 immunoreaction, between stages HH11 and HH28. The patterns analyzed
serve to fix the cephalic and caudal boundaries of the pretectum and to define
three molecularly distinct anteroposterior pretectal domains (precommissural,
juxtacommissural, and commissural) and several dorsoventral subdomains. These
molecular specification patterns are established step by step between stages HH10
and HH18, largely before neurogenesis begins. This set of gene-architectonic data
constitutes a useful scaffold for correlations with fate maps and other
experimental embryologic results and may serve as well for inquiries on
homologies in this part of the brain.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17912743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3082-8. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

TCF7L2 is not a major susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians:
analysis of 3,501 individuals.

Guo T(1), Hanson RL, Traurig M, Muller YL, Ma L, Mack J, Kobes S, Knowler WC,
Bogardus C, Baier LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Molecular Genetics Section, Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical
Research Branch, National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, NIH, 445 North 5th St., Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene was initially reported
to be associated with type 2 diabetes in Icelandic, Danish, and U.S. populations.
We investigated whether TCF7L2 also has a role in type 2 diabetes susceptibility 
in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The six variants reported to be associated with type
2 diabetes in the Icelandic study were genotyped in a population-based sample of 
3,501 Pima Indians (1,561 subjects had type 2 diabetes, and 1,940 did not have
diabetes). In addition, the coding and promoter regions of TCF7L2 were sequenced 
in 24 Pima subjects. The one variant identified by sequencing, 35 additional
database variants positioned in introns, and the six variants reported in the
Icelandic study were genotyped in Pima families to determine the haplotype
structure of TCF7L2 among Pima Indians. Fourteen representative variants were
selected and genotyped in 3,501 Pima Indians.
RESULTS: The six variants initially reported to be associated with type 2
diabetes were less common in Pima Indians compared with samples of European
origin, and none were associated with type 2 diabetes. One representative
variant, rs1225404, was nominally associated with type 2 diabetes in a general
model (additive P = 0.03, dominant P = 0.005) but not in a within-family analysis
(additive P = 0.2, dominant P = 0.07). However, several variants were associated 
with BMI; in particular, rs12255372 was associated in both general and
within-family analyses (both P = 0.0007). Modest associations were also found
with traits predictive for type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Variation within TCF7L2 does not confer major risk for type 2
diabetes among the Pima Indian population.

PMID: 17909099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9315-21.

beta-catenin regulates multiple steps of RNA metabolism as revealed by the RNA
aptamer in colon cancer cells.

Lee HK(1), Kwak HY, Hur J, Kim IA, Yang JS, Park MW, Yu J, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, BK21 Graduate Program for RNA Biology,
Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, Dankook University Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

Nuclear beta-catenin forms a transcription complex with TCF-4, which is
implicated in colon cancer development and progression. Recently, we and others
have shown that beta-catenin could be a regulator of RNA splicing and it also
stabilizes the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA. Here, we further explored the role 
of beta-catenin in the RNA metabolism in colon cancer cells. To specifically
modulate the subcellular functions of beta-catenin, we expressed the RNA aptamer 
in the form of RNA intramers with unique cellular localizations. The
nucleus-expressed RNA intramer proved to be effective in reducing the
protein-protein interaction between beta-catenin and TCF-4, thus shown to be a
specific regulator of beta-catenin-activated transcription. It could also
regulate the alternative splicing of E1A minigene in diverse colon cancer cell
lines. In addition, we tested whether beta-catenin could stabilize any other
mRNAs and found that cyclin D1 mRNA was also bound and stabilized by
beta-catenin. Significantly, the cytoplasm-expressed RNA intramer reverted the
beta-catenin-induced COX-2 and cyclin D1 mRNA stabilization. We show here that
beta-catenin regulated multiple steps of RNA metabolism in colon cancer cells and
might be the protein factor coordinating RNA metabolism. We suggest that the RNA 
intramers could provide useful ways for inhibiting beta-catenin-mediated
transcription and RNA metabolism, which might further enhance the antitumorigenic
effects of these molecules in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 17909039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Nat Genet. 2007 Nov;39(11):1376-83. Epub 2007 Sep 30.

EphB-ephrin-B interactions suppress colorectal cancer progression by
compartmentalizing tumor cells.

Cortina C(1), Palomo-Ponce S, Iglesias M, Fernández-Masip JL, Vivancos A,
Whissell G, Humà M, Peiró N, Gallego L, Jonkheer S, Davy A, Lloreta J, Sancho E, 
Batlle E.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Programme, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Josep
Samitier 1-5, 08028 Barcelona. Spain.

The genes encoding tyrosine kinase receptors EphB2 and EphB3 are beta-catenin and
Tcf4 target genes in colorectal cancer (CRC) and in normal intestinal cells. In
the intestinal epithelium, EphB signaling controls the positioning of cell types 
along the crypt-villus axis. In CRC, EphB activity suppresses tumor progression
beyond the earliest stages. Here we show that EphB receptors compartmentalize the
expansion of CRC cells through a mechanism dependent on E-cadherin-mediated
adhesion. We demonstrate that EphB-mediated compartmentalization restricts the
spreading of EphB-expressing tumor cells into ephrin-B1-positive territories in
vitro and in vivo. Our results indicate that CRC cells must silence EphB
expression to avoid repulsive interactions imposed by normal ephrin-B1-expressing
intestinal cells at the onset of tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17906625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2417-9.

Testing the gene or testing a variant? The case of TCF7L2.

Goodarzi MO(1), Rotter JI.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, 8700 Beverly Blvd., Becker B-131, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
mark.goodarzi@cshs.org

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7.

PMID: 17901222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2413-6.

The enteroinsular axis may mediate the diabetogenic effects of TCF7L2
polymorphisms.

Nauck MA(1), Meier JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabeteszentrum Bad Lauterberg, Kirchberg 21, D-37431, Bad Lauterberg, Harz,
Germany. M.Nauck@diabeteszentrum.de

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2443-50.

PMID: 17898988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. FEBS Lett. 2007 Oct 16;581(25):4850-6. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Suppression of nuclear Wnt signaling leads to stabilization of Rac1 isoforms.

Esufali S(1), Charames GS, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 60 Murray Street,
Room L6-304-4, Toronto, Canada.

The Rac1 GTPase contains a functional nuclear localization signal (NLS) and
destruction box sequence in the C-terminal polybasic region. It has been
postulated that these two regulatory sequences may function together, enabling
Rac1 to participate in nuclear signaling pathways that ultimately target it for
degradation. We have previously shown that the NLS activity of Rac1 and the Rac1b
splice variant is essential for Wnt pathway activation. In the present study, we 
demonstrate that suppression of nuclear Wnt signaling leads to stabilization of
Rac1 protein. In addition, we show that Rac1b may be under proteasomal
regulation. We propose that Rac1 and Rac1b levels are regulated by being targeted
for degradation through a negative feedback loop initiated by Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17888911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Diabet Med. 2007 Oct;24(10):1062-6.

The importance of TCF7L2.

Weedon MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK. michael.weedon@pms.ac.uk

After many years of frustratingly limited success, the genetic architecture of
Type 2 diabetes is finally being uncovered. Recent genome-wide association
studies have identified novel genes predisposing to Type 2 diabetes, which are
giving fascinating new insights into the pathophysiology of this complex disease.
Of the genes so far identified by this approach, one stands out as having by far 
the biggest effect on disease risk. A common variant of TCF7L2, when present in
two copies, is associated with an approximate 2-fold higher risk of Type 2
diabetes. This short review focuses on the TCF7L2 finding and discusses its
significance for Type 2 diabetes genetic studies and for clinical practice.

PMID: 17888129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):G1089-98. Epub 2007 Sep 
20.

A role of Wnt/beta-catenin signals in hepatic fate specification of human
umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Yoshida Y(1), Shimomura T, Sakabe T, Ishii K, Gonda K, Matsuoka S, Watanabe Y,
Takubo K, Tsuchiya H, Hoshikawa Y, Kurimasa A, Hisatome I, Uyama T, Terai M,
Umezawa A, Shiota G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Department of Genetic Medicine and
Regenerative Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan.

Human umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells (UCBMSCs) are expected 
to be an excellent source of cells for transplantation. In addition, the stem
cell plasticity of human UCBMSCs, which can transdifferentiate into hepatocytes, 
has been reported. However, the mechanisms involved remain to be clarified. To
identify the genes and/or signals that are important in specifying the hepatic
fate of human UCBMSCs, we analyzed gene expression profiles during the hepatic
differentiation of UCBMSCs with human telomerase reverse transcriptase, UCBMSCs
immortalized by infection with a retrovirus carrying telomerase reverse
transcriptase, but whose differentiation potential remains unchanged. Efficient
differentiation was induced by 5-azacytidine (5-aza)/hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)/oncostatin M (OSM)/fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) treatment in terms of 
function as well as protein expression: 2.5-fold increase in albumin, 4-fold
increase in CCAAT enhancer-binding protein alpha, 1.5-fold increase in cytochrome
p450 1A1/2, and 8-fold increase in periodic acid-Schiff staining. Consequently,
we found that the expression of Wnt/beta-catenin-related genes downregulated, and
the translocation of beta-catenin was observed along the cell membrane and in the
cytoplasm, although some beta-catenin was still in the nucleus. Downregulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signals in the cells by Fz8-small interference RNA treatment,
which was analyzed with a Tcf4 promoter-luciferase assay, resulted in similar
hepatic differentiation to that observed with 5-azacytidine/HGF/OSM/FGF2. In
addition, the subcellular distribution of beta-catenin was similar to that of
cells treated with 5-azacytidine/HGF/OSM/FGF2. In conclusion, the suppression of 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling induced the hepatic differentiation of UCBMSCs,
suggesting that Wnt/beta-catenin signals play an important role in the hepatic
fate specification of human UCBMSCs.

PMID: 17884977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15382-7. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

The E-protein Tcf4 interacts with Math1 to regulate differentiation of a specific
subset of neuronal progenitors.

Flora A(1), Garcia JJ, Thaller C, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. aflora@bcm.edu

Proneural factors represent <10 transcriptional regulators required for
specifying all of the different neurons of the mammalian nervous system. The
mechanisms by which such a small number of factors creates this diversity are
still unknown. We propose that proteins interacting with proneural factors confer
such specificity. To test this hypothesis we isolated proteins that interact with
Math1, a proneural transcription factor essential for the establishment of a
neural progenitor population (rhombic lip) that gives rise to multiple hindbrain 
structures and identified the E-protein Tcf4. Interestingly, haploinsufficiency
of TCF4 causes the Pitt-Hopkins mental retardation syndrome, underscoring the
important role for this protein in neural development. To investigate the
functional relevance of the Math1/Tcf4 interaction in vivo, we studied Tcf4(-/-) 
mice and found that they have disrupted pontine nucleus development.
Surprisingly, this selective deficit occurs without affecting other rhombic
lip-derived nuclei, despite expression of Math1 and Tcf4 throughout the rhombic
lip. Importantly, deletion of any of the other E-protein-encoding genes does not 
have detectable effects on Math1-dependent neurons, suggesting a specialized role
for Tcf4 in distinct neural progenitors. Our findings provide the first in vivo
evidence for an exclusive function of dimers formed between a proneural basic
helix-loop-helix factor and a specific E-protein, offering insight about the
mechanisms underlying transcriptional programs that regulate development of the
mammalian nervous system.

PMCID: PMC1978485
PMID: 17878293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7802-15. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Sox17 and Sox4 differentially regulate beta-catenin/T-cell factor activity and
proliferation of colon carcinoma cells.

Sinner D(1), Kordich JJ, Spence JR, Opoka R, Rankin S, Lin SC, Jonatan D, Zorn
AM, Wells JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The canonical Wnt pathway is necessary for gut epithelial cell proliferation, and
aberrant activation of this pathway causes intestinal neoplasia. We report a
novel mechanism by which the Sox family of transcription factors regulate the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway. We found that some Sox proteins antagonize while
others enhance beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) activity. Sox17, which is
expressed in the normal gut epithelium but exhibits reduced expression in
intestinal neoplasia, is antagonistic to Wnt signaling. When overexpressed in
SW480 colon carcinoma cells, Sox17 represses beta-catenin/TCF activity in a
dose-dependent manner and inhibits proliferation. Sox17 and Sox4 are expressed in
mutually exclusive domains in normal and neoplastic gut tissues, and gain- and
loss-of-function studies demonstrate that Sox4 enhances beta-catenin/TCF activity
and the proliferation of SW480 cells. In addition to binding beta-catenin, both
Sox17 and Sox4 physically interact with TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family
members via their respective high-mobility-group box domains. Results from gain- 
and loss-of-function experiments suggest that the interaction of Sox proteins
with beta-catenin and TCF/LEF proteins regulates the stability of beta-catenin
and TCF/LEF. In particular, Sox17 promotes the degradation of both beta-catenin
and TCF proteins via a noncanonical, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta-independent
mechanism that can be blocked by proteasome inhibitors. In contrast, Sox4 may
function to stabilize beta-catenin protein. These findings indicate that Sox
proteins can act as both antagonists and agonists of beta-catenin/TCF activity,
and this mechanism may regulate Wnt signaling responses in many developmental and
disease contexts.

PMCID: PMC2169141
PMID: 17875931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1520-6. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a
p53-dependent manner.

Iwai A(1), Hijikata M, Hishiki T, Isono O, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin is closely related to carcinogenesis.
Mutations in the p53 gene are reported to induce the aberrant accumulation of
beta-catenin in the absence of dysfunction in the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
(GSK3beta)-mediated degradation pathway, but the mechanism remains incompletely
understood. Here, we show that human coiled-coil domain containing 85B (CCDC85B) 
is induced by p53 and regulates beta-catenin activity via interaction with the
T-cell factor 4 in the nucleus. Moreover, CCDC85B enhances the degradation of
beta-catenin and suppresses tumor cell growth. In conclusion, we revealed that
CCDC85B-induced degradation of beta-catenin is independent of GSK3beta and other 
p53-inducible products, Siah-1L, suggesting that CCDC85B constitutes the one of
the frameworks of p53-induced multiple regulatory pathways for beta-catenin
activity.

PMID: 17873903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem J. 2007 Dec 15;408(3):317-26.

The epigenetic signature of CFTR expression is co-ordinated via chromatin
acetylation through a complex intronic element.

Paul T(1), Li S, Khurana S, Leleiko NS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene is a tightly 
regulated and differentially expressed transcript in many mucosal epithelial cell
types. It appears that DNA sequence variations alone do not explain CFTR-related 
gastrointestinal disease patterns and that epigenetic modifiers influence CFTR
expression. Our aim was to characterize the native chromatin environment in
cultured cells for intestinal CFTR expression by determining the relationship
between histone acetylation and occupation of CFTR by multiple transcription
factors, through a common regulatory element. We used HDAC (histone deacetylase) 
inhibition and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analyses to define regions
associated with acute acetylation of histone at the CFTR locus. We identified a
region within the first intron associated with acute acetylation of histone H4 as
an epigenetic signature corresponding to an intestine-specific enhancer element
for CFTR. DHS (DNase I-hypersensitivity) assays and ChIP were used to specify
control elements and occupation by regulatory factors. Quantitative ChIP
procedures indicate that HNF1alpha (hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha) and Cdx2
(caudal homeobox protein 2) occupy and regulate through a novel intronic enhancer
element of CFTR and that Tcf4 (T-cell factor 4) overlaps the same DNA element.
RNAi (RNA interference) of Tcf4 and HNF1alpha decreased intestinal cell CFTR
expression, identifying these as positive regulatory factors and CFTR as a target
for Wnt signalling. We have linked the acetylation signature of nucleosomal
histones to active intestinal CFTR expression and occupation by transcription
factors HNF1alpha, Cdx2 and Tcf4 which converge to modify chromatin architecture.
These studies suggest the therapeutic potential of histone modification
strategies, such as inhibition of HDAC activity, to treat CFTR-associated disease
by selectively enhancing CFTR expression.

PMCID: PMC2267364
PMID: 17848139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1527-35. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Downregulation of tumor suppressor Pdcd4 promotes invasion and activates both
beta-catenin/Tcf and AP-1-dependent transcription in colon carcinoma cells.

Wang Q(1), Sun Z, Yang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA.

Programmed cell death 4 (Pdcd4) is a tumor suppressor that inhibits neoplastic
transformation and tumor invasion. Tissue microarray analysis showed that Pdcd4
expression is downregulated in colon adenocarcinoma and carcinoma relative to
adjacent normal tissues. To address the issue of whether reduced Pdcd4 expression
is sufficient to promote tumor progression, we knocked down Pdcd4 expression in
colon tumor HT29 cells using pdcd4 short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Pdcd4 knockdown
results in a fibroblast-like transition, while the control cells (expressing LacZ
shRNA) remain as clumped similar to the parental cells. In addition, expression
of pdcd4 shRNA in HT29 cells promotes invasion. In an effort to characterize the 
molecular mechanism underlying these observations, we discovered that knockdown
of Pdcd4 results in reduction of E-cadherin expression, and accumulation of
active beta-catenin in the nucleus. The active beta-catenin binds with T-cell
factor 4 (Tcf4) and activates beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription.
Furthermore, Pdcd4 knockdown dramatically increases AP-1-dependent transcription.
Thus, the mechanism by which reduced Pdcd4 expression promotes invasion appears
to involve the activation of beta-catenin/Tcf and AP-1-dependent transcription.

PMID: 17828298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. EMBO Rep. 2007 Oct;8(10):966-73. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

T-cell factor 4 (Tcf7l2) maintains proliferative compartments in zebrafish
intestine.

Muncan V(1), Faro A, Haramis AP, Hurlstone AF, Wienholds E, van Es J, Korving J, 
Begthel H, Zivkovic D, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Center for Biomedical
Research, Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Previous studies have shown that Wnt signals, relayed through beta-catenin and
T-cell factor 4 (Tcf4), are essential for the induction and maintenance of crypts
in mice. We have now generated a tcf4 (tcf7l2) mutant zebrafish by reverse
genetics. We first observe a phenotypic defect at 4 weeks post-fertilization
(wpf), leading to death at about 6 wpf. The phenotype comprises a loss of
proliferation at the base of the intestinal folds of the middle and distal parts 
of the intestine. The proximal intestine represents an independent compartment,
as it expresses sox2 in the epithelium and barx1 in the surrounding mesenchyme,
which are early stomach markers in higher vertebrates. Zebrafish are functionally
stomach-less, but the proximal intestine might share its ontogeny with the
mammalian stomach. Rare adult homozygous tcf4(-/-) 'escapers' show proliferation 
defects in the gut epithelium, but have no other obvious abnormalities. This
study underscores the involvement of Tcf4 in maintaining proliferative
self-renewal in the intestine throughout life.

PMCID: PMC2002560
PMID: 17823612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2318-22. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Disparate genetic influences on polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and type 2
diabetes revealed by a lack of association between common variants within the
TCF7L2 gene and PCOS.

Barber TM(1), Bennett AJ, Groves CJ, Sovio U, Ruokonen A, Martikainen H, Pouta A,
Hartikainen AL, Elliott P, Wass JA, Järvelin MR, Zeggini E, Franks S, McCarthy
MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, 
Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK. tom.barber@drl.ox.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants of the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) have a powerful effect on individual risk of type 2 diabetes (per
allele odds ratio approximately 1.35). Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and type 
2 diabetes are familial conditions sharing common features. Based on this, the
aim of the present study was to establish whether variation in TCF7L2 also
influences the development of PCOS.
METHODS: We conducted a genetic association study of variants of TCF7L2
(rs7903146 and rs12255372) using both case-control and quantitative trait
approaches. Case-control analyses were conducted in (1) 369 PCOS cases and 2574
controls of UK British/Irish origin, and (2) 540 women with PCOS symptoms and
1083 controls from the Northern Finland Birth Cohort of 1966. Quantitative trait 
analyses (androgen levels) were also performed (1249 individuals).
RESULTS: There was no association between rs7903146 and PCOS in the UK
case-control study (Cochran-Armitage test, p = 0.51); nor with symptomatic status
in the Finnish cohort (p = 0.36). In addition, there were no relationships
between the TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 and androgen levels
(UK cases, p = 0.99; Finnish controls, p = 0.57; Finnish symptomatic cases, p =
0.80). Results at rs12255372 were similar, reflecting strong linkage
disequilibrium with rs7903146.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study was powered to detect an effect on PCOS
susceptibility similar to that previously reported for these variants on type 2
diabetes. Failure to detect any evident association with PCOS provides the
strongest evidence yet that the genetic architecture of these related conditions 
is qualitatively distinct.

PMID: 17805508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007 Nov;14(11):3251-9. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

Overexpression of axin downregulates TCF-4 and inhibits the development of lung
cancer.

Xu HT(1), Wei Q, Liu Y, Yang LH, Dai SD, Han Y, Yu JH, Liu N, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: T cell factor 4 (TCF-4) mediates a nuclear response to wingless/int
(Wnt) signals by interacting with beta-catenin. Axis inhibition protein (axin) is
an important negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway. Our aims were to
examine the relationship between axin and TCF-4 and to explore the effects of
axin on the development of lung cancer.
METHODS: Expression levels of axin and TCF-4 were examined in 107 lung cancer
specimens by immunohistochemistry. The axin gene was transfected into lung cancer
BE1 cells. The expression levels of axin, beta-catenin, and TCF-4 were detected
with immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) experiments. Apoptosis, proliferation, and the invasive ability of lung 
cancer cells were examined using flow cytometry,
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide (MTT), and Matrigel 
invasive assays.
RESULTS: Preserved axin expression correlated negatively with TCF-4 expression (P
= .031). Axin expression differed with respect to degree of differentiation (P = 
.025) and histological tumor type (P = .031). TCF-4 expression differed relative 
to tumor, node metastasis (TNM) stage (P = .024). BE1 cells transfected with axin
(BE1-axin cells) exhibited a significant decrease in TCF-4 expression. The level 
of apoptosis in BE1-axin cells was significantly increased, while the
proliferative and invasive abilities of BE1-axin cells were decreased.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that reduced expression of axin or augmented
expression of TCF-4 is associated with the malignant behavior of lung cancers.
Overexpression of axin can downregulate expression of TCF-4 and can inhibit the
ability of lung cancer cells to proliferate and invade.

PMID: 17768662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):665-78. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

A highly conserved Wnt-dependent TCF4 binding site within the proximal enhancer
of the anti-myogenic Msx1 gene supports expression within Pax3-expressing limb
bud muscle precursor cells.

Miller KA(1), Barrow J, Collinson JM, Davidson S, Lear M, Hill RE, Mackenzie A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen
AB25 2ZD, UK.

The product of the Msx1 gene is a potent inhibitor of muscle differentiation.
Msx1 is expressed in muscle precursor cells of the limb bud that also express
Pax3. It is thought that Msx1 may facilitate distal migration by delaying
myogenesis in these cells. Despite the role played by Msx1 in inhibiting muscle
differentiation, nothing is known of the mechanisms that support the expression
of the Msx1 gene within limb bud muscle precursor cells. In the present study we 
have used a combination of comparative genomics, mouse transgenic analysis, in
situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry to identify a highly conserved and
tissue-specific regulatory sub-domain within the previously characterised Msx1
gene proximal enhancer element that supports the expression of the Msx1 gene in
Pax3-expressing mouse limb pre-muscle masses. Furthermore, using a combination of
in situ hybridisation, in vivo ChIP assay and transgenic explant culture analysis
we provide evidence that Msx1 expression in limb bud muscle precursor cells is
dependent on the canonical Wnt/TCF signalling pathway that is important in muscle
shape formation. The results of these studies provide evidence of a mechanistic
link between the Wnt/TCF and the Msx1/Pax3/MyoD pathways within limb bud muscle
precursor cells.

PMID: 17727834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Diabet Med. 2007 Oct;24(10):1067-72. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated with Type 2
diabetes in UK community-based cases, but the risk allele frequency is reduced
compared with UK cases selected for genetic studies.

De Silva NM(1), Steele A, Shields B, Knight B, Parnell K, Weedon MN, Hattersley
AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Common polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are
strongly associated with Type 2 diabetes. Many studies include a large proportion
of cases enriched for family history or young age of diagnosis and may therefore 
provide an overestimation of the general population risk. We aimed to compare the
impact of TCF7L2 in UK community-based Type 2 diabetic subjects with that in
subjects ascertained for genetic studies.
METHODS: We genotyped the TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 in 1068 cases from two
sources: 487 from 10 GP practices and 601 ascertained for genetic studies, and
2099 control subjects from two sources: 1099 parents from a birth cohort
(population control subjects) and 300 subjects with normal fasting glucose aged >
or = 45 years (community control subjects).
RESULTS: When compared with Type 2 diabetes cases ascertained for genetic
studies, the risk allele frequency in community-based cases was lower (40 vs.
36%, P = 0.04), but there was no difference in risk allele frequency between
community-based control and population-based control subjects (31 vs. 30%, P =
0.61). The T allele of rs7903146 increased Type 2 diabetes risk with an odds
ratio (OR) of 1.32 (95% CI: 1.13-1.52; P = 0.0002) in community-based cases, but 
this OR was lower than the OR of cases enriched for genetic studies [1.58 (95%
CI: 1.38-1.80), P = 1.4 x 10(-11)] and the combined OR of meta-analysis of 10
studies to date on rs7903146 [1.48 (95% CI: 1.41-1.54), P < 10(-20)].
CONCLUSION: Common variation in the TCF7L2 gene contributes to Type 2 diabetes
risk in UK patients recruited in general practice, but the risk allele frequency 
may be lower than that in subjects enriched for genetic effects.

PMID: 17725629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):3109-18.

The Paneth cell alpha-defensin deficiency of ileal Crohn's disease is linked to
Wnt/Tcf-4.

Wehkamp J(1), Wang G, Kübler I, Nuding S, Gregorieff A, Schnabel A, Kays RJ,
Fellermann K, Burk O, Schwab M, Clevers H, Bevins CL, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University 
of Tübingen, Auerbachstrasse 12, Stuttgart, Germany. jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

Ileal Crohn's disease (CD), a chronic mucosal inflammation, is characterized by
two pertinent features: a specific decrease of Paneth cell-produced antimicrobial
alpha-defensins and the presence of mucosal-adherent bacteria. A mutation in
NOD2, the muramyl dipeptide recognition receptor, is found in some patients,
which leads to an even more pronounced alpha-defensin decrease. However, the
underlying mechanism remains unclear for the majority of patients. In this study,
we report a reduced expression in ileal CD of the Wnt-signaling pathway
transcription factor Tcf-4, a known regulator of Paneth cell differentiation and 
alpha-defensin expression. Within specimens, the levels of Tcf-4 mRNA showed a
high degree of correlation with both HD5 and HD6 mRNA. The levels of Tcf-4 mRNA
were decreased in patients with ileal disease irrespective of degree of
inflammation, but were not decreased in colonic CD or ulcerative colitis. As a
functional indicator of Tcf-4 protein, quantitative binding analysis with nuclear
extracts from small intestine biopsies to a Tcf-4 high-affinity binding site in
the HD-5 and HD-6 promoters showed significantly reduced activity in ileal CD.
Furthermore, a causal link was shown in a murine Tcf-4 knockout model, where the 
comparably reduced expression of Tcf-4 in heterozygous (+/-) mice was sufficient 
to cause a significant decrease of both Paneth cell alpha-defensin levels and
bacterial killing activity. Finally, the association between Paneth cell
alpha-defensins and Tcf-4 was found to be independent of the NOD2 genotype. This 
new link established between a human inflammatory bowel disease and the Wnt
pathway/Tcf-4 provides a novel mechanism for pathogenesis in patients with ileal 
CD.

PMID: 17709525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Zhongguo Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2007 Aug;19(8):471-3.

[A study of expression of Tcf-4 in the small intestine mucosa crypt during severe
abdominal infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu CT(1), Liu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China. wct66@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of T cell factor 4(Tcf-4) in the process of 
severe abdominal infection in rats.
METHODS: Forty healthy adult Wistar rats were randomly divided into control group
(celiotomy only) and groups of 12, 24, 48 hours after establishment of abdominal 
infection. The latter groups included rats receiving cecal ligation and puncture 
(CLP) to establish the severe abdominal infection. Each group consisted of 10
rats. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) were used to detect the number of Tcf-4-positive cells and
expression of Tcf-4 mRNA in the crypts of the mucosa of the small intestine.
RESULTS: It showed that the expression of Tcf-4 in the mucosal crypts of the
small intestine in control group was weak but the number of cells with positive
Tcf-4 expression was increased in crypts of small intestinal mucosa 12 hours
after CLP, reaching its peak level at 24 hours, and remained higher than control 
group at 48 hours (all P<0.01). The transcription level of Tcf-4 was associated
with the stages of the severe abdominal infection. RT-PCR showed that Tcf-4 mRNA 
was upregulated rapidly 12 hours after CLP (0.21+/-0.01, P<0.01), and it reached 
peak level after 24 hours (0.28+/-0.02, P<0.01), decreased slowly but still
obviously higher (0.20+/-0.01, P<0.05) than that of control group (0.19+/-0.01).
CONCLUSION: The expression of Tcf-4 is induced by severe abdominal infection. The
results suggest that Tcf-4 might be related with the proliferation and
differentiation of intestinal stem cell during severe abdominal infection, and
plays an important role in damage and repair of enteric mucosa.

PMID: 17708841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Development. 2007 Sep;134(18):3283-95. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

Wnt signaling mediates regional specification in the vertebrate face.

Brugmann SA(1), Goodnough LH, Gregorieff A, Leucht P, ten Berge D, Fuerer C,
Clevers H, Nusse R, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

At early stages of development, the faces of vertebrate embryos look remarkably
similar, yet within a very short timeframe they adopt species-specific facial
characteristics. What are the mechanisms underlying this regional specification
of the vertebrate face? Using transgenic Wnt reporter embryos we found a highly
conserved pattern of Wnt responsiveness in the developing mouse face that later
corresponded to derivatives of the frontonasal and maxillary prominences. We
explored the consequences of disrupting Wnt signaling, first using a genetic
approach. Mice carrying compound null mutations in the nuclear mediators Lef1 and
Tcf4 exhibited radically altered facial features that culminated in a
hyperteloric appearance and a foreshortened midface. We also used a biochemical
approach to perturb Wnt signaling and found that in utero delivery of a Wnt
antagonist, Dkk1, produced similar midfacial malformations. We tested the
hypothesis that Wnt signaling is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism
controlling facial morphogenesis by determining the pattern of Wnt responsiveness
in avian faces, and then by evaluating the consequences of Wnt inhibition in the 
chick face. Collectively, these data elucidate a new role for Wnt signaling in
regional specification of the vertebrate face, and suggest possible mechanisms
whereby species-specific facial features are generated.

PMID: 17699607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Metabolism. 2007 Sep;56(9):1174-8.

The rs12255372(G/T) and rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene are
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Asian Indians.

Bodhini D(1), Radha V, Dhar M, Narayani N, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)MDRF-ICMR Advanced Centre for Genomics of Diabetes, Madras Diabetes Research
Foundation, Gopalapuram, Chennai, India.

One thousand thirty-eight normal glucose-tolerant and 1031 type 2 diabetic
subjects selected from the Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study were genotyped 
using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay to
investigate the association of rs12255372(G/T) and rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms
of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
in Asian Indians. The frequency of the "T" allele of both rs12255372(G/T) and
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms was significantly higher in diabetic subjects (23%
and 33%) compared to that in normal glucose-tolerant subjects (19% and 28%; P =
.001 and P = .0001, respectively). Logistic regression analysis of the
rs12255372(G/T) polymorphism showed that the odds ratio (adjusted for age, sex,
and body mass index) was 1.56 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.03-2.37; P = .034)
for the TT genotype and 1.29 (95% CI, 1.06-1.58; P = .011) for the TG genotype
when compared with the GG genotype. Adjusted odds ratios for the TT and TC
genotypes of the rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism were found to be 1.50 (95% CI,
1.08-2.08; P = .013) and 1.44 (95% CI, 1.18-1.76; P = .0003), respectively,
compared with the CC genotype. Normal glucose-tolerant subjects with the TT
genotype of rs12255372(G/T) had significantly higher 2-hour plasma glucose levels
(mean +/- SD, 6.1 +/- 1.4 mmol/L) than those with the GG genotype (5.6 +/- 1.0
mmol/L, P = .011). Normal glucose-tolerant subjects with the TT genotype of
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism had significantly higher 2-hour plasma glucose levels
(mean +/- SD, 6.0 +/- 1.3 mmol/L) than those with the CC genotype (5.6 +/- 1.0
mmol/L, P = .004). In conclusion, the T allele of the rs12255372(G/T) and
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene confer susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus in Asian Indians.

PMID: 17697858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Nov;21(11):2805-20. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Transforming growth factor-beta and Wnt signals regulate chondrocyte
differentiation through Twist1 in a stage-specific manner.

Dong YF(1), Soung do Y, Chang Y, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Paris M, O'Keefe RJ, Schwarz 
EM, Drissi H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

We investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the transition between
immature and mature chondrocytes downstream of TGF-beta and canonical Wnt
signals. We used two developmentally distinct chondrocyte models isolated from
the caudal portion of embryonic chick sternum or chick growth plates. Lower
sternal chondrocytes exhibited immature phenotypic features, whereas growth
plate-extracted cells displayed a hypertrophic phenotype. TGF-beta significantly 
induced beta-catenin in immature chondrocytes, whereas it repressed it in mature 
chondrocytes. TGF-beta further enhanced canonical Wnt-mediated transactivation of
the Topflash reporter expression in lower sternal chondrocytes. However, it
inhibited Topflash activity in a time-dependent manner in growth plate
chondrocytes. Our immunoprecipitation experiments showed that TGF-beta induced
Sma- and Mad-related protein 3 interaction with T-cell factor 4 in immature
chondrocytes, whereas it inhibited this interaction in mature chondrocytes.
Similar results were observed by chromatin immunoprecipitation showing that
TGF-beta differentially shifts T-cell factor 4 occupancy on the Runx2 promoter in
lower sternal chondrocytes vs. growth plate chondrocytes. To further determine
the molecular switch between immature and hypertrophic chondrocytes, we assessed 
the expression and regulation of Twist1 and Runx2 in both cell models upon
treatment with TGF-beta and Wnt3a. We show that Runx2 and Twist1 are
differentially regulated during chondrocyte maturation. Furthermore, whereas
TGF-beta induced Twist1 in mature chondrocytes, it inhibited Runx2 expression in 
these cells. Opposite effects were observed upon Wnt3a treatment, which
predominates over TGF-beta effects on these cells. Finally, overexpression of
chick Twist1 in mature chondrocytes dramatically inhibited their hypertrophy.
Together, our findings show that Twist1 may be an important regulator of
chondrocyte progression toward terminal maturation in response to TGF-beta and
canonical Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17684115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Aug 3;8:51.

The TCF7L2 locus and type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ(1), Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics Lab, The McGill University Health Center, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada. hui.qi.qu@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 belongs to a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG box-containing
transcription factors, and maps to human chromosome 10q25.3. A recent study
identified genetic association of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with this gene,
correlated with diminished insulin secretion. This study aimed to investigate the
possibility of genetic association between TCF7L2 and type 1 diabetes (T1D).
METHODS: The SNP most significantly associated with T2D, rs7903146, was genotyped
in 886 T1D nuclear family trios with ethnic backgrounds of mixed European
descent.
RESULTS: This study found no T1D association with, and no age-of-onset effect
from rs7903146.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that a T2D mechanism mediated by TCF7L2 does not 
participate in the etiology of T1D.

PMCID: PMC1978206
PMID: 17683561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Gastroenterology. 2007 Aug;133(2):710-2.

Intestinal development: the many faces of Wnt signaling.

Kapoor A, Li HJ, Leiter AB.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Aug;133(2):539-46.
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Aug;133(2):529-38.

PMID: 17681188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Gastroenterology. 2007 Aug;133(2):529-38. Epub 2007 May 3.

Phases of canonical Wnt signaling during the development of mouse intestinal
epithelium.

Kim BM(1), Mao J, Taketo MM, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Aug;133(2):710-2.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Intestinal crypts constitute a niche in which epithelial
progenitors respond to Wnt signals, replicate, and prepare to differentiate.
Because mutations in Wnt pathway genes lead to intestinal cancer, the role of Wnt
signaling in gut epithelial homeostasis is a subject of intense investigation. We
studied how Wnt signaling is established during intestine development.
METHODS: We studied spatiotemporal features of Wnt signaling at formative stages 
in mouse embryos, when villous projections appear and crypt precursors occupy
intervillus regions. We used TOP-GAL transgenic and Axin2(LacZ) mice, which
report faithfully on canonical Wnt activity, relevant molecular markers, and
embryos with aberrant beta-catenin activation.
RESULTS: Developing intestines first display evidence for Wnt signaling after
appearance of villi. During villus morphogenesis, intervillus cells proliferate
actively but lack signs of canonical Wnt signaling. Surprisingly, in late
gestation and briefly thereafter, conspicuous Wnt activity is evident in
differentiated, postmitotic villus epithelium. Neither Tcf4, a principal
transcriptional effector of intestinal Wnt signals, nor candidate Wnt targets
CD44 and cyclinD1 are expressed in late fetal villus cells that show high Wnt
activity. Instead, those cells express the related factor Tcf3 and a different
Wnt target, c-Myc. Premature and deregulated beta-catenin activation causes
severe villus dysmorphogenesis in transgenic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Relationships among Wnt signaling, epithelial proliferation, and
tissue differentiation are reversed in the developing and adult gut. The
canonical Wnt pathway has independent, albeit possibly overlapping, functions in 
early intestinal villi and adult crypts. These observations advance understanding
of Wnt functions in intestinal development and disease.

PMID: 17681174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Kidney Int Suppl. 2007 Aug;(106):S43-8.

Genetic variations associated with diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes in a
Japanese population.

Maeda S(1), Osawa N, Hayashi T, Tsukada S, Kobayashi M, Kikkawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Center, RIKEN, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan. smaeda@src.riken.jp

Genetic susceptibility plays an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetic
nephropathy and type II diabetes. To identify the genetic polymorphisms
associated with diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes, we performed a
genome-wide association study using single-nucleotide polymorphisms as genetic
markers. We also analyzed polymorphisms within the genes encoding for the
renin-angiotensin system that were considered as candidate genes for diabetic
nephropathy susceptibility and the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) as a
candidate for type II diabetes, in a large cohort of a Japanese population. A
genome-wide association study identified SLC12A3 and engulfment and cell motility
1 gene as the new candidates for diabetic nephropathy and transcription
factor-activating protein 2beta as a novel susceptibility gene for type II
diabetes; this observation was based on the significant association between the
polymorphisms within the genes and the corresponding diseases (P<0.0001).
Further, we discovered that the genes encoding the angiotensin-converting enzyme,
angiotensinogen, and angiotensin II type I receptor have a significant
combinational effect on conferring susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy.
Furthermore, TCF7L2 that has been reported as a convincing susceptibility gene
for type II diabetes in Caucasian populations was also shown to be associated
with type II diabetes in a Japanese population. These genes could be considered
as strong susceptibility genes for diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes in
the Japanese, although the new candidates that have been identified by
genome-wide screening need to be examined in greater detail by several
replication studies.

PMID: 17653210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2155-63.

Mechanisms by which common variants in the TCF7L2 gene increase risk of type 2
diabetes.

Lyssenko V(1), Lupi R, Marchetti P, Del Guerra S, Orho-Melander M, Almgren P,
Sjögren M, Ling C, Eriksson KF, Lethagen AL, Mancarella R, Berglund G, Tuomi T,
Nilsson P, Del Prato S, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, and Lund
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
Valeri.Lyssenko@med.lu.se

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2077-9.

Genetic variants in the gene encoding for transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) 
have been associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and impaired beta cell function, 
but the mechanisms have remained unknown. We therefore studied prospectively the 
ability of common variants in TCF7L2 to predict future T2D and explored the
mechanisms by which they would do this. Scandinavian subjects followed for up to 
22 years were genotyped for 3 SNPs (rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs10885406) in
TCF7L2, and a subset of them underwent extensive metabolic studies. Expression of
TCF7L2 was related to genotype and metabolic parameters in human islets. The
CT/TT genotypes of SNP rs7903146 strongly predicted future T2D in 2 independent
cohorts (Swedish and Finnish). The risk T allele was associated with impaired
insulin secretion, incretin effects, and enhanced rate of hepatic glucose
production. TCF7L2 expression in human islets was increased 5-fold in T2D,
particularly in carriers of the TT genotype. Overexpression of TCF7L2 in human
islets reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. In conclusion, the increased
risk of T2D conferred by variants in TCF7L2 involves the enteroinsular axis,
enhanced expression of the gene in islets, and impaired insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC1934596
PMID: 17671651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2077-9.

Prime suspect: the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes risk.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, United Kingdom. Andrew.Hattersley@pms.ac.uk

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2155-63.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is the most important type 2 diabetes
susceptibility gene identified to date, with common intronic variants strongly
associated with diabetes in all major racial groups. This ubiquitous
transcription factor in the Wnt signaling pathway was not previously known to be 
involved in glucose homeostasis, so defining the underlying mechanism(s) will
provide new insights into diabetes. In this issue of the JCI, Lyssenko and
colleagues report on their human and isolated islet studies and suggest that the 
risk allele increases TCF7L2 expression in the pancreatic beta cell, reducing
insulin secretion and hence predisposing the individual to diabetes (see the
related article beginning on page 2155).

PMCID: PMC1934573
PMID: 17671643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Dec;84(12):1005-14.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene and predisposition to type 2 diabetes in UK
European Whites, Indian Asians and Afro-Caribbean men and women.

Humphries SE(1), Gable D, Cooper JA, Ireland H, Stephens JW, Hurel SJ, Li KW,
Palmen J, Miller MA, Cappuccio FP, Elkeles R, Godsland I, Miller GJ, Talmud PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, British Heart
Foundation Laboratories, Royal Free and University College Medical School,
London, WC1E 6JF, UK. rmhaseh@ucl.ac.uk

Common variants of TCF7L2, encoding a beta-cell-expressed transcription factor,
are strongly associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We examined
this association using both prospective and case-control designs. A total of
2,676 healthy European white middle-aged men from the prospective NPHSII (158
developed T2D over 15 years surveillance) were genotyped for two intronic SNPs
[rs 7903146 (IVS3C>T) and rs12255372 (IVS4G>T)] which showed strong linkage
disequilibrium (D' = 0.88, p<0.001; R(2)=0.76, p<0.001). The IVS5T allele
frequency was 0.28 (95% CI 0.27-0.29) and 0.33 (0.28-0.39) in healthy and T2D,
respectively (p=0.04). Compared to CC men, CT and TT men had an adjusted [for
age, body mass index, systolic blood pressure, triglyceride and C-reactive
protein levels] hazard ratio for T2D of 1.65 (1.13-2.41) and 1.87 (0.99-3.53),
respectively, p<0.01. The population attributable fraction for diabetes risk was 
17%. In 1459, European white T2D men and women (60% male), T allele frequency was
0.36 (0.34-0.38), and compared to NPHSII healthy men the OR for T2D for the CT
and TT subjects was 1.43 (1.24-1.65) and 2.11 (1.69-2.63), respectively
p=<0.0001. A similar effect was observed in 919 T2D Indian Asians [OR=1.50
(1.14-1.99) and 1.64 (1.03-2.63) p=0.003] and 385 Afro-Caribbean subjects
[OR=1.25 (0.90-1.75) and 1.32 (0.74-2.33) p=0.17] compared to non-diabetic
ethnically matched subjects from South London. Weaker associations were found for
the IVS4G>T in all studies. Linkage disequilibrium between the two SNPs was high 
in Indian Asians (D'=0.94), but much weaker in Afro-Caribbeans (D'=0.17) and
haplotype frequencies differed markedly in this group. These results extend
previous observations to other ethnic groups, and strongly confirm that TCF7L2
genotype is a major risk factor for development of T2D.

PMID: 17665514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2443-50. Epub 2007 Jul 28.

Impaired glucagon-like peptide-1-induced insulin secretion in carriers of
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms.

Schäfer SA(1), Tschritter O, Machicao F, Thamer C, Stefan N, Gallwitz B, Holst
JJ, Dekker JM, 't Hart LM, Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, Eberhard-Karls University of
Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str 10, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Mar;52(3):557. Dosage error in article text.
    Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):208. t' Hart, L M [corrected to 't Hart, L M].

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2413-6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
are associated with type 2 diabetes and reduced insulin secretion. The
transcription factor TCF7L2 is an essential factor for glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) secretion from intestinal L cells. We studied whether a defect in the
enteroinsular axis contributes to impaired insulin secretion in carriers of
TCF7L2 polymorphisms.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,110 non-diabetic German participants for five single
nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF7L2. All participants underwent an OGTT; GLP-1
secretion was measured in 155 participants. In 210 participants, an IVGTT
combined with a hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp was performed. In another 160
participants from the Netherlands and 73 from Germany, a hyperglycaemic clamp (10
mmol/l) was performed. In 73 German participants this clamp was combined with a
GLP-1 infusion and an arginine bolus.
RESULTS: The OGTT data confirmed that variants in TCF7L2 are associated with
reduced insulin secretion. In contrast, insulin secretion induced by an i.v.
glucose challenge in the IVGTT and hyperglycaemic clamp was not different between
the genotypes. GLP-1 concentrations during the OGTT were not influenced by the
TCF7L2 variants. However, GLP-1-infusion combined with a hyperglycaemic clamp
showed a significant reduction in GLP-1-induced insulin secretion in carriers of 
the risk allele in two variants (rs7903146, rs12255372, p < 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Variants of TCF7L2 specifically impair GLP-1-induced 
insulin secretion. This seems to be rather the result of a functional defect in
the GLP-1 signalling in beta cells than a reduction in GLP-1 secretion. This
defect might explain the impaired insulin secretion in carriers of the risk
alleles and confers the increased risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2063563
PMID: 17661009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Protein Sci. 2007 Sep;16(9):1984-98. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Molecular plasticity of beta-catenin: new insights from single-molecule
measurements and MD simulation.

Ritco-Vonsovici M(1), Ababou A, Horton M.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Nanotechnology and Department of Medicine, University
College London, London WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom.

The multifunctional protein, beta-catenin, has essential roles in cell adhesion
and, through the Wnt signaling pathway, in controlling cell differentiation,
development, and generation of cancer. Could distinct molecular forms of
beta-catenin underlie these two functions? Our single-molecule force spectroscopy
of armadillo beta-catenin, with molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, suggests a
model in which the cell generates various forms of beta-catenin, in equilibrium. 
We find beta-catenin and the transcriptional factor Tcf4 form two complexes with 
different affinities. Specific cellular response is achieved by the ligand
binding to a particular matching preexisting conformer. Our MD simulation
indicates that complexes derive from two conformers of the core region of the
protein, whose preexisting molecular forms could arise from small variations in
flexible regions of the beta-catenin main binding site. This mechanism for the
generation of the various forms offers a route to tailoring future therapeutic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC2206973
PMID: 17660262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jul 21;13(27):3747-51.

Novel mutations and sequence variants in exons 3-9 of human T cell factor-4 gene 
in sporadic rectal cancer patients stratified by microsatellite instability.

Meng WJ(1), Wang L, Tian C, Yu YY, Zhou B, Gu J, Xia QJ, Sun XF, Li Y, Wang R,
Zheng XL, Zhou ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, 37 Guo Xue Xiang, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

AIM: To establish the role of human T Cell Factor-4 (hTCF-4) gene exons 3-9
mutation status in association with sporadic rectal cancer with microsatellite
instability (MSI).
METHODS: Microsatellite markers were genotyped in 93 sporadic rectal cancer
patients. Eleven cases were found to be high-frequency MSI (MSI-H). Sequence
analysis of the coding region of the exons 3-9 of hTCF-4 gene was carried out for
the 11 MSI-H cases and 10 controls (5 microsatellite stability (MSS) cases and 5 
cases with normal mucosa). The sequencing and MSI identification were used.
RESULTS: Several novel mutations and variants were revealed. In exon 4, one is a 
4-position continuous alteration which caused amino acid change from Q131T and
S132I (391insA, 392 G > A, 393 A > G and 395delC) and another nucleotide deletion
(395delC) is present in MSI-H cases (5/10 and 4/10, respectively) but completely 
absent in the controls.
CONCLUSION: Novel mutations in exon 4 of hTCF-4 gene were revealed in this study,
which might be of importance in the pathogenesis of sporadic rectal cancer
patients with MSI-H.

PMCID: PMC4250650
PMID: 17659738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neuron. 2007 Jul 19;55(2):217-30.

The transcription factor Yin Yang 1 is essential for oligodendrocyte progenitor
differentiation.

He Y(1), Dupree J, Wang J, Sandoval J, Li J, Liu H, Shi Y, Nave KA,
Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, R. Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The progression of progenitors to oligodendrocytes requires proliferative arrest 
and the activation of a transcriptional program of differentiation. While
regulation of cell cycle exit has been extensively characterized, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for the initiation of differentiation remain ill-defined. 
Here, we identify the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) as a critical
regulator of oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation. Conditional ablation of 
yy1 in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo induces a phenotype characterized by
defective myelination, ataxia, and tremor. At the cellular level, lack of yy1
arrests differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitors after they exit from the
cell cycle. At the molecular level, YY1 acts as a lineage-specific repressor of
transcriptional inhibitors of myelin gene expression (Tcf4 and Id4), by
recruiting histone deacetylase-1 to their promoters during oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Thus, we identify YY1 as an essential component of the
transcriptional network regulating the transition of oligodendrocyte progenitors 
from cell cycle exit to differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2034312
PMID: 17640524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Mol Signal. 2007 Jul 16;2:6.

Clusterin expression can be modulated by changes in TCF1-mediated Wnt signaling.

Schepeler T(1), Mansilla F, Christensen LL, Orntoft TF, Andersen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. cla@ki.au.dk.

BACKGROUND: Clusterin (CLU) is an enigmatic molecule associated with various
physiological processes and disease states. Different modes of cellular stress
lead to increased CLU levels, and additionally numerous growth factors and
cytokines affect the expression of the CLU gene. APC and c-MYC, both intimately
linked to the Wnt signaling pathway have previously been shown to influence CLU
levels, and we therefore investigated if changes in Wnt signaling activity in
vitro could regulate the expression of one, or more, of several CLU mRNA and
protein variants.
RESULTS: Over-expression of the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin tagged with GFP 
was used to abrogate Wnt signaling activity in LS174T and HCT116 colon carcinoma 
cells. This fusion construct sequestered signaling competent beta-catenin whereby
Wnt signaling was abrogated, and consequently cytoplasmic CLU protein levels
increased as demonstrated by immunofluorescence. To determine which branch of the
Wnt pathway was mediating the CLU response, we over-expressed dominant negative
(dn) TCF1 and TCF4 transcription factors in stably transfected LS174T cells. We
observed both intra- and extracellular levels of CLU protein to be induced by
dnTCF1 but not dnTCF4. Subsequent analysis of the expression levels of three CLU 
mRNA variants by real time RT-PCR revealed only one CLU mRNA variant to be
responsive to dnTCF1 over-expression. 5'-end RACE indicated that this CLU mRNA
variant was shorter at the 5'-end than previously reported, and accordingly the
translated protein was predicted to be shorter at the N-terminus and destined to 
the secretory pathway which fit our observations. Examination of the immediate
expression kinetics of CLU after dnTCF1 over-expression using real time RT-PCR
indicated that CLU might be a secondary Wnt target.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the Wnt signaling pathway
specifically regulates one out of three CLU mRNA variants via TCF1. This CLU
transcript is shorter at the 5' end than reported by the RefSeq database, and
produces the intracellular 60 kDa CLU protein isoform which is secreted as a ~80 
kDa protein after post-translational processing.

PMCID: PMC1976611
PMID: 17634137  [PubMed]


237. Diabetologia. 2007 Sep;50(9):1852-7. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Variants of the TCF7L2 gene are associated with beta cell dysfunction and confer 
an increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the ULSAM cohort of Swedish
elderly men.

Dahlgren A(1), Zethelius B, Jensevik K, Syvänen AC, Berne C; ULSAM Cohort.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: In a population-based cohort of elderly men with well-defined
phenotypes and biochemical markers related to type 2 diabetes mellitus, we
analysed two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs7903146 and rs12255372, in
the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), which are associated with an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 1,142 subjects were from the population-based Uppsala 
Longitudinal Study of Adult Men cohort study (see
http://www.pubcare.uu.se/ULSAM/, last accessed in May 2007). Insulin sensitivity 
was assessed using a euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp; fasting intact and
32-33 split proinsulin, immunoreactive insulin and specific insulin were measured
in plasma samples. The SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 were genotyped using a
fluorescent homogeneous single base extension assay. The SNP genotypes were
analysed against diabetes prevalence at age 70 using logistic regression and
against quantitative biochemical measures using linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: We replicated the association with type 2 diabetes mellitus for both
SNPs in this cohort of elderly males. The highest significant odds ratio (2.15,
95% CI 1.20-3.85) was found for SNP rs7903146. The odds ratio for SNP rs12255372 
was 1.69 (95% CI 1.20-2.39). Both TCF7L2 SNPs were found to be significantly
associated with plasma proinsulin when adjusting for insulin sensitivity, both in
the whole cohort and when the diabetic subjects were excluded. Analysis for
fasting plasma insulin or insulin sensitivity did not give significant results.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The association between the risk alleles of the two
SNPs studied and levels of proinsulin in plasma, identified when adjusting for
insulin sensitivity using euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp measurements in
this study, is an important novel finding.

PMID: 17618413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Sep;92(9):3733-7. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Replication and identification of novel variants at TCF7L2 associated with type 2
diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese.

Ng MC(1), Tam CH, Lam VK, So WY, Ma RC, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: Variations at a large linkage disequilibrium (LD) block of
transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) were reported to be associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Icelandic, Danish and European-American populations and 
further replicated in other populations of European, African, and Asian
ancestries. However, data for Chinese and comprehensive survey of the whole gene 
are lacking.
DESIGN: We attempted to examine 22 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
spanning across the TCF7L2 gene for association with T2D in Hong Kong Chinese. We
first studied a case-control sample involving 433 hospital cases with familial
early-onset T2D and 419 normal controls and further studied the associated SNPs
in 450 members of 142 diabetic families.
RESULTS: Two of the previously reported risk alleles at rs11196205 (C) and
rs7903146 (T) were rare in Chinese (0.013 and 0.024, respectively, in controls). 
Rs11196205 was associated with T2D [odds ratio (OR) [95% confidence interval
(CI)] = 2.11 (1.04-4.26)], whereas the association for rs7903146 [OR (95% CI) =
1.27 (0.71-2.29)] was not significant in the case-control sample. Interestingly, 
another SNP (rs11196218 G allele) located in adjacent LD block conferred
independent risk for T2D [OR (95%CI) =1.43 (1.14-1.79)] and contributed
high-population attributable risk of 42%. The association finding of rs11196218
and its haplotype for T2D was also replicated in the family sample (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are consistent with others' findings that variations at 
TCF7L2 contribute to T2D, including Chinese. The presence of association signals 
spanning several LD blocks warrants further examination of extended regions to
reveal the causal variant(s) for this important T2D gene.

PMID: 17609304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):35-45.

Crosstalk between NF-kappaB/p65 and beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling pathways
through alterations in GSK-3beta expression during trans-differentiation of
endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling loops play an important role in
trans-differentiation towards the morular phenotype of endometrial carcinomas.
Crosstalk between NF-kappaB and beta-catenin pathways has been proposed and we
focused here on associations between these two pathways during
trans-differentiation. In normal endometrium, nuclear phosphorylated p65 (pp65), 
the active form NF-kappaB subunit, was found to be significantly increased in the
secretory phase, correlating positively with vimentin and E-cadherin and
inversely with Snail mRNA expression. On transfection of p65, vimentin,
E-cadherin, and Snail were transcriptionally altered, indicating possible roles
in establishment and maintenance of the secretory phenotype. In endometrial
carcinomas with morules, levels of nuclear pp65, Snail mRNA, vimentin, and
cytoplasmic TNF-alpha were reduced during trans-differentiation, correlating
inversely with nuclear beta-catenin. Nuclear accumulation of GSK-3beta, along
with beta-catenin, was observed in morules. In cell lines, overexpression of p65 
inhibited beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription, while transfection of
GSK-3beta resulted in repression of TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activity.
Moreover, nuclear GSK-3beta was increased by overexpression of beta-catenin, as
well as induction of G1-cell cycle arrest. These findings provide evidence that a
shift from NF-kappaB to beta-catenin signalling pathways through alterations in
GSK-3beta expression may be essential for the induction of trans-differentiation 
of endometrial carcinoma cells, leading to a shut-down of mesenchymal markers.

PMID: 17607667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2638-42. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with
type 2 diabetes in an African-American population enriched for nephropathy.

Sale MM(1), Smith SG, Mychaleckyj JC, Keene KL, Langefeld CD, Leak TS, Hicks PJ, 
Bowden DW, Rich SS, Freedman BI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. msale@virginia.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recently, variants in the TCF7L2 gene have been reported to be
associated with type 2 diabetes across multiple Europid populations, but only one
small sample of African-American type 2 diabetic patients has been examined. Our 
objective was to investigate the importance of TCF7L2 in a larger
African-American case-control population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in six known type 2 diabetes genes in 577 African-American case subjects
with type 2 diabetes enriched for nephropathy and 596 African-American control
subjects. Additionally, we genotyped 70 ancestry-informative markers (AIMs) to
apply adjustments for differences in ancestral proportions.
RESULTS: The most significant associations were observed with TCF7L2 intron 3
SNPs rs7903146 (additive P = 4.10 x 10(-6), odds ratio [OR] 1.51;
admixture-adjusted P(a) = 3.77 x 10(-6)) and rs7901695 (P = 0.001, OR 1.30; P(a) 
= 0.003). The 2-SNP haplotype containing these SNPs was also associated with type
2 diabetes (P = 3 x 10(-5)). Modest associations were also seen with TCF7L2
intron 4 SNPs rs7895340, rs11196205, and rs12255372 (0.01 < P < 0.05; 0.03 < P(a)
< 0.08), as well as with ATP-sensitive inwardly rectifying potassium channel
subunit Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) SNPs (0.01 
< P < 0.05; 0.01 < P(a) < 0.41). No significant associations were detected with
genotyped calpain 10 (CAPN10), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARG), and transcription factor 1 (TCF1) SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that variants in the TCF7L2 gene significantly 
contribute to diabetes susceptibility in African-American populations.

PMID: 17601994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Jun 25;8:37.

TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant does not associate with smallness for gestational age in
the French population.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Choquet H, Deghmoun S, Durand E, Gaget S, Lecoeur C,
Froguel P, Levy-Marchal C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, 8090-Institute of biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, 59000 France.
Stephane.Cauchi@good.ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: In adults, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele, commonly associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D), has been also associated with a lower body mass index
(BMI) in T2D individuals and with a smaller waist circumference in subjects with 
impaired glucose tolerance.
METHODS: The present association study aimed at analyzing the contribution of the
rs7903146 SNP to smallness for gestational age (SGA) and metabolic profiles in
subjects with SGA or appropriate for gestational age birth weight (AGA). Two
groups of French Caucasian subjects were selected on birth data: SGA (birth
weight < 10th percentile; n = 764), and AGA (25th < birth weight < 75th
percentile; n = 627). Family-based association tests were also performed in 3,012
subjects from 628 SGA and AGA pedigrees.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 genotypic distributions between AGA (30.7%) and SGA
(29.0%) were not statistically different (allelic OR = 0.92 [0.78-1.09], p =
0.34). Family association-based studies did not show a distortion of T allele
transmission in SGA subjects (p = 0.52). No significant effect of the T allele
was detected on any of the metabolic parameters in the SGA group. However, in the
AGA group, trends towards a lower insulin secretion (p = 0.03) and a higher
fasting glycaemia (p = 0.002) were detected in carriers of the T allele.
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant neither increases the risk for SGA nor
modulates birth weight and young adulthood glucose homeostasis in French
Caucasian subjects born with SGA.

PMCID: PMC1920504
PMID: 17593304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1780. Epub 2007 Jun 23.

The accelerator hypothesis cannot be tested using the type 2 diabetes gene,
TCF7L2.

Wilkin TJ.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2001 Jul;44(7):914-22.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):212-3.

PMID: 17589824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1621-30. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes, glucose
homeostasis traits and gene expression in US participants of European and African
descent.

Elbein SC(1), Chu WS, Das SK, Yao-Borengasser A, Hasstedt SJ, Wang H, Rasouli N, 
Kern PA.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Section, Medicine and Research Services, Central Arkansas Veterans
Healthcare System, John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans Hospital, 4700 W. 7th
Street, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. elbeinstevenc@uams.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We sought to determine: (1) the role of previously described
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants in type 2 diabetes in African
American individuals and in participants of European ancestry; (2) the
physiological impact of these variants on glucose homeostasis; and (3) whether
the non-coding variants altered TCF7L2 expression in adipocytes and transformed
lymphocytes.
METHODS: Association studies were conducted by genotyping 932 Europid and African
American diabetic and control participants. Family studies were conducted in 673 
members of 68 Europid families ascertained for at least two diabetic siblings.
Metabolic studies were conducted in 585 non-diabetic individuals who had
undergone frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance tests to determine
insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion. Gene expression studies were conducted
in 74 adipose samples and 64 muscle samples from non-diabetic individuals with
known genotypes and also in 55 lymphoblastoid cell lines.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 variants were associated with type 2 diabetes in a Europid
case-control population and in families, but not in African Americans. Risk
alleles increased the 60 min post-challenge glucose value in Europid families and
reduced insulin sensitivity by 45% in Europids, but did not alter insulin
secretion. TCF7L2 expression was not altered by genotype and did not correlate
with insulin sensitivity or BMI.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We confirmed TCF7L2 as a risk factor in a population 
of European descent, where it reduced glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, 
but not insulin secretion. We found no role in African Americans and could not
explain the association by altered adipocyte or muscle gene expression.

PMID: 17579832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Association study of the genetic polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) gene and type 2 diabetes in the Chinese population.

Chang YC(1), Chang TJ, Jiang YD, Kuo SS, Lee KC, Chiu KC, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2417-9.
    Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):e22; author reply e23.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene is one of the few validated genetic variants with large effects on the risk 
of type 2 diabetes in the populations of European ancestry. In this study, we
aimed to explore the effect of the TCF7L2 polymorphisms in a Han Chinese
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) across the TCF7L2 gene in 1,520 unrelated subjects from a Han Chinese
population in Taiwan. The associations of SNPs and haplotypes with type 2
diabetes and linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure of the TCF7L2 gene were
analyzed.
RESULTS: The previously reported SNPs rs7903146 T- and rs12255372 T-alleles of
the TCF7L2 gene were rare and were not associated with type 2 diabetes in a
Chinese population, which may attribute to the low frequencies of these two SNPs.
SNP rs290487 located in an LD block close to the 3' end of the gene was
associated with type 2 diabetes (allele-specific P = 0.0021; permuted P = 0.03). 
The odds ratio was 1.36 for the CT genotype (95% CI 1.08-1.71; P = 0.0063) and
1.51 for the CC genotype (1.10 -2.07; P = 0.0085) compared with the TT genotype, 
corresponding to a population attributable risk fraction of 18.7%. The haplotypes
composed of rs290487 were also significantly associated with type 2 diabetes
(global P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel risk-conferring genetic variant of TCF7L2 for 
type 2 diabetes in a Chinese population. Our data suggested that the TCF7L2
genetic polymorphisms are major determinants for risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Chinese population.

PMID: 17579206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Diabet Med. 2007 Jul;24(7):696-701. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

A new era in finding Type 2 diabetes genes-the unusual suspects.

Frayling TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
tim.frayling@pms.ac.uk

In 1988 the task of identifying Type 2 diabetes genes was described as a
nightmare. For the next 17 years this proved to be largely correct. In the
meantime the prevalence of Type 2 diabetes rose sharply due to non-genetic
factors, compounding the problem of trying to find genes. Despite a huge amount
of effort, progress was disappointing and only two genes, PPARG and KCNJ11, were 
confirmed beyond doubt as Type 2 diabetes risk factors in multiple studies. The
reasons for this have been well documented and mainly consist of the use of
inappropriate levels of statistical inference given the many hundreds of
thousands of potential risk polymorphisms in the genome and their small effect
sizes. The good news is that these problems are now surmountable and prospects
for finding many more genes are bright. This year saw the identification of a
third gene, TCF7L2, that has a greater impact on risk than the first two and
provided important lessons for Type 2 diabetes genetic studies. The most
important of these lessons was that previously unsuspected genes may be involved.
In this review I discuss why this year is the start of a new era in our
understanding of Type 2 diabetes genes and how this may lead to improved patient 
care.

PMID: 17561964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Diabetes Care. 2007 Sep;30(9):2299-301. Epub 2007 May 31.

Variation of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene predicts impaired
fasting glucose in healthy young adults: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns
Study.

Raitakari OT(1), Rönnemaa T, Huupponen R, Viikari L, Fan M, Marniemi J,
Hutri-Kähönen N, Viikari JS, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Turku, Finland.
olli.raitakari@utu.fi

Erratum in
    Diabetes Care. 2007 Dec;30(12):3154. Lehtimäkimd, Terho [corrected to Lehtimäki, 
Terho].

PMID: 17540954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Electrophoresis. 2007 Jun;28(12):1882-95.

Scanning copy number and gene expression on the 18q21-qter chromosomal region by 
the systematic multiplex PCR and reverse transcription-PCR methods.

Yamamoto F(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Epigenetics Program, Burnham Institute for Medical
Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. fyamamoto@burnham.org

We examined differences in copy number and expression of 127 genes located on the
18q21-qter chromosomal region of the breast and prostate cancer cell lines, using
the systematic multiplex PCR and reverse transcription-PCR (SM PCR and SM RT-PCR)
methods that we developed. Semi-quantitative data were obtained that were
comparable in quality, but not in quantity, to data from DNA microarray
hybridization analysis. In the chromosomal region where losses are frequent in
breast, prostate, and other cancers, we detected a homozygous deletion of the
SMAD4 gene in the MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cell line. We also observed partial or
entire loss of expression in genes such as CCBE1, CCDC11, CD226, NP_115536.1,
NP_689683.2, RNF152, SERPINB8, and TCF4 in certain breast and/or prostate cancer 
cell lines. An increase in gene expression was rare, but found with the
transcription factor ONECUT2 gene in all of the cancer cell lines examined.
Real-time qRT-PCR experiments confirmed these SM RT-PCR results. Further analysis
of clinical specimens of breast cancer by real-time qRT-PCR demonstrated that the
gene expression of CCBE1, TCF4, NP_115536.1, and NP_689683.2 was downregulated in
the majority of clinical cases of breast cancer.

PMID: 17523142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Diabetes. 2007 Aug;56(8):2178-82. Epub 2007 May 22.

Variation in TCF7L2 influences therapeutic response to sulfonylureas: a GoDARTs
study.

Pearson ER(1), Donnelly LA, Kimber C, Whitley A, Doney AS, McCarthy MI,
Hattersley AT, Morris AD, Palmer CN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
e.pearson@chs.dundee.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: There is considerable interindividual variation in sulfonylurea
response in type 2 diabetes. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants have
been identified to be strongly associated with type 2 diabetes risk, probably due
to decreased beta-cell function. We hypothesized that variation in TCF7L2 would
influence response to sulfonylureas but not metformin. We studied the effect of
TCF7L2 rs12255372 and rs7903146 genotypes on glycemic response.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The DARTS/MEMO (Diabetes Audit and Research
Tayside/Medicines Monitoring Unit) collaboration database includes prescribing,
biochemistry, and clinical phenotype of all patients with diabetes within
Tayside, Scotland, from 1992. Of these, the TCF7L2 genotype was determined in
4,469 patients with type 2 diabetes recruited to GoDARTS (Genetics of Diabetes
Audit and Research Tayside) between 1997 and July 2006. A total of 901 incident
sulfonylurea users and 945 metformin users were identified. A logistic regression
was used with treatment failure defined as an A1C >7% within 3-12 months after
treatment initiation. Covariates included the TCF7L2 genotype, BMI, sex, age
diagnosed, drug adherence, and drug dose. A1C pretreatment was available in a
subset of patients (sulfonylurea n = 579; metformin n = 755).
RESULTS: Carriers of the risk allele were less likely to respond to sulfonylureas
with an odds ratio (OR) for failure of 1.95 (95% CI 1.23-3.06; P = 0.005),
comparing rs12255372 T/T vs. G/G. Including the baseline A1C strengthened this
association (OR 2.16 [95% CI 1.21-3.86], P = 0.009). A similar, although slightly
weaker, association was seen with rs7903146. No association was seen between
metformin response and either single nucleotide polymorphism, after adjustment
for baseline A1C.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 variants influence therapeutic response to sulfonylureas but 
not metformin. This study establishes that genetic variation can alter response
to therapy in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17519421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;80(6):1150-61. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Type 2 diabetes TCF7L2 risk genotypes alter birth weight: a study of 24,053
individuals.

Freathy RM(1), Weedon MN, Bennett A, Hypponen E, Relton CL, Knight B, Shields B, 
Parnell KS, Groves CJ, Ring SM, Pembrey ME, Ben-Shlomo Y, Strachan DP, Power C,
Jarvelin MR, McCarthy MI, Davey Smith G, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK.

The role of genes in normal birth-weight variation is poorly understood, and it
has been suggested that the genetic component of fetal growth is small. Type 2
diabetes genes may influence birth weight through maternal genotype, by
increasing maternal glycemia in pregnancy, or through fetal genotype, by altering
fetal insulin secretion. We aimed to assess the role of the recently described
type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2 in birth weight. We genotyped the polymorphism
rs7903146 in 15,709 individuals whose birth weight was available from six studies
and in 8,344 mothers from three studies. Each fetal copy of the predisposing
allele was associated with an 18-g (95% confidence interval [CI] 7-29 g) increase
in birth weight (P=.001) and each maternal copy with a 30-g (95% CI 15-45 g)
increase in offspring birth weight (P=2.8x10-5). Stratification by fetal genotype
suggested that the association was driven by maternal genotype (31-g [95% CI 9-48
g] increase per allele; corrected P=.003). Analysis of diabetes-related traits in
10,314 nondiabetic individuals suggested the most likely mechanism is that the
risk allele reduces maternal insulin secretion (disposition index reduced by
~0.15 standard deviation; P=1x10-4), which results in increased maternal glycemia
in pregnancy and hence increased offspring birth weight. We combined information 
with the other common variant known to alter fetal growth, the -30G-->A
polymorphism of glucokinase (rs1799884). The 4% of offspring born to mothers
carrying three or four risk alleles were 119 g (95% CI 62-172 g) heavier than
were the 32% born to mothers with none (for overall trend, P=2x10-7), comparable 
to the impact of maternal smoking during pregnancy. In conclusion, we have
identified the first type 2 diabetes-susceptibility allele to be reproducibly
associated with birth weight. Common gene variants can substantially influence
normal birth-weight variation.

PMCID: PMC1867102
PMID: 17503332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jun 15;16(12):1488-94. Epub 2007 May 3.

Severe mental retardation with breathing abnormalities (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome) is
caused by haploinsufficiency of the neuronal bHLH transcription factor TCF4.

Brockschmidt A(1), Todt U, Ryu S, Hoischen A, Landwehr C, Birnbaum S, Frenck W,
Radlwimmer B, Lichter P, Engels H, Driever W, Kubisch C, Weber RG.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, 53111 
Bonn, Germany.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic mental disorder, which is mainly 
characterized by severe motor and mental retardation including absent language
development, a characteristic facial gestalt and episodes of hyperventilation. We
report on a female patient with PHS showing severe mental retardation with absent
speech, pronounced muscular hypotonia, ataxia, distinctive facial features, such 
as a coarse face, a broad nasal bridge and a wide mouth, and hyperventilation
attacks. In this patient, genomic profiling by array-based comparative genomic
hybridization and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies detected and
confirmed a de novo 0.5 Mb deletion in 18q21.2 containing a single gene, the
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TCF4. cDNA and genomic analyses in
the patient and her parents demonstrated TCF4 haploinsufficiency as the
underlying cause of the disease. Analysis of the embryonal expression pattern of 
the Danio rerio ortholog, tcf4, by whole-mount in situ hybridization showed a
highly specific expression domain in the pallium of the telencephalon during late
somitogenesis, when the patterning of the zebrafish brain is advanced and neural 
differentiation commences. Later expression domains were restricted to several
regions in the central nervous system, including continued expression in the
pallium of the telencephalon, and starting expression in the diencephalon
(thalamus, ventral thalamus and posterior tuberculum), the midbrain tegmentum,
the hindbrain and the branchial arches. This expression pattern correlates with
the clinical phenotype. Our results show that haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes
PHS and suggest that D. rerio is a valuable model to study the molecular
pathogenesis of PHS and the role of TCF4 in brain development.

PMID: 17478476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Jul;85(7):777-82. Epub 2007 May 3.

TCF7L2 is reproducibly associated with type 2 diabetes in various ethnic groups: 
a global meta-analysis.

Cauchi S(1), El Achhab Y, Choquet H, Dina C, Krempler F, Weitgasser R, Nejjari C,
Patsch W, Chikri M, Meyre D, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, 8090, Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, 59000, France.

TCF7L2 variants have been consistently associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of different ethnic descent. Among them, the rs7903146 T allele is
probably the best proxy to evaluate the effect of this gene on T2D risk in
additional ethnic groups. In the present study, we investigated the association
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and T2D in Moroccans (406 normoglycemic
individuals and 504 T2D subjects) and in white Austrians (1,075 normoglycemic
individuals and 486 T2D subjects). Then, we systematically reviewed the
association of this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with T2D risk in a
meta-analysis, combining our data with data from previous studies. The allelic
odds ratios (ORs) for T2D were 1.56 [1.29-1.89] (p = 2.9 x 10(-6)) and 1.52
[1.29-1.78] (p = 3.0 x 10(-7)) in Moroccans and Austrians, respectively. No
heterogeneity was found between these two different populations by Woolf test
(chi (2) = 0.04, df = 1, p = 0.84). We found 28 original published association
studies dealing with the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism in T2D. A meta-analysis
was then performed on 29,195 control subjects and 17,202 cases. No heterogeneity 
in genotypic distribution was found (Woolf test: chi (2) = 31.5, df = 26, p =
0.21; Higgins statistic: I2 = 14.1%). A Mantel-Haenszel procedure was then
performed to provide a pooled odds ratio (OR) of 1.46 [1.42-1.51] (p = 5.4 x
10(-140)). No publication bias was detected, using the conservative Egger's
regression asymmetry test (t = -1.6, df = 25, p = 0.11). Compared to any other
gene variants previously confirmed by meta-analysis, TCF7L2 can be distinguished 
by its tremendous reproducibility of association with T2D and its OR twice as
high. In the near future, large-scale genome-wide association studies will fully 
extend the genome coverage, potentially delivering other common
diabetes-susceptibility genes like TCF7L2.

PMID: 17476472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Clin Genet. 2007 Apr;71(4):359-66.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in Mexico City.

Parra EJ(1), Cameron E, Simmonds L, Valladares A, McKeigue P, Shriver M, Wacher
N, Kumate J, Kittles R, Cruz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario,
Canada. eparra@utm.utoronto.ca

Polymorphisms within the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in several recent studies. We characterized
three of these polymorphisms (rs12255372, rs7903146 and the microsatellite
DG10S478) in an admixed sample of 286 patients with T2D and 275 controls from
Mexico City. We also analyzed three samples representative of the relevant
parental populations: Native Americans from the state of Guerrero (Mexico),
Spanish from Valencia and Nigerians (Bini from the Edo region). In order to
minimize potential confounding because of the presence of population
stratification in the sample, we evaluated the association of the three TCF7L2
polymorphisms with T2D by using the program admixmap to fit a logistic regression
model incorporating individual ancestry, sex, age, body mass index and education.
The markers rs12255372, rs7903146 and DG10S478 are in tight disequilibrium in the
Mexican sample. We observed a significant association between the
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs12255372 and the microsatellite DG10S478
with T2D in the Mexican sample [rs12255372, odds ratio (OR) = 1.78, p = 0.017;
DG10S478, OR = 1.62, p = 0.041]. The SNP rs7903146 shows similar trends, but its 
association with T2D is not as strong (OR = 1.39, p = 0.152). Analysis of the
parental samples, as well as other available data, indicates that there are
substantial population frequency differences for these polymorphisms: The
frequencies of the T2D risk factors are more than 20% higher in European and West
African populations than in East Asian and Native American populations.

PMID: 17470138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Sep;28(9):1885-92. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

A functional role of Cdx2 in beta-catenin signaling during transdifferentiation
in endometrial carcinomas.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Wani Y, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Nuclear beta-catenin is required for changes in morphology from glandular to
morular phenotypes of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells, with activation of
p14(ARF)/p53/p21(Waf1) and alteration of p16(INK4A)/pRb pathways. Having
demonstrated previously that the homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2 increases 
markedly during intestinal epithelial cell differentiation, we have examined its 
effects in beta-catenin signaling during transdifferentiation of Em Ca cells. In 
clinical cases, Cdx2 immunoreactivity, along with increased mRNA signals, was
found to overlap with nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and p21(Waf1) in
morules, demonstrating an inverse correlation with cell proliferation. In cell
lines, over-expression of active form beta-catenin resulted in a significant
increase in endogenous Cdx2 expression at both mRNA and protein levels.
Furthermore, the Cdx2 promoter was activated by T-cell factor 4 (TCF4)
-independent activated beta-catenin, as well as Cdx2 itself, through the region
from -39 to +9 bp relative to transcription start site. Cells over-expressing
exogenous Cdx2 showed high levels of p21(Waf1) expression due to stabilization of
the mRNA status, resulting in significant decrease in the proliferation rate, in 
contrast to the lack of apparent changes in morphology. Moreover, transfected
Cdx2 could inhibit beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcriptional activation of
target genes, including p14(ARF) and cyclin D1, probably through indirect
mechanisms. These data suggest that over-expression of Cdx2 mediated by nuclear
beta-catenin and Cdx2 itself can cause an inhibition of Em Ca cell proliferation 
through up-regulation of p21(Waf1) expression, modulating
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription. We therefore conclude that an
association between Cdx2 and beta-catenin signaling may participate in induction 
of transdifferentiation of Em Ca cells.

PMID: 17468517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. FEBS Lett. 2007 May 15;581(10):1969-76. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Keratinocyte transcriptional regulation of the human c-Myc promoter occurs via a 
novel Lef/Tcf binding element distinct from neoplastic cells.

Kolly C(1), Zakher A, Strauss C, Suter MM, Müller EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Dermatology, Institute of Animal Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, 3012 
Bern, Switzerland.

The proto-oncogene c-Myc is involved in early neoplastic transformations. Two
consensus Lef/Tcf binding elements (TBE) were found to be prerequisite for
transcriptional transactivation by the armadillo proteins beta-catenin and
plakoglobin (PG) together with Tcf4 in human neoplastic cells. In epidermal
keratinocytes, c-Myc was reported to be repressed by Lef-1 and PG. Using reporter
gene assays, here we demonstrate that deletion of the two consensus TBE fails to 
abrogate transcriptional regulation by Lef-1/PG in wildtype and beta-catenin-/-
keratinocytes, while it reduces transcription in pre-neoplastic PG-/-
keratinocytes. We identified a TBE sequence variant downstream of the major
transcriptional initiation site that binds Lef-1 in vitro and in vivo, and its
mutation compromised transcriptional regulation by Lef-1/PG. Collectively, this
study demonstrates that the two consensus TBE's reported in neoplastic cells are 
dispensable for c-Myc regulation in normal keratinocytes, which instead use a
novel TBE sequence variant. This unprecedented finding may have important
implications for armadillo target genes involved in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17466981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jul;14(7):1361-73. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha inhibits adipogenesis via a
beta-catenin/TCF4(TCF7L2)-dependent pathway.

Cawthorn WP(1), Heyd F, Hegyi K, Sethi JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a proinflammatory cytokine, is a potent
negative regulator of adipocyte differentiation. However, the mechanism of
TNF-alpha-mediated antiadipogenesis remains incompletely understood. In this
study, we first confirm that TNF-alpha inhibits adipogenesis of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes by preventing the early induction of the adipogenic transcription
factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha). This suppression coincides
with enhanced expression of several reported mediators of antiadipogenesis that
are also targets of the Wnt/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) pathway. Indeed, 
we found that TNF-alpha enhanced TCF4-dependent transcriptional activity during
early antiadipogenesis, and promoted the stabilisation of beta-catenin throughout
antiadipogenesis. We analysed the effect of TNF-alpha on adipogenesis in 3T3-L1
cells in which beta-catenin/TCF signalling was impaired, either via stable
knockdown of beta-catenin, or by overexpression of dominant-negative TCF4
(dnTCF4). The knockdown of beta-catenin enhanced the adipogenic potential of
3T3-L1 preadipocytes and attenuated TNF-alpha-induced antiadipogenesis. However, 
beta-catenin knockdown also promoted TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis in these cells. 
In contrast, overexpression of dnTCF4 prevented TNF-alpha-induced
antiadipogenesis but showed no apparent effect on cell survival. Finally, we show
that TNF-alpha-induced antiadipogenesis and stabilisation of beta-catenin
requires a functional death domain of TNF-alpha receptor 1 (TNFR1). Taken
together these data suggest that TNFR1-mediated death domain signals can inhibit 
adipogenesis via a beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC4303765
PMID: 17464333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):770-5. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

A variant in CDKAL1 influences insulin response and risk of type 2 diabetes.

Steinthorsdottir V(1), Thorleifsson G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Jonsdottir
T, Walters GB, Styrkarsdottir U, Gretarsdottir S, Emilsson V, Ghosh S, Baker A,
Snorradottir S, Bjarnason H, Ng MC, Hansen T, Bagger Y, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP,
Adeyemo A, Chen Y, Zhou J, Gudnason V, Chen G, Huang H, Lashley K, Doumatey A, So
WY, Ma RC, Andersen G, Borch-Johnsen K, Jorgensen T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV,
Hofker MH, Wijmenga C, Christiansen C, Rader DJ, Rotimi C, Gurney M, Chan JC,
Pedersen O, Sigurdsson G, Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. vstein@decode.is

We conducted a genome-wide association study for type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
Icelandic cases and controls, and we found that a previously described variant in
the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) gene conferred the most
significant risk. In addition to confirming two recently identified risk
variants, we identified a variant in the CDKAL1 gene that was associated with T2D
in individuals of European ancestry (allele-specific odds ratio (OR) = 1.20 (95% 
confidence interval, 1.13-1.27), P = 7.7 x 10(-9)) and individuals from Hong Kong
of Han Chinese ancestry (OR = 1.25 (1.11-1.40), P = 0.00018). The genotype OR of 
this variant suggested that the effect was substantially stronger in homozygous
carriers than in heterozygous carriers. The ORs for homozygotes were 1.50
(1.31-1.72) and 1.55 (1.23-1.95) in the European and Hong Kong groups,
respectively. The insulin response for homozygotes was approximately 20% lower
than for heterozygotes or noncarriers, suggesting that this variant confers risk 
of T2D through reduced insulin secretion.

PMID: 17460697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Nat Prod. 2007 May;70(5):802-7. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Additional scalarane sesterterpenes from the sponge Phyllospongia papyracea.

Li HJ(1), Amagata T, Tenney K, Crews P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Institute for Marine Sciences,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA.

A chemical investigation of the marine sponge Phyllospongia papyracea, collected 
in Papua New Guinea, initiated by the screening result of a beta-catenin/Tcf4
disruption assay afforded six new bishomoscalarane sesterterpenes containing two 
rare scalaranes with a cyclobutane ring in the molecule, together with one known 
scalarane sesterterpene. The structures of the new compounds were elucidated by
1D and 2D spectroscopic techniques. The compounds isolated in this study did not 
show activity against the beta-catenin and Tcf4 complex.

PMID: 17455979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gene. 2007 Jun 15;395(1-2):160-9. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Selection and validation of optimal siRNA target sites for RNAi-mediated gene
silencing.

Luo Q(1), Kang Q, Song WX, Luu HH, Luo X, An N, Luo J, Deng ZL, Jiang W, Yin H,
Chen J, Sharff KA, Tang N, Bennett E, Haydon RC, He TC.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital, and the Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine
designated by the Ministry of Education, Chongqing University of Medical
Sciences, Chongqing 400016, China.

RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated gene silencing has become a valuable tool for
functional studies, reverse genomics, and drug discoveries. One major challenge
of using RNAi is to identify the most effective short interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
sites of a given gene. Although several published bioinformatic prediction models
have proven useful, the process to select and validate optimal siRNA sites for a 
given gene remains empirical and laborious. Here, we developed a
fluorescence-based selection system using a retroviral vector backbone, namely
pSOS, which was based on the premise that candidate siRNAs would knockdown the
chimeric transcript between GFP and target gene. The expression of siRNA was
driven by the opposing convergent H1 and U6 promoters. This configuration
simplifies the cloning of duplex siRNA oligonucleotide cassettes. We demonstrated
that GFP signal reduction was closely correlated with siRNA knockdown efficiency 
of human beta-catenin, as well as with the inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf4
signaling activity. The pSOS should not only facilitate the selection and
validation of candidate siRNA sites, but also provide efficient delivery tools of
siRNAs via viral vectors in mammalian cells. Thus, the pSOS system represents an 
efficient and user-friendly strategy to select and validate siRNA target sites.

PMID: 17449199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biomol NMR. 2007 Jun;38(2):133-7. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Protein-protein interaction site mapping using NMR-detected mutational scanning.

Baminger B(1), Ludwiczek ML, Kontaxis G, Knapp S, Konrat R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Structural Chemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories,
University of Vienna, Vienna, 1030, Austria.

We demonstrate a novel NMR method for the mapping of protein-protein interaction 
sites. In our approach protein-protein binding sites are mapped by competition
binding experiments using indirect NMR reporter technology and Ala positional
scanning. The methodology provides high sensitivity, ease of implementation and
high-throughput capabilities. The feasibility of the technique is demonstrated
with an application to the beta-Catenin/Tcf4 complex.

PMID: 17447011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1192-200. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene predict conversion to
type 2 diabetes in the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study and are associated with 
impaired glucose regulation and impaired insulin secretion.

Wang J(1), Kuusisto J, Vänttinen M, Kuulasmaa T, Lindström J, Tuomilehto J,
Uusitupa M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
70210 Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We investigated the association of variants of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene with: (1) incident diabetes in the Finnish Diabetes
Prevention Study (DPS, Study I); (2) type 2 diabetes and impaired glucose
regulation (i.e. IGT or IFG) in a cross-sectional study (Study II); and (3)
insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity and adipose tissue expression of TCF7L2 in
offspring of type 2 diabetic probands (III).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Study I (the DPS) included 507 individuals with IGT who
were randomly allocated to control and intervention groups and followed for an
average of 3.9 years to monitor for progression to diabetes. Study II was a
population-based cross-sectional study of 1,766 men, aged 50-70 years, randomly
selected from the population of Kuopio, eastern Finland. Study III included 238
non-diabetic offspring of patients with type 2 diabetes. Genotyping of rs12255372
and rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was carried out.
RESULTS: In the DPS, the TT genotype of rs12255372 was significantly associated
with an adjusted 2.85-fold risk (95% CI 1.17-6.95, p = 0.021) of incident
diabetes in the control group, but not in the intervention group. In Study II,
the adjusted odds ratio in subjects with the TT genotype was 3.40 (1.45-7.97, p =
0.005) for the comparison of diabetic subjects with normoglycaemic subjects. The 
T allele of rs12255372 was significantly associated with decreased insulin
secretion (Studies II, III). Expression of TCF7L2 in adipose tissue tended to be 
lower in subjects with the TT risk genotypes of rs12255372 and rs7903146.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The variant of rs12255372 of TCF7L2 was associated
with incident type 2 diabetes in the DPS and in a separate population-based
cross-sectional study. Impaired insulin secretion is likely to be the main cause 
for our findings.

PMID: 17437080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):994-1001. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes syndromal mental retardation with intermittent 
hyperventilation (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome).

Zweier C(1), Peippo MM, Hoyer J, Sousa S, Bottani A, Clayton-Smith J, Reardon W, 
Saraiva J, Cabral A, Gohring I, Devriendt K, de Ravel T, Bijlsma EK, Hennekam RC,
Orrico A, Cohen M, Dreweke A, Reis A, Nurnberg P, Rauch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rarely reported syndrome of so-far-unknown etiology
characterized by mental retardation, wide mouth, and intermittent
hyperventilation. By molecular karyotyping with GeneChip Human Mapping 100K SNP
arrays, we detected a 1.2-Mb deletion on 18q21.2 in one patient. Sequencing of
the TCF4 transcription factor gene, which is contained in the deletion region, in
30 patients with significant phenotypic overlap revealed heterozygous stop,
splice, and missense mutations in five further patients with severe mental
retardation and remarkable facial resemblance. Thus, we establish the
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome as a distinct but probably heterogeneous entity caused by
autosomal dominant de novo mutations in TCF4. Because of its phenotypic overlap, 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome evolves as an important differential diagnosis to Angelman 
and Rett syndromes. Both null and missense mutations impaired the interaction of 
TCF4 with ASCL1 from the PHOX-RET pathway in transactivating an E box-containing 
reporter construct; therefore, hyperventilation and Hirschsprung disease in
patients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome might be explained by altered development of 
noradrenergic derivatives.

PMCID: PMC1852727
PMID: 17436255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):988-93. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Mutations in TCF4, encoding a class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, are responsible for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, a severe epileptic
encephalopathy associated with autonomic dysfunction.

Amiel J(1), Rio M, de Pontual L, Redon R, Malan V, Boddaert N, Plouin P, Carter
NP, Lyonnet S, Munnich A, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Genetics, Pediatric Radiology and INSERM U-797,
Universite Paris-Descartes, Faculte de Medecine, Hopitaux de Paris, Hopital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. amiel@necker.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic encephalopathy characterized by
daily bouts of hyperventilation and a facial gestalt. We report a 1.8-Mb de novo 
microdeletion on chromosome 18q21.1, identified by array-comparative genomic
hybridization in one patient with PHS. We subsequently identified two de novo
heterozygous missense mutations of a conserved amino acid in the basic region of 
the TCF4 gene in three additional subjects with PHS. These findings demonstrate
that TCF4 anomalies are responsible for PHS and provide the first evidence of a
human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription-factor
defects (also known as "E proteins"). Moreover, our data may shed new light on
the normal processes underlying autonomic nervous system development and
maintenance of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal circuitry.

PMCID: PMC1852736
PMID: 17436254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1186-91. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

TCF7L2 in the Go-DARTS study: evidence for a gene dose effect on both diabetes
susceptibility and control of glucose levels.

Kimber CH(1), Doney AS, Pearson ER, McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT, Leese GP, Morris 
AD, Palmer CN.

Author information: 
(1)Population Pharmacogenetics Group, Biomedical Research Centre, Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has
been identified as a type 2 diabetes locus from genome-wide linkage studies and
subsequent association analysis. We investigated the role of two common variants 
in TCF7L2 in a large case-control study recruited from the Tayside region of
Scotland, UK.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 6,516 participants for rs12255372 and
rs7903146 and analysed the role in type 2 diabetes susceptibility using binary
logistic regression. Age, sex and obesity status were examined as covariates. The
distribution of the genotypes within different treatment groups of cases was
examined.
RESULTS: Both variants were associated with type 2 diabetes (p < 10(-13)). The
variants were present at very similar frequencies and were in strong linkage
disequilibrium (R(2) = 0.88, D' = 0.89). A gene dosage effect of the rare allele 
of both variants was observed, the heterozygote CT group of rs7903146 having an
odds ratio of 1.36 (95% CI 1.2-1.5, p=1.54 x 10(-7)) for type 2 diabetes and the 
TT homozygote having a greater risk (OR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.7-2.5, p=1.40 x
10(-12)). An interaction with sex was observed, the males displaying a higher
degree of genotype-associated risk compared with the females (p = 0.023). The T
allele was associated with increased HbA(1c) levels in both cases and controls,
and with decreased BMI and waist circumference in case but not controls. The T
allele was overrepresented in individuals requiring insulin treatment and
underrepresented in the patients being managed by diet alone (p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: We have confirmed TCF7L2 to be a diabetes locus in a large
case-control study in Tayside, UK. Our data suggest that variants of TCF7L2 may
be associated with increased disease severity and therapeutic failure.

PMID: 17429603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Diabetes. 2007 Jul;56(7):1943-7. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms modulate proinsulin levels and beta-cell function in a
British Europid population.

Loos RJ(1), Franks PW, Francis RW, Barroso I, Gribble FM, Savage DB, Ong KK,
O'Rahilly S, Wareham NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Strangeways Research Laboratory,
Cambridge, UK. ruth.loos@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk

Rapidly accumulating evidence shows that common T-cell transcription factor
(TCF)7L2 polymorphisms confer risk of type 2 diabetes through unknown mechanisms.
We examined the association between four TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), including rs7903146, and measures of insulin sensitivity and insulin
secretion in 1,697 Europid men and women of the population-based MRC (Medical
Research Council)-Ely study. The T-(minor) allele of rs7903146 was strongly and
positively associated with fasting proinsulin (P = 4.55 x 10(-9)) and 32,33 split
proinsulin (P = 1.72 x 10(-4)) relative to total insulin levels; i.e.,
differences between T/T and C/C homozygotes amounted to 21.9 and 18.4%
respectively. Notably, the insulin-to-glucose ratio (IGR) at 30-min oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT), a frequently used surrogate of first-phase insulin
secretion, was not associated with the TCF7L2 SNP (P > 0.7). However, the insulin
response (IGR) at 60-min OGTT was significantly lower in T-allele carriers (P =
3.5 x 10(-3)). The T-allele was also associated with higher A1C concentrations (P
= 1.2 x 10(-2)) and reduced beta-cell function, assessed by homeostasis model
assessment of beta-cell function (P = 2.8 x 10(-2)). Similar results were
obtained for the other TCF7L2 SNPs. Of note, both major genes involved in
proinsulin processing (PC1, PC2) contain TCF-binding sites in their promoters.
Our findings suggest that the TCF7L2 risk allele may predispose to type 2
diabetes by impairing beta-cell proinsulin processing. The risk allele increases 
proinsulin levels and diminishes the 60-min but not 30-min insulin response
during OGTT. The strong association between the TCF7L2 risk allele and fasting
proinsulin but not insulin levels is notable, as, in this unselected and largely 
normoglycemic population, external influences on beta-cell stress are unlikely to
be major factors influencing the efficiency of proinsulin processing.

PMCID: PMC2668957
PMID: 17416797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dig Dis Sci. 2007 Aug;52(8):1814-25. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Alterations in epithelial and mesenchymal intestinal gene expression during
doxorubicin-induced mucositis in mice.

de Koning BA(1), Lindenbergh-Kortleve DJ, Pieters R, Büller HA, Renes IB,
Einerhand AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Divisions of Pediatric Oncology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. b.dekoning@erasmusmc.nl

In the current study we aimed to gain insight into epithelial-mesenchymal
cross-talk and progenitor compartment modulation during doxorubicin (DOX)-induced
mucositis in mice. Intestinal segments were collected on various days after DOX
treatment. DOX-induced damage at day 1-2 was characterized by increased
epithelial proliferation and apoptosis and a decrease in the expression of
epithelial differentiation markers. Concurrently, T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) levels
increased and the epithelial differentiation enhancing factor, bone morphogenic
protein-4 (BMP4), decreased. During severe damage (day 3), BMP4 levels were
significantly increased, which inversely correlated with epithelial
proliferation. At the same time, the expression of the epithelial differentiation
markers was increasing again. At day 7, BMP4 levels were down-regulated, while
the levels of the epithelial differentiation markers and TCF4 were normalized
again. These data suggest that in response to DOX-induced damage, BMP4 and TCF4
are modulated in such a way that homeostasis of the progenitor compartment is
partly preserved.

PMCID: PMC1914222
PMID: 17415656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2284-94. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

CBP/p300 are bimodal regulators of Wnt signaling.

Li J(1), Sutter C, Parker DS, Blauwkamp T, Fang M, Cadigan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

Many Wnts influence cell behavior by a conserved signaling cascade that promotes 
the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin (beta-cat), which then
associates with TCF family members to activate target genes. The histone
acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP) can bind to TCF and inhibit Wnt
signaling in Drosophila. In contrast, studies in vertebrates indicate a positive 
role for CBP and the closely related protein p300 as beta-cat binding
transcriptional co-activators. We address this discrepancy by demonstrating that 
in addition to its negative role, CBP has an essential positive role in Wnt
signaling in flies. CBP binds directly to the C-terminus of Armadillo (Arm, the
fly beta-cat) and is recruited to a Wnt-regulated enhancer (WRE) in a Wnt- and
Arm-dependent manner. In a human colorectal cancer cell line, we show that CBP
and p300 can inhibit Wnt signaling and demonstrate that human p300 can bind
directly to TCF4 in vitro. Our results argue that CBP/p300 has an evolutionarily 
conserved role as a buffer regulating TCF-beta-cat/Arm binding. Subsequent to
this interaction, it also has an essential role in mediating the transactivation 
activity of beta-cat/Arm.

PMCID: PMC1864967
PMID: 17410209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Gastroenterology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1420-31. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

The forkhead box M1 transcription factor contributes to the development and
growth of mouse colorectal cancer.

Yoshida Y(1), Wang IC, Yoder HM, Davidson NO, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
yyoshida@gh.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In this study, we used Forkhead Box m1b (Foxm1b) transgenic
mice and conditional Foxm1 knock-out mice to examine the role of Foxm1 in colon
cancer development and proliferation.
METHODS: To induce mouse colorectal cancer, we used a single intraperitoneal
injection of azoxymethane (AOM) followed by three 1-week cycles of 2.5% dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS) water, each cycle separated by 2 weeks. For these colon
tumor studies, we used either Rosa26-Foxm1b transgenic mice that ubiquitously
expressed the human Foxm1b complementary DNA or mice in which the Foxm1 fl/fl
targeted allele was deleted in colonic epithelial cells using the gut-specific
Villin-Cre recombinase transgene (Villin-Cre). Colorectal tumor number and
bromodeoxyuridine labeling were determined in Rosa26-Foxm1b mice, Villin-Cre
Foxm1-/-, mice and wild-type mice after 12 weeks of AOM/DDS exposure. We also
used Foxm1 small interfering RNA-depleted human DLD1 and mouse CT26 colon cancer 
cell lines to examine DNA replication and anchorage-independent growth.
RESULTS: After 12 weeks of treatment with AOM/DSS, Rosa26 Foxm1b transgenic mice 
showed an increase in the number and size of colorectal tumors compared with
wild-type mice. Likewise, a significant reduction in the development and growth
of colorectal tumors was found in Villin-Cre Foxm1-/- mice compared with Foxm1
fl/fl mice after AOM/DSS treatment, which was associated with decreased
expression of cyclin A2, cyclin B1, survivin, and T-cell factor 4 genes.
Moreover, Foxm1-depleted colon cancer cell lines showed reduced DNA replication
and anchorage-independent growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that Foxm1 is critical for the proliferation
and growth of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17408638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5864-71. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Human immunodeficiency virus-restricted replication in astrocytes and the ability
of gamma interferon to modulate this restriction are regulated by a downstream
effector of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Carroll-Anzinger D(1), Kumar A, Adarichev V, Kashanchi F, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush University Medical Center, 1735 W.
Harrison Street, 614 Cohn, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Astrocyte dysregulation correlates with the severity and the rate of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated dementia (HAD) progression, highlighting 
a pivotal role for astrocytes in HIV neuropathogenesis. Yet, astrocytes limit
HIV, indicating that they possess an intrinsic molecular mechanism to restrict
HIV replication. We previously established that this restriction can be partly
overcome by priming astrocytes with gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), which is
elevated in the cerebral spinal fluid of HAD patients. We evaluated the mechanism
of restrictive HIV replication in astrocytes and how IFN-gamma priming modulates 
this restriction. We demonstrate that the downstream effector of Wnt signaling,
T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4), is part of a transcriptional complex that is
immunoprecipitated with HIV TAR-containing region in untreated astrocytes but not
in IFN-gamma-treated cells. Blocking TCF-4 activity with a dominant-negative
mutant enhanced HIV replication by threefold in both the astrocytoma cell line
U87MG and primary fetal astrocytes. Using a TCF-4 reporter plasmid, we directly
demonstrate that Wnt signaling is active in human astrocytes and is markedly
reduced by IFN-gamma treatment. Collectively, these data implicate TCF-4 in
repressing HIV replication and the ability of IFN-gamma to regulate this
restriction by inhibiting TCF-4. Given that TCF-4 is the downstream effector of
Wnt signaling, harnessing Wnt signaling as an intrinsic molecular mechanism to
limit HIV replication may emerge as a powerful tool to regulate HIV replication
within and outside of the brain.

PMCID: PMC1900315
PMID: 17392368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Gastroenterology. 2007 Mar;132(3):1039-54. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Involvement of splicing factor-1 in beta-catenin/T-cell factor-4-mediated gene
transactivation and pre-mRNA splicing.

Shitashige M(1), Naishiro Y, Idogawa M, Honda K, Ono M, Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: beta-Catenin is the downstream effector of the Wnt signaling
pathway and is involved in the process of colorectal carcinogenesis. However, it 
is still uncertain whether beta-catenin exerts its oncogenic function solely by
coactivating the target genes of T-cell factor-4 (TCF4). We previously reported
that the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex contains several classes of RNA-binding
proteins and regulates the premessenger RNA splicing reaction, but the identity
of the exact effector molecule downstream of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex has
not been established.
METHODS: Using isotope-coded affinity tagging and mass spectrometry, we examined 
more than 4000 peptides derived from colorectal cancer cells and identified that 
splicing factor-1 (SF1) was one of the proteins whose expression is regulated by 
the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex.
RESULTS: The expression of SF1 was found to be correlated with the
differentiation status of intestinal epithelial cells and inversely correlated
with tumorigenesis. Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed that SF1 was a complex, and beta-catenin-evoked gene transactivation and
cell proliferation were negatively regulated by SF1 complementary DNA
transfection. SF1 was essential for the induction of alternative splicing by the 
beta-catenin/TCF4 complex, and SF1 complementary DNA transfection induced known
cancer-related splice variants, such as Wnt-induced secreted protein-1v and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-3-ATII.
CONCLUSIONS: The beta-catenin/TCF4 complex regulates the level of SF1 protein
expression, and, conversely, SF1 interacts with the complex and regulates its
gene transactivation and premessenger RNA splicing activities. Identification of 
the interaction may shed light on a novel aspect of the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 17383426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nature. 2007 Apr 5;446(7136):676-9. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Myc deletion rescues Apc deficiency in the small intestine.

Sansom OJ(1), Meniel VS, Muncan V, Phesse TJ, Wilkins JA, Reed KR, Vass JK,
Athineos D, Clevers H, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)The Beatson Institute, Garscube Estate, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
o.sansom@beatson.gla.ac.uk

The APC gene encodes the adenomatous polyposis coli tumour suppressor protein,
germline mutation of which characterizes familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an
autosomal intestinal cancer syndrome. Inactivation of APC is also recognized as
the key early event in the development of sporadic colorectal cancers, and its
loss results in constitutive activity of the beta-catenin-Tcf4 transcription
complex. The proto-oncogene c-MYC has been identified as a target of the Wnt
pathway in colorectal cancer cells in vitro, in normal crypts in vivo and in
intestinal epithelial cells acutely transformed on in vivo deletion of the APC
gene; however, the significance of this is unclear. Therefore, to elucidate the
role Myc has in the intestine after Apc loss, we have simultaneously deleted both
Apc and Myc in the adult murine small intestine. Here we show that loss of Myc
rescued the phenotypes of perturbed differentiation, migration, proliferation and
apoptosis, which occur on deletion of Apc. Remarkably, this rescue occurred in
the presence of high levels of nuclear beta-catenin. Array analysis revealed that
Myc is required for the majority of Wnt target gene activation following Apc
loss. These data establish Myc as the critical mediator of the early stages of
neoplasia following Apc loss.

PMID: 17377531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3324-9. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Serial analysis of chromatin occupancy identifies beta-catenin target genes in
colorectal carcinoma cells.

Yochum GS(1), McWeeney S, Rajaraman V, Cleland R, Peters S, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Preventative Medicine, and Oregon Health &
Science University Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA. yochumg@ohsu.edu

Most instances of colorectal cancer are due to abnormalities in the Wnt signaling
pathway, resulting in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. beta-Catenin
activates transcription of target genes primarily by associating with the T cell 
factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (TCF/Lef) family of transcription
factors. In this report, we use serial analysis of chromatin occupancy (SACO) to 
identify 412 high-confidence beta-catenin targets in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma 
cells. Of these targets, 84% contained a consensus TCF motif and were occupied by
TCF4 in vivo. Examination of the flanking 5-bp residues in each consensus
revealed motif-specific enrichment at neighboring sites. beta-Catenin binding was
localized to the 5' promoters, internal regions, and 3' UTRs of protein-coding
genes. Furthermore, 15 components of the canonical Wnt pathway were identified as
beta-catenin target genes, suggesting that feed-forward and feedback mechanisms
exist to modulate the Wnt signal in colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1805576
PMID: 17360646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dig Dis Sci. 2007 May;52(5):1242-6. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Activation of beta-catenin in the stem cell region of crypts during growth of the
small intestine in infant rats.

Camac KS(1), Thompson FM, Cummins AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
Woodville South, Australia.

The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has been proposed as promoting intestinal stem cell 
division. Wnt ligands activate cytoplasmic beta-catenin and increase nuclear
translocation of beta-catenin that binds to the Tcf-4 transcription factor. The
aim of this study was to investigate beta-catenin expression in the stem cell
region of crypts during intestinal growth in rats. Litters of DAxPVG/c rats were 
humanely killed at 7, 14, 21, 35, and 72 days of life. beta-Catenin and Tcf-4
were quantified by immunoperoxidase staining and image analysis with cumulative
signal analysis. Cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of beta-catenin peaked nearly
2-fold at day 14 (versus day 7) of life in the stem cell region of intestinal
crypts. Tcf-4 nuclear expression peaked earlier at 7 days and was lower
thereafter with age. We conclude that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is activated
in the stem cell region of intestinal crypts during growth of the small
intestine.

PMID: 17356920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Diabetes Care. 2007 Jun;30(6):1621-3. Epub 2007 Mar 10.

Additive effects of obesity and TCF7L2 variants on risk for type 2 diabetes among
cardiac patients.

Duan QL(1), Dubé MP, Frasure-Smith N, Barhdadi A, Lesperance F, Théroux P,
St-Onge J, Rouleau GA, McCaffery JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal and Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

PMID: 17351281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Diabetologia. 2007 May;50(5):972-9. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

A variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated with
an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Lernmark A, Karlsson E, Ivarsson S, Parikh H, Berntorp K, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes & Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. nael.shaat@med.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic and epidemiological studies suggest an association
between gestational diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes. Both are polygenic
multifactorial disorders characterised by beta cell dysfunction and insulin
resistance. Our aim was to investigate whether common genetic variants that have 
previously been associated with type 2 diabetes or related phenotypes would also 
confer risk for gestational diabetes mellitus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 1,881 unrelated pregnant Scandinavian women (649 women 
with gestational diabetes mellitus, 1,232 non-diabetic control subjects) we
genotyped the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2 rs7903146), adiponectin
(ADIPOQ +276G > T), peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor, gamma 2 (PPARG
Pro12Ala), PPARG-coactivator, 1 alpha (PPARGC1A Gly482Ser), forkhead box C2
(FOXC2 -512C > T) and beta3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3 Trp64Arg) polymorphisms
using TaqMan allelic discrimination assay or RFLP.
RESULTS: The CC, CT and TT genotype frequencies of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant
differed significantly between women with gestational diabetes mellitus and
control women (46.3, 43.6 and 10.1% vs 58.5, 35.3 and 6.2%, p = 3.7 x 10(-6),
corrected p value [Pc] for multiple testing Pc = 2.2 x 10(-5)). The T-allele was 
associated with an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (odds ratio
1.49 [95% CI 1.28-1.75], p = 4.9 x 10(-7) [Pc = 2.8 x 10(-6)]). Compared with
wild-type CC-genotype carriers, heterozygous (CT-genotype) and homozygous
(TT-genotype) carriers had a 1.6-fold (95% CI 1.26-1.93, p = 3.7 x 10(-5) [Pc =
0.0002]) and a 2.1-fold (95% CI 1.41-2.99, p = 0.0001 [Pc = 0.0008]) increased
risk of gestational diabetes mellitus, respectively. The other polymorphisms
studied were not significantly associated with gestational diabetes mellitus
(ADIPOQ +276G > T: 1.17 [1.01-1.36], p = 0.039 [Pc = 0.23]; PPARG Pro12Ala: 1.06 
[0.87-1.29], p = 0.53; PPARGC1A Gly482Ser: 0.96 [0.83-1.10], p = 0.54; FOXC2
-512C > T: 1.01 [0.87-1.16], p = 0.94; and ADRB3 Trp64Arg: 1.22 [0.95-1.56], p = 
0.12).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant is associated with an
increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in Scandinavian women.

PMID: 17342473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Diabetologia. 2007 May;50(5):980-4. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Replication study for the association of TCF7L2 with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes in a Japanese population.

Hayashi T(1), Iwamoto Y, Kaku K, Hirose H, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Centre, The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) has been shown
to be strongly associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes in white
populations. To further investigate the involvement of TCF7L2 in conferring
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, we examined the association of TCF7L2
polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We analysed four SNPs (rs12255372, rs7903146, rs7901695 and
rs11196205) and one tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism (DG10S478) in 1,630
Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes and 1,064 control subjects.
RESULTS: All investigated polymorphisms were significantly associated with type 2
diabetes, and rs12255372 showed the strongest association (T vs G, chi2 = 9.20, p
= 0.0024, odds ratio = 1.70, 95% CI = 1.20-2.41), although the frequency of the
risk allele in our population was much lower than that in white populations. The 
microsatellite polymorphism showed an almost complete linkage disequilibrium to
rs1255372 when the alleles with longer repeats (+8, +12) were considered as minor
alleles and showed an association with type 2 diabetes (chi2 = 5.34, p = 0.021,
odds ratio = 1.50, 95% CI = 1.06-2.12).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results indicate that TCF7L2 might be a strong 
candidate for conferring susceptibility to type 2 diabetes across different
ethnicities.

PMID: 17340123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):90-102. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Wnt3a regulates Lef-1 expression during airway submucosal gland morphogenesis.

Driskell RR(1), Goodheart M, Neff T, Liu X, Luo M, Moothart C, Sigmund CD,
Hosokawa R, Chai Y, Engelhardt JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Regulation of the lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (Lef-1) transcription factor is
important for the inductive formation of many epithelial-derived appendages
including airway submucosal glands (SMGs). Although Wnts have been linked to
developmental processes involving transcriptional activation of the Lef-1
protein, there is little in vivo information directly linking Wnts with the
transcriptional regulation of the Lef-1 promoter. In the present study, we
hypothesized that Wnt3a directly regulates Lef-1 gene expression required for SMG
morphogenesis in mice. In support of this hypothesis, TOPGAL reporter mice
demonstrated activation of beta-catenin/Tcf complexes during early phases of SMG 
development and immunolocalization studies confirmed abundant expression of Tcf4,
but not Tcf1 or Tcf3, at this stage. ChIP analysis in primary airway epithelial
cells revealed that Tcf4 associates with a known Wnt Responsive Region in the
Lef-1 promoter and transfection of Cos-1 cells with dominant active beta-catenin 
and Tcf4 synergistically activated the Lef-1 promoter. Using Wnt3a deficient and 
Lef-1 promoter-GFP reporter mice, we also demonstrate that Wnt3a induces Lef-1
gene expression in newly forming SMG buds of mice and is required for the
maintenance of gland bud growth. These findings provide the first in vivo
evidence that Wnt3a can transcriptionally regulate the Lef-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1892170
PMID: 17335794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;13(6):1726-35. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

The identification of (ETV6)/RUNX1-regulated genes in lymphopoiesis using histone
deacetylase inhibitors in ETV6/RUNX1-positive lymphoid leukemic cells.

Starkova J(1), Madzo J, Cario G, Kalina T, Ford A, Zaliova M, Hrusak O, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric
Haematology/Oncology, 2nd Medical School, Charles University Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic.

PURPOSE: Chimeric transcription factor ETV6/RUNX1 (TEL/AML1) is believed to cause
pathologic block in lymphoid cell development via interaction with corepressor
complex and histone deacetylase. We wanted to show the regulatory effect of
ETV6/RUNX1 and its reversibility by histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), as
well as to identify potential ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used luciferase assay to show the interaction of
ETV6/RUNX1 protein, ETV6/RUNX1-regulated gene, and HDACi. To identify
ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes, we used expression profiling and HDACi in lymphoid
cells. Next, using the flow cytometry and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR,
we measured differentiation changes in gene and protein expression after HDACi
treatment.
RESULTS: Luciferase assay showed repression of granzyme B expression by
ETV6/RUNX1 protein and the reversibility of this effect by HDACi. Proving this
regulatory role of ETV6/RUNX1, we identified, using complex statistical analysis,
25 genes that are potentially regulated by ETV6/RUNX1 protein. In four selected
genes with known role in the cell cycle regulation (JunD, ACK1, PDGFRB, and
TCF4), we confirmed expression changes after HDACi by quantitative analysis.
After HDACi treatment, ETV6/RUNX1-positive cells showed immunophenotype changes
resembling differentiation process compared with other leukemic cells (BCR/ABL,
ETV6/PDGFRB positive). Moreover, ETV6/RUNX1-positive leukemic cells accumulated
in G(1)-G(0) phase after HDACi whereas other B-lineage leukemic cell lines showed
rather unspecific changes including induction of apoptosis and decreased
proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Presented data support the hypothesis that HDACi affect
ETV6/RUNX1-positive cells via direct interaction with ETV6/RUNX1 protein and that
treatment with HDACi may release aberrant transcription activity caused by
ETV6/RUNX1 chimeric transcription factor.

PMID: 17325341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Gastroenterology. 2007 Feb;132(2):628-32. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

The Intestinal Wnt/TCF Signature.

Van der Flier LG(1), Sabates-Bellver J, Oving I, Haegebarth A, De Palo M, Anti M,
Van Gijn ME, Suijkerbuijk S, Van de Wetering M, Marra G, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Centre
for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In colorectal cancer, activating mutations in the Wnt pathway 
transform epithelial cells through the inappropriate expression of a TCF4 target 
gene program, which is physiologically expressed in intestinal crypts.
METHODS: We have now performed an exhaustive array-based analysis of this target 
gene program in colorectal cancer cell lines carrying an inducible block of the
Wnt cascade. Independently, differential gene-expression profiles of human
adenomas and adenocarcinomas vs normal colonic epithelium were obtained.
RESULTS: Expression analyses of approximately 80 genes common between these data 
sets were performed in a murine adenoma model. The combined data sets describe a 
core target gene program, the intestinal Wnt/TCF signature gene set, which is
responsible for the transformation of human intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The genes were invariably expressed in adenomas, yet could be
subdivided into 3 modules, based on expression in distinct crypt compartments. A 
module of 17 genes was specifically expressed at the position of the crypt stem
cell.

PMID: 17320548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 7;26(5):1456-66. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Bcr-Abl stabilizes beta-catenin in chronic myeloid leukemia through its tyrosine 
phosphorylation.

Coluccia AM(1), Vacca A, Duñach M, Mologni L, Redaelli S, Bustos VH, Benati D,
Pinna LA, Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Milan,
Italy. g_lagna@hotmail.com

Self-renewal of Bcr-Abl(+) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells is sustained by a
nuclear activated serine/threonine-(S/T) unphosphorylated beta-catenin. Although 
beta-catenin can be tyrosine (Y)-phosphorylated, the occurrence and biological
relevance of this covalent modification in Bcr-Abl-associated leukemogenesis is
unknown. Here we show that Bcr-Abl levels control the degree of beta-catenin
protein stabilization by affecting its Y/S/T-phospho content in CML cells.
Bcr-Abl physically interacts with beta-catenin, and its oncogenic tyrosine kinase
activity is required to phosphorylate beta-catenin at Y86 and Y654 residues. This
Y-phospho beta-catenin binds to the TCF4 transcription factor, thus representing 
a transcriptionally active pool. Imatinib, a Bcr-Abl antagonist, impairs the
beta-catenin/TCF-related transcription causing a rapid cytosolic retention of
Y-unphosphorylated beta-catenin, which presents an increased binding affinity for
the Axin/GSK3beta complex. Although Bcr-Abl does not affect GSK3beta
autophosphorylation, it prevents, through its effect on beta-catenin Y
phosphorylation, Axin/GSK3beta binding to beta-catenin and its subsequent S/T
phosphorylation. Silencing of beta-catenin by small interfering RNA inhibited
proliferation and clonogenicity of Bcr-Abl(+) CML cells, in synergism with
Imatinib. These findings indicate the Bcr-Abl triggered Y phosphorylation of
beta-catenin as a new mechanism responsible for its protein stabilization and
nuclear signalling activation in CML.

PMCID: PMC1817619
PMID: 17318191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Endocrinology. 2007 May;148(5):2168-80. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Negative regulation of c-Myc transcription by pancreas duodenum homeobox-1.

Chen L(1), Yan HX, Chen J, Yang W, Liu Q, Zhai B, Cao HF, Liu SQ, Wu MC, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Co-operation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, 200438
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor-1 (Pdx1) is essential for pancreatic 
development and insulin gene transcription, whereas c-Myc has a deleterious
effect on islet function. However, the relationship between c-Myc and Pdx1 is
poorly concerned. Here we demonstrated that Pdx1 could suppress c-Myc promoter
activity, which relied on T cell factor (Tcf) binding elements harbored in c-Myc 
promoter. Furthermore, the transcription activity of beta-catenin/Tcf was
markedly decreased on Pdx1 expression, but cotransfection of Pdx1 short hairpin
RNA abrogated this effect. Pdx1 expression did not induce beta-catenin
degradation nor did it alter their subcellular distribution. The mutation
analysis showed that the amino acids (1-209) of Pdx1 harboring an inhibitory
domain, which might lead to the reduction of beta-catenin/Tcf/p300 complex levels
and attenuate their binding activity with c-Myc promoter sequences. Moreover,
adenovirus-mediated Pdx1 interference caused cell proliferation and
cytokine-induced apoptosis via the dysregulation of c-Myc transcription. These
results indicated that the Pdx1 functioned as a key regulator for maintenance of 
beta-cell function, at least in part, through controlling c-Myc expression and
the loss of its regulatory function may be an alternative mechanism for beta-cell
neogenesis and apoptosis found in diabetes.

PMID: 17317781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Diabetes. 2007 May;56(5):1481-5. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is associated with gestational diabetes
mellitus and interacts with adiposity to alter insulin secretion in Mexican
Americans.

Watanabe RM(1), Allayee H, Xiang AH, Trigo E, Hartiala J, Lawrence JM, Buchanan
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
90089-9011, USA. rwatanab@usc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been
shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes and diabetes-related quantitative
traits. We examined variation in a 0.1-Mb region surrounding marker DG10S478 for 
association with diabetes-related quantitative traits in 132 Mexican-American
families of a proband with previous gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Study participants were phenotyped by an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and an intravenous glucose tolerance test and by a 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan for percentage of body fat. Of the 42 tag
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyped, 15 were identified.
RESULTS: On univariate analysis, none of the SNPs showed association with
diabetes-related quantitative traits. However, rs12255372 showed association with
30' Deltainsulin (OGTT 30' min fasting insulin) in an interaction with percentage
of body fat (Bonferroni-corrected P = 0.027). The effect of adiposity to increase
30' Deltainsulin was greater in subjects with the T allele. This interaction was 
not associated with acute insulin response to intravenous glucose. rs12255372
also showed an association with beta-cell compensation for insulin resistance
based on 30' Deltainsulin in an interaction with percentage of body fat
(Bonferroni-corrected P = 0.014). rs12255372 was also associated with GDM (odds
ratio [OR] 2.49 [95% CI 1.17-5.31]; P = 0.018) in our case-control sample.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that variation in TCF7L2 is associated with GDM and
interacts with adiposity to alter insulin secretion in Mexican Americans. Our
observations partly explain the increased ORs observed in previous associated
studies when analyses were restricted to lean subjects and the variability in
quantitative trait association results.

PMCID: PMC2925638
PMID: 17317761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;92(5):1956-60. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms confer an increased risk for early impairment of
glucose metabolism and increased height in obese children.

Körner A(1), Berndt J, Stumvoll M, Kiess W, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig,
Oststrasse 21-25, 04317 Leipzig, Germany. antje.koerner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

CONTEXT: Variants in the transcription factor 7-like2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes in adults. To evaluate
whether the five reported risk variants confer a higher risk for obesity and
early impairment of glucose metabolism in children, we genotyped these risk
variants of the TCF7L2 gene in a representative cohort of 1029 Caucasian children
and an independent cohort of 283 obese children.
RESULTS: Applying a case control design, we observed a significantly lower
prevalence of the rs11196205 and rs7895340 risk alleles in the obese (n = 283)
compared with lean (n = 672) children (0.40 vs. 0.45; P = 0.02). There was,
however, no statistically significant relationship between these genotypes and
quantitative traits of obesity in either a normal representative cohort (n =
1029) or an obesity cohort. Obese children were significantly taller than lean
children. This increase in height was independently associated with risk variants
of the TCF7L2 gene, whereas in the normal representative cohort height appeared
to be decreased in carriers of the minor alleles. In the obese cohort, three risk
alleles (rs7901695, rs7903146, and rs1225572) were significantly associated with 
higher fasting and 120-min blood glucose levels independent of sex, age, pubertal
stage, and body mass index. Fasting and peak insulin levels and HOMA-IR appeared 
with a similar tendency but were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate for the first time that TCF7L2 gene variants
confer an increased risk for early impairment of glucose metabolism in obese
children, which is consistent with adult studies identifying TCF7L2 as a major
diabetes susceptibility gene.

PMID: 17311858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4489-98. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Gli1 acts through Snail and E-cadherin to promote nuclear signaling by
beta-catenin.

Li X(1), Deng W, Lobo-Ruppert SM, Ruppert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-3300, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway transcription factor Gli1 induces transformation of
epithelial cells via induction of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin (E-cad). E-cad
is normally complexed with beta-catenin at the cell membrane. Loss of E-cad
during developmental epithelial-mesenchymal transitions can switch beta-catenin
from its role at adherens junctions to its role in nuclear transcription. During 
tumorigenesis it is unclear which pathways trigger this switch. In the current
study, gain- and loss-of-function approaches identified E-cad as a selective
inhibitor of transformation by Gli1, and Snail knockdown was rescued by
downregulation of E-cad. Gli1 induced relocalization of beta-catenin from the
cell membrane to the nucleus. The ability of wild-type or mutant alleles of E-cad
to modulate transformation by Gli1 correlated with their ability to regulate
localization of beta-catenin. Inhibition of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling by
dominant negative Tcf4 selectively blocked in vitro transformation by Gli1. In
Gli1-transgenic mice, infiltrating skin tumor cells expressed active,
unphosphorylated beta-catenin. Our studies identify E-cad as a selective
suppressor of transformation by Gli1 and point to the Sonic Hedgehog-Gli1 pathway
as a key regulator of the beta-catenin switch in epithelial cells and cancers.

PMCID: PMC2233601
PMID: 17297467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Bone Miner Res. 2007 May;22(5):708-16.

Novel LRP5 missense mutation in a patient with a high bone mass phenotype results
in decreased DKK1-mediated inhibition of Wnt signaling.

Balemans W(1), Devogelaer JP, Cleiren E, Piters E, Caussin E, Van Hul W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital of Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium. wendy.balemans@ua.ac.be

We found a novel heterozygous missense mutation (M282V) in the LRP5 gene in a
patient with a high bone mass phenotype. In vitro studies suggest that a reduced 
antagonistic effect of DKK1 on canonical Wnt signaling contributes to the
molecular effect of this mutation and its pathogenic consequence.INTRODUCTION:
Gain-of-function mutations in the gene encoding LDL receptor-related protein 5
(LRP5) cause high bone mass. Recent studies revealed that a reduced inhibition of
canonical Wnt signaling by Dickkopf 1 (DKK1) contributes to the pathophysiology
of this disease phenotype.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report on a 55-yr-old female patient with a high bone
mass phenotype. Sequencing of exons 2-4 of the LRP5 gene was carried out to
screen for disease-associated mutations in genomic DNA of the patient. The effect
of the identified mutation on LRP5 membrane trafficking was studied by
immunoblotting of a truncated form of LRP5. Additionally, Wnt signal activation
in the absence and presence of DKK1 was assessed using a TCF4-based reporter gene
assay in Saos-2 cells.
RESULTS: Our patient presents with dense bones (Z-scores > +6), and radiographic 
examination showed a generalized thickening of the skeleton. BMD at the hip and
lumbar spine significantly decreased through the passage to menopause, indicating
no protection to bone loss. Further clinical evaluation revealed torus palatinus.
Mutation analysis showed the presence of a novel heterozygous missense variant
(844A-->G; M282V) in LRP5, located in the first beta-propeller domain of the
extracellular portion. Although protein secretion seemed to be impaired, this
mutant was able to transduce Wnt signals at levels comparable with wildtype LRP5.
We additionally observed a less efficient inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling
by DKK1.
CONCLUSIONS: Like all high BMD-associated gain-of-function LRP5 mutations
described thus far, the M282V variant affects an amino acid located in the first 
beta-propeller domain, underlining the functional importance of this region in
the pathophysiology of these conditions. This mutation most likely alters a
region important for LRP5 modulation by DKK.

PMID: 17295608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):911-8.

Ku70 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 competitively regulate beta-catenin and
T-cell factor-4-mediated gene transactivation: possible linkage of DNA damage
recognition and Wnt signaling.

Idogawa M(1), Masutani M, Shitashige M, Honda K, Tokino T, Shinomura Y, Imai K,
Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and ADP-Ribosylation in Oncology Project, National
Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Formation of the T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) and beta-catenin nuclear complex is
considered crucial to embryonic development and colorectal carcinogenesis. We
previously reported that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) interacts with
the TCF-4 and beta-catenin complex and enhances its transcriptional activity.
However, its biological significance remains unexplained. Using
immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we found that two Ku proteins, Ku70
and Ku80, were also associated with the complex. Knockdown of Ku70 by RNA
interference increased the amount of beta-catenin associated with TCF-4 and
enhanced the transcriptional activity. PARP-1 competed with Ku70 for binding to
TCF-4. Treatment with bleomycin, a DNA-damaging alkylating agent, induced
polyADP-ribosylation of PARP-1 protein and inhibited its interaction with TCF-4. 
Bleomycin conversely increased the amounts of Ku70 coimmunoprecipitated with
TCF-4 and removed beta-catenin from TCF-4. We propose a working model in which
the transcriptional activity of TCF-4 is regulated by the relative amount of
Ku70, PARP-1, and beta-catenin proteins binding to TCF-4. Identification of the
functional interaction of Ku70 as well as PARP-1 with the TCF-4 and beta-catenin 
transcriptional complex may provide insights into a novel linkage between DNA
damage recognition/repair and Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17283121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):389-93.

Haplotypes of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and its upstream region
are associated with type 2 diabetes and age of onset in Mexican Americans.

Lehman DM(1), Hunt KJ, Leach RJ, Hamlington J, Arya R, Abboud HE, Duggirala R,
Blangero J, Göring HH, Stern MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Clinical Epidemiology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
lehman@uthscsa.edu

TCF7L2 acts as both a repressor and transactivator of genes, as directed by the
Wnt signaling pathway. Recently, several highly correlated sequence variants
located within a haplotype block of the TCF7L2 gene were observed to associate
with type 2 diabetes in three Caucasian cohorts. We previously reported linkage
of type 2 diabetes in the San Antonio Family Diabetes Study (SAFADS) cohort
consisting of extended pedigrees of Mexican Americans to the region of chromosome
10q harboring TCF7L2. We therefore genotyped 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) from nine haplotype blocks across the gene in 545 SAFADS subjects (178
diabetic) to investigate their role in diabetes pathogenesis. We observed nominal
association between four SNPs (rs10885390, rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs3814573) 
in three haplotype blocks and type 2 diabetes, age at diagnosis, and 2-h glucose 
levels (P = 0.001-0.055). Furthermore, we identified a common protective
haplotype defined by these four SNPs that was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes and age at diagnosis (P = 4.2 x 10(-5), relative risk [RR] 0.69; P =
6.7 x 10(-6), respectively) and a haplotype that confers diabetes risk that
contains the rare alleles at SNPs rs10885390 and rs12255372 (P = 0.02, RR 1.64). 
These data provide evidence that variation in the TCF7L2 genomic region may
affect risk for type 2 diabetes in Mexican Americans, but the attributable risk
may be lower than in Caucasian populations.

PMID: 17259383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Diabetologia. 2007 Apr;50(4):747-51. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

A genetic variation of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene is associated with 
risk of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Horikoshi M(1), Hara K, Ito C, Nagai R, Froguel P, Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: It has been suggested that transcription factor 7-like 2 protein
(TCF7L2) plays an important role in glucose metabolism by regulating the
production level of glucagon-like peptide-1, a hormone which modifies
glucose-dependent insulin secretion. Recently, variants of TCF7L2 gene were
reported to confer an increased risk of type 2 diabetes in three different
samples from European and European-origin populations. We studied whether the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 were associated with type 2
diabetes in samples from a Japanese population.
METHODS: Five SNPs were genotyped in three different sample sets. Association
with type 2 diabetes was investigated in each, as well as in combined sample
sets.
RESULTS: The SNP rs7903146 was nominally associated with type 2 diabetes in the
initial (p = 0.08) and two replication sample sets (p = 0.05 and 0.06). For the
combined sample set, in which we successfully genotyped 1,174 type 2 diabetes
patients and 823 control subjects, rs7903146 showed a significant association
with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio = 1.69 [95% CI 1.21-2.36], p = 0.002) with the
same direction as the previous reports in samples from European and
European-origin populations. SNPs rs7903146 and rs7901695 were in complete
linkage disequilibrium. The rest of the five SNPs (rs7895340, rs11196205 and
rs12255372) did not show any significant associations with type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The consistent association between rs7903146 in
TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in different ethnic groups, including the Japanese
population, suggests that TCF7L2 is a common susceptibility gene for type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 17245589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;15(3):342-6. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes in northern Sweden.

Mayans S(1), Lackovic K, Lindgren P, Ruikka K, Agren A, Eliasson M, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Department of Medical Biosciences, 
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

A recent study found association of one microsatellite and five single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in intron 3 of the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
the Icelandic, Danish and American populations. The aim of the present study was 
to investigate if those SNPs were associated to T2D in two (family- and
population-based) cohorts from northern Sweden. We genotyped four of the
associated SNPs in a case-control cohort consisting of 872 T2D cases and 857
controls matched with respect to age, sex and geographical origin and in a sample
of 59 extended families (148 affected and 83 unaffected individuals). Here, we
report replication of association between T2D and three SNPs in the case-control 
(rs7901695, P=0.003; rs7901346, P=0.00002; and rs12255372, P=0.000004) and two
SNPs in the family-based (rs7901695, P=0.01 and rs7901346, P=0.04) samples from
northern Sweden. This replication strengthens the evidence for involvement of
TCF7L2 in T2D.

PMID: 17245407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Neurochem Int. 2007 Feb;50(3):461-90. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Multiple genes and factors associated with bipolar disorder converge on growth
factor and stress activated kinase pathways controlling translation initiation:
implications for oligodendrocyte viability.

Carter CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)chris_car@yahoo.com

Famine and viral infection, as well as interferon therapy have been reported to
increase the risk of developing bipolar disorder. In addition, almost 100
polymorphic genes have been associated with this disease. Several form most of
the components of a phosphatidyl-inositol signalling/AKT1 survival pathway
(PIK3C3, PIP5K2A, PLCG1, SYNJ1, IMPA2, AKT1, GSK3B, TCF4) which is activated by
growth factors (BDNF, NRG1) and also by NMDA receptors (GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B).
Various other protein products of genes associated with bipolar disorder either
bind to or are affected by phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate products of this
pathway (ADBRK2, HIP1R, KCNQ2, RGS4, WFS1), are associated with its constituent
elements (BCR, DUSP6, FAT, GNAZ) or are downstream targets of this signalling
cascade (DPYSL2, DRD3, GAD1, G6PD, GCH1, KCNQ2, NOS3, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, SST, TH,
TIMELESS). A further pathway relates to endoplasmic reticulum-stress (HSPA5,
XBP1), caused by problems in protein glycosylation (ALG9), growth factor receptor
sorting (PIK3C3, HIP1R, SYBL1), or aberrant calcium homoeostasis (WFS1). Key
processes relating to these pathways appear to be under circadian control (ARNTL,
CLOCK, PER3, TIMELESS). DISC1 can also be linked to many of these pathways. The
growth factor pathway promotes protein synthesis, while the endoplasmic reticulum
stress pathway, and other stress pathways activated by viruses and cytokines
(IL1B, TNF, Interferons), oxidative stress or starvation, all factors associated 
with bipolar disorder risk, shuts down protein synthesis via control of the EIF2 
alpha and beta translation initiation complex. For unknown reasons,
oligodendrocytes appear to be particularly prone to defects in the translation
initiation complex (EIF2B) and the convergence of these environmental and genomic
signalling pathways on this area might well explain their vulnerability in
bipolar disorder.

PMID: 17239488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Horm Metab Res. 2007 Jan;39(1):46-52.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) are strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes but not with the metabolic syndrome in the
MONICA/KORA surveys.

Marzi C(1), Huth C, Kolz M, Grallert H, Meisinger C, Wichmann HE, Rathmann W,
Herder C, Illig T.

Author information: 
(1)GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany.

Recently, significant associations between common variants of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 gene ( TCF7L2) and type 2 diabetes have been reported. This study
was designed to replicate the reported associations of the two highly correlated 
(r (2)=0.86) TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs12255372 and rs7903146 with
type 2 diabetes in a case-control study of 2369 MONICA/KORA participants (678
cases/1691 controls from Augsburg, Germany). To further investigate the
pathogenic mechanism underlying these associations, we extended our analyses to
the metabolic syndrome (IDF, NCEP definitions) and its components in a
population-based study comprising 1404 male and female KORA participants aged
55-74 years. Results of our analyses strongly confirmed the minor T alleles as
risk variants for type 2 diabetes (rs7903146: OR (TvsC) [95% CI]=1.36
[1.18;1.58], p=0.00003, and rs12255372: OR (TvsG) [95% CI]=1.31 [1.13;1.51],
p=0.0003). Moreover, the T allele at rs7903146 was inversely associated with
log-transformed, HOMA-%B (beta=-0.07, p=0.005) as a measure of basal insulin
secretion, and log-transformed fasting insulin (beta=-0.06, p=0.02). No
association was found with insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the metabolic
syndrome. These findings support replication evidence that TCF7L2 variants
increase type 2 diabetes risk. TCF7L2 may primarily affect pancreatic beta cell
function.

PMID: 17226113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Feb;17(1):45-51.

The many ways of Wnt in cancer.

Polakis P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. ppolakis@gene.com

More than 20 years ago, the oncogenicity of a Wnt ligand was revealed in a series
of experiments originating with random proviral integration in mice. The
significance of Wnt signaling in human cancer has since been buttressed by the
identification of mutations in genes coding for the Wnt pathway components Axin, 
APC, and beta-catenin. This review summarizes the reported genetic defects in the
Wnt pathway, with an emphasis on their functional contribution to human tumor
progression.

PMID: 17208432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nat Genet. 2007 Feb;39(2):218-25. Epub 2007 Jan 7.

Refining the impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on type 2 diabetes and adaptive
evolution.

Helgason A(1), Pálsson S, Thorleifsson G, Grant SF, Emilsson V, Gunnarsdottir S, 
Adeyemo A, Chen Y, Chen G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Hinney A, Hansen T,
Andersen G, Borch-Johnsen K, Jorgensen T, Schäfer H, Faruque M, Doumatey A, Zhou 
J, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP, Rader DJ, Bagger Y, Christiansen C, Sigurdsson G,
Hebebrand J, Pedersen O, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Rotimi C,
Stefánsson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. agnar@decode.is

We recently described an association between risk of type 2diabetes and variants 
in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2; formerly TCF4), with a
population attributable risk (PAR) of 17%-28% in three populations of European
ancestry. Here, we refine the definition of the TCF7L2 type 2diabetes risk
variant, HapB(T2D), to the ancestral T allele of a SNP, rs7903146, through
replication in West African and Danish type 2 diabetes case-control studies and
an expanded Icelandic study. We also identify another variant of the same gene,
HapA, that shows evidence of positive selection in East Asian, European and West 
African populations. Notably, HapA shows a suggestive association with body mass 
index and altered concentrations of the hunger-satiety hormones ghrelin and
leptin in males, indicating that the selective advantage of HapA may have been
mediated through effects on energy metabolism.

PMID: 17206141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. BMC Med. 2006 Dec 20;4:34.

Effects of the diabetes linked TCF7L2 polymorphism in a representative older
population.

Melzer D(1), Murray A, Hurst AJ, Weedon MN, Bandinelli S, Corsi AM, Ferrucci L,
Paolisso G, Guralnik JM, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, RD&E Wonford Site, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW,
UK. david.melzer@pms.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: A polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has
been found to be associated with type 2 diabetes in case-control studies. We
aimed to estimate associations of the marker rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism with
fasting glucose, lipids, diabetes prevalence and complications in an older
general population.
METHODS: In total, 944 subjects aged > or = 65 years from the population
representative InCHIANTI study were enrolled in this study. Those with fasting
blood glucose of > or = 7 mmol/l or physician diagnosis were considered diabetic.
Cut-off points for impaired fasting glucose (IFG) were > or = 5.6 mmol/l to < 7
mmol/l.
RESULTS: In the general population sample, minor (T) allele carriers of rs7903146
had higher fasting blood glucose (FBG) (p = 0.028) but lower fasting insulin (p =
0.030) and HOMA2b scores (p = 0.001), suggesting poorer beta-cell function. T
allele carriers also had smaller waist circumference (p = 0.009), lower
triglyceride levels (p = 0.006), and higher high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(p = 0.008). The prevalence of diabetes or IFG was 32.4% in TT carriers and 23.3%
in CC carriers; adjusted OR = 1.67 (95% confidence interval 1.05 to 2.65, p =
0.031). Within the diabetic and IFG groups, fewer T allele carriers had metabolic
syndrome features (p = 0.047) or had experienced a myocardial infarction (p =
0.037). Conversely, T allele carriers with diabetes had poorer renal function
(reduced 24-hour creatinine clearance, p = 0.013), and possibly more retinopathy 
(p = 0.067). Physician-diagnosed dementia was more common in the T carriers (in
diabetes p = 0.05, with IFG p = 0.024).
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism is associated with lower insulin
levels, smaller waist circumference, and lower risk lipid profiles in the general
elderly population. Patients with diabetes who are carriers of the minor allele
are less likely to have metabolic-syndrome features, but may experience more
microvascular complications, although the number of cases was small. If
replicated, these findings may have implications for developing treatment
approaches tailored by genotype.

PMCID: PMC1769391
PMID: 17181866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Dec 14;12(46):7482-7.

Effects of gastrin 17 on beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway in Colo320WT colon cancer
cells.

Cao J(1), Yu JP, Liu CH, Zhou L, Yu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Jiefang
Road 238, Wuhan 430060, Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To explore the effect of gastrin 17 (G17) on beta-catenin/T cell factor-4
(Tcf-4) signaling in colonic cancer cell line Colo320WT.
METHODS: The pCR3.1/GR plasmid, which expresses gastrin receptor,
cholecystokinin-2 receptor (CCK-2R), was transfected into a colonic cancer cell
line Colo320 by Lipofectamine (TM)2000 and the stably expressing CCK-2R clones
were screened by G418. The expression levels of gastrin receptor in the Colo320
and the transfected Colo320WT cell line were assayed by RT-PCR. Colo320WT cells
were treated with G17 in a time-dependent manner (0, 1, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h), then
with L365,260 (Gastrin(17) receptor blocker) for 30 min, and with G17 again for
12 h or L365,260 for 12 h. Expression levels of beta-catenin in a TX-100 soluble 
fraction and TX-100 insoluble fraction of Colo320WT cells treated with G17 were
detected by co-immuniprecipation and Western blot. Immunocytochemistry was used
to examine the distribution of beta-catenin in CoLoWT320 cells. Expression levels
of c-myc and cyclin D1 in Colo320WT cells treated with G17 were assayed by
Western blot.
RESULTS: Expression levels of beta-catenin in the TX-100 solution fraction
decreased apparently in a time-dependent fashion and reached the highest level
after G17 treatment for 12 h, while expression levels of beta-catenin in the
TX-100 insoluble fraction were just on the contrary. Immunocytochemistry showed
that beta-catenin was translocated from the cell membranes into the cytoplasm and
nucleus under G17 treatment. Expression levels of c-myc and cyclin D1 in the
G17-treated Colo320WT cells were markedly higher compared to the untreated
Colo320WT cells. In addition, the aforementioned G17-stimulated responses were
blocked by L365,260.
CONCLUSION: Gastrin17 activates beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling in Colo320WT cells, 
thereby leading to over-expression of c-myc and cyclin D1.

PMCID: PMC4087595
PMID: 17167838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 9;282(6):3653-63. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Direct interactions of Runx2 and canonical Wnt signaling induce FGF18.

Reinhold MI(1), Naski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

Canonical Wnt signaling is clearly required for skeletal development and bone
formation. However, the targets of Wnt signaling that convert this signal into
bone are unclear. Identification of these targets will yield insight into normal 
bone physiology and suggest new therapeutics for treatment of bone disease. Here 
we show that an essential regulator of bone development, FGF18, is a direct
target of canonical Wnt signaling. A single DNA binding site for the
Wnt-dependent transcription factors TCF/Lef accounted for the stimulation of the 
fgf18 promoter in response to Wnt signaling. Additionally, targeted disruption of
betacat blocked fgf18 expression in vivo. Partially overlapping the TCF/Lef
binding site is a Runx2 binding site and experiments showed that Runx2 and
TCF/Lef work cooperatively to induce fgf18 expression. RNA interference knockdown
of Runx2 inhibited and Runx2 forced expression augmented the induction of fgf18
by canonical Wnt signaling. Significantly, Runx2 formed a complex with Lef1 or
TCF4 and this complex bound the composite binding site in the fgf18 promoter.
These results demonstrate that two transcription pathways that are essential for 
bone, physically and functionally converge at the fgf18 promoter.

PMID: 17158875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncogene. 2007 May 24;26(24):3492-502. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Physical and functional cooperation between AP-1 and beta-catenin for the
regulation of TCF-dependent genes.

Toualbi K(1), Güller MC, Mauriz JL, Labalette C, Buendia MA, Mauviel A, Bernuau
D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U697, Paris, France.

Stabilization of cytoplasmic beta-catenin is a hallmark of a variety of cancers. 
The stabilized beta-catenin is able to translocate to the nucleus, where it acts 
as a transcriptional activator of T-cell factor (TCF)-regulated genes.
beta-Catenin may cross-talk with many signalling cascades to activate target
genes. Whether beta-catenin cooperates with AP-1, another transcriptional complex
activated during tumorigenesis is not fully clarified. We show that beta-catenin 
co-immunoprecipitates with c-Jun and c-Fos. GST pull-down experiments indicate a 
physical association of the armadillo repeat domain of beta-catenin with the
DNA-binding domain of c-Jun and of the C-terminal domain of beta-catenin with the
N-terminal domain of c-Fos. Promoter studies indicate that overexpression of AP-1
activates the transcription of two beta-catenin target genes, cyclin D1 and
c-myc, by a mechanism independent of the AP-1 site, and fully dependent on the
TCF-binding site. We further demonstrate that AP-1/beta-catenin synergism is
involved during serum-induced cyclin D1 transcriptional activation. We identify a
TCF-binding site on the cyclin D1 promoter which binds in vivo a complex induced 
by serum, containing beta-catenin, TCF4, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunB and JunD. This novel 
mechanism of interaction between two signalling cascades might contribute to the 
potentiation of malignancy.

PMID: 17146436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Oncogene. 2006 Dec 4;25(57):7531-7.

Colorectal cancer and genetic alterations in the Wnt pathway.

Segditsas S(1), Tomlinson I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, London, UK.

In colorectal tumours, Wnt pathway genetics continues to be dominated by
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Germline mutations cause 
familial adenomatous polyposis and at least two-thirds of sporadic colorectal
tumours also acquire APC mutations, quite possibly as the initiating events in
tumorigenesis. These mutations almost always cause loss of the C-terminal
functions of the APC protein - probably involved in microtubule binding, cell
polarity and chromosome segregation - and deletion of the SAMP repeats that are
important for binding to axin and formation of the beta-catenin phosphorylation
complex. The truncated APC proteins are, in general, stable and almost certainly 
retain some activity in beta-catenin binding. The 'two hits' at APC are
coselected so as to produce an optimal activation of Wnt signalling (just-right
hypothesis). In a minority of colorectal tumours, Wnt activation can occur
through mutations that affect phosphorylation sites within exon 3 of
beta-catenin, causing protein stabilization. In other tumours, epigenetic
transcriptional silencing or mutation of the secreted frizzled-related proteins
may modulate Wnt levels. Mutations in the Wnt components AXIN1, AXIN2 and TCF4
have been found in microsatellite-unstable colon cancers, but it is not clear in 
every case whether these changes are functional. Therapeutic modulation of the
Wnt pathway remains an attractive therapeutic possibility for colorectal
carcinomas.

PMID: 17143297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3630-4.

Polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated
with reduced insulin secretion in nondiabetic women.

Munoz J(1), Lok KH, Gower BA, Fernandez JR, Hunter GR, Lara-Castro C, De Luca M, 
Garvey WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Sciences, 1675 Webb Nutrition Sciences Building, Room 
241, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. munozj@uab.edu

Recently, the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene on chromosome 10q25.2
has been linked with type 2 diabetes among Caucasians, with disease associations 
noted for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs12255372 and rs7903146. To
investigate mechanisms by which TCF7L2 could contribute to type 2 diabetes, we
examined the effects of these SNPs on clinical and metabolic traits affecting
glucose homeostasis in 256 nondiabetic female subjects (138 European Americans
and 118 African Americans) aged 7-57 years. Outcomes included BMI, percent body
fat, insulin sensitivity (S(i)), acute insulin response to glucose (AIR(g)), and 
the disposition index (DI). Homozygosity for the minor allele (TT) of SNP
rs12255372 occurred in 9% of individuals and was associated with a 31% reduction 
in DI values in a recessive model. The at-risk allele TT was also associated with
lower AIR(g) adjusted for S(i) in both ethnic groups, whereas rs12255372 genotype
was not associated with measures of adiposity or with S(i). The T allele of
rs12255372 was also associated with increased prevalence of impaired fasting
glucose. Genotypes at rs7903146 were not associated with any metabolic trait.
Lower S(i) and higher AIR(g) observed in the African-American compared with the
European-American subgroup could not be explained by the TCF7L2 genotype. Our
data suggest that the TCF7L2 gene is an important factor regulating insulin
secretion, which could explain its association with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17130514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Ann Pathol. 2006 Jun;26(3):159-72.

[Expression of SERCA pumps during cell differentiation and tumorigenesis:
application to colonic carcinogenesis].

[Article in French]

Brouland JP(1), Valleur P, Papp B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital Lariboisière, 75475 
Paris Cedex 10, France. jean-philippe.brouland@lrb.aphp.fr

Calcium homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is involved in
intracellular signaling pathways and is implicated in major cell functions such
as cell growth, differentiation, protein synthesis and apoptosis. The
accumulation of calcium in the ER is performed by specific sarco/endoplasmic
reticulum calcium transport ATPases (SERCA iso-enzymes). The expression of
biochemically distinct SERCA isoforms is cell type dependent and developmentally 
regulated. This review summarizes pertinent data about the modulation of the
expression of SERCA enzymes during the differentiation of normal and tumor cells.
These data support the implication of SERCA pumps and especially SERCA3 in the
differentiation program of cancer and leukemia cells. During the multi-step
process of colon carcinogenesis, the decrease of SERCA3 expression seems to be
linked to enhanced APC/ss-catenin/TCF4 signaling and deficient Sp1-like
factor-dependent transcription.

PMID: 17127848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):871-8. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

An antisense transcript induced by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling decreases E2F4.

Yochum GS(1), Cleland R, McWeeney S, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventative Medicine, OHSU Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland 97239, USA. yochumg@ohsu.edu

Wnt signaling induces the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and transcription 
of specific target genes via the DNA-binding proteins TCF/Lef. Although all known
beta-catenin target genes encode proteins, genome-wide RNA profiling studies
indicate that many transcripts do not have this capability. Transcription
factor-binding sites associated with these noncoding transcripts can be
identified using unbiased techniques such as serial analysis of chromatin
occupancy (SACO). We used this method to identify a beta-catenin-regulated
antisense RNA expressed in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells, a cellular model of
activated beta-catenin signaling. Genomic signature tags designating putative
beta-catenin-binding sites mapped to the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
E2F4 gene. We showed that both beta-catenin and TCF4 bind to the E2F4 3'-UTR site
in vivo, inducing expression of an E2F4 antisense transcript. LiCl, which mimics 
Wnt signaling, also induced expression of the E2F4 antisense transcript and
decreased E2F4 protein levels. This effect was blocked by a cDNA expressing the
E2F4 3'-UTR sense strand. The antisense-mediated decrease in E2F4 protein was
reflected by reduced E2F4 association with specific target genes, including
CCNA2, CDC2, PCNA, and Rad54. We propose that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by reducing the level of the E2F4 cell
cycle repressor via an antisense mechanism.

PMID: 17121828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Biochem J. 2007 Mar 15;402(3):515-23.

Post-translational palmitoylation and glycosylation of Wnt-5a are necessary for
its signalling.

Kurayoshi M(1), Yamamoto H, Izumi S, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Wnt-5a is a representative ligand that activates a beta-catenin-independent
pathway in Wnt signalling. In the present paper, the roles of the
post-translational modifications in the actions of Wnt-5a were investigated. We
found that Wnt-5a is modified with palmitate at Cys104 and glycans at Asn114,
Asn120, Asn311 and Asn325. The palmitoylation was not essential for the secretion
of Wnt-5a, but was necessary for its ability to suppress Wnt-3a-dependent T-cell 
factor transcriptional activity and to stimulate cell migration. Wnt-5a activated
focal adhesion kinase and this activation also required palmitoylation. Wild-type
Wnt-5a induced the internalization of Fz (Frizzled) 5, but a Wnt-5a mutant that
lacks the palmitoylation site did not. Furthermore, the binding of Wnt-5a to the 
extracellular domain of Fz5 required palmitoylation of Wnt-5a. These results
indicate that palmitoylation of Wnt-5a is important for the triggering of
signalling at the cell surface level and, therefore, that the lipid-unmodified
form of Wnt-5a cannot activate intracellular signal cascades. In contrast,
glycosylation was necessary for the secretion of Wnt-5a, but not essential for
the actions of Wnt-5a. Thus the post-translational palmitoylation and
glycosylation of Wnt-5a are important for the actions and secretion of Wnt-5a.

PMCID: PMC1863570
PMID: 17117926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. BMC Cancer. 2006 Nov 17;6:268.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variant is associated with familial breast
cancer risk: a case-control study.

Burwinkel B(1), Shanmugam KS, Hemminki K, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Sutter C,
Wappenschmidt B, Kiechle M, Bartram CR, Frank B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. b.burwinkel@dkfz.de <b.burwinkel@dkfz.de>

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a critical component of
the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Aberrant TCF7L2 expression modifies Wnt signaling
and mediates oncogenic effects through the upregulation of c-MYC and cyclin D.
Genetic alterations in TCF7L2 may therefore affect cancer risk. Recently, TCF7L2 
variants, including the microsatellite marker DG10S478 and the nearly perfectly
linked SNP rs12233372, were identified to associate with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of the TCF7L2 rs12255372 variant on familial 
breast cancer (BC) risk by means of TaqMan allelic discrimination, analyzing
BRCA1/2 mutation-negative index patients of 592 German BC families and 735
control individuals.
RESULTS: The T allele of rs12255372 showed an association with borderline
significance (OR = 1.19, 95% C.I. = 1.01-1.42, P = 0.04), and the
Cochran-Armitage test for trend revealed an allele dose-dependent association of 
rs12255372 with BC risk (Ptrend = 0.04).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a possible influence of TCF7L2 rs12255372 on the 
risk of familial BC.

PMCID: PMC1665524
PMID: 17109766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10677-82.

Human arrest defective 1 acetylates and activates beta-catenin, promoting lung
cancer cell proliferation.

Lim JH(1), Park JW, Chun YS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Departments of Pharmacology and Physiology,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Arrest defective 1 (ARD1), an acetyltransferase, is essential for the yeast life 
cycle. Although its human homologue (hARD1) has been identified, its biological
functions in human cells remain unclear. In the present study, we examined the
biological function of hARD1. In H1299 and A549 lung cancer cells,
hARD1-silencing RNA inhibited cell proliferation and induced G(1) arrest. Cyclin 
D1 was also found to be down-regulated in these growth-arrested cells, and the
ectopic expression of cyclin D1 rescued cell growth. hARD1 knockdown repressed
the promoter activity of the cyclin D1 gene, which inhibited the transcription of
cyclin D1. Moreover, hARD1 knockdown reduced the binding of beta-catenin/TCF4
transcription factor to cyclin D1 promoter and repressed its transcriptional
activity. Inversely, hARD1 expression increased the transcriptional activity of
beta-catenin. Both endogenous and ectopically expressed hARD1 was
coimmunoprecipitated with beta-catenin. hARD1 knockdown did not affect
beta-catenin expression or degradation but noticeably reduced acetylated
beta-catenin. The beta-catenin binding and acetylation by hARD1 were observed in 
vitro. Therefore, it is suggested that hARD1 participates in proliferation of
lung cancer cells via the activation of beta-catenin.

PMID: 17108104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4913-23. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Novel binding partners of Ldb1 are required for haematopoietic development.

Meier N(1), Krpic S, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Monti M, Krijgsveld J, Gering M,
Patient R, Hostert A, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Ldb1, a ubiquitously expressed LIM domain binding protein, is essential in a
number of tissues during development. It interacts with Gata1, Tal1, E2A and Lmo2
to form a transcription factor complex regulating late erythroid genes. We
identify a number of novel Ldb1 interacting proteins in erythroleukaemic cells,
in particular the repressor protein Eto-2 (and its family member Mtgr1), the
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9, and the bridging factor Lmo4. MO-mediated
knockdowns in zebrafish show these factors to be essential for definitive
haematopoiesis. In accordance with the zebrafish results these factors are
coexpressed in prehaematopoietic cells of the early mouse embryo, although we
originally identified the complex in late erythroid cells. Based on the change in
subcellullar localisation of Eto-2 we postulate that it plays a central role in
the transition from the migration and expansion phase of the prehaematopoietic
cells to the establishment of definitive haematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 17108004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):5-7. Epub 2006 Nov 11.

TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes--we WNT to know.

Smith U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45,
Gothenburg, Sweden. ulf.smith@medic.gu.se

PMID: 17102948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

TCF7L2: the biggest story in diabetes genetics since HLA?

Zeggini E(1), McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratories, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Old Road, Headington,
Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):63-7.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):59-62.

PMCID: PMC1760757
PMID: 17096114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):63-7. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene are strongly associated with type 2 diabetes
mellitus in the Indian population.

Chandak GR(1), Janipalli CS, Bhaskar S, Kulkarni SR, Mohankrishna P, Hattersley
AT, Frayling TM, Yajnik CS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Group, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad,
India.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

AIMS AND HYPOTHESIS: India has the greatest number of diabetic subjects in any
one country, but the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes mellitus in India is poorly
understood. Common non-coding variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene 
(TCF7L2) have recently been strongly associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes in European populations. We investigated whether TCF7L2 variants are
also associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Indian population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We genotyped type 2 diabetes patients (n = 955) and
ethnically matched control subjects (n = 399) by sequencing three single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs4506565) in TCF7L2.
RESULTS: We observed a strong association with all the polymorphisms, including
rs12255372 (odds ratio [OR] 1.50 [95% CI = 1.24-1.82], p = 4.0 x 10(-5)),
rs4506565 (OR 1.48 [95% CI = 1.24-1.77], p = 2.0 x 10(-5)) and rs7903146 (OR 1.46
[95% CI = 1.22-1.75], p = 3.0 x 10(-5)). All three variants showed increased
relative risk when homozygous rather than heterozygous, with the strongest risk
for rs12255372 (OR 2.28 [95% CI = 1.40-3.72] vs OR 1.43 [95% CI = 1.11-1.83]). We
found no association of the TCF7L2 genotypes with age at diagnosis, BMI or WHR,
but the risk genotype at rs12255372 was associated with higher fasting plasma
glucose (p = 0.001), higher 2-h plasma glucose (p = 0.0002) and higher
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-R; p = 0.012) in
non-diabetic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study in Indian subjects replicates the strong association of
TCF7L2 variants with type 2 diabetes in other populations. It also provides
evidence that variations in TCF7L2 may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes by influencing both insulin secretion and insulin resistance.
TCF7L2 is an important gene for determining susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
mellitus and it transgresses the boundaries of ethnicity.

PMID: 17093941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):214-6. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

No major contribution of TCF7L2 sequence variants to maturity onset of diabetes
of the young (MODY) or neonatal diabetes mellitus in French white subjects.

Cauchi S, Vaxillaire M, Choquet H, Durand E, Duval A, Polak M, Froguel P.

PMID: 17093940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Dec;84(12):985-7. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

A high mobility group box-containing transcription factor leads to diabetes risk.

Luft FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Franz Volhard Clinic, HELIOS Kliniken Berlin, Medical Faculty of the Charité, 
Humboldt University, Berlin-Buch, Germany. luft@fvk-berlin.de

PMID: 17091236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Cell Biol. 2006 Nov 6;175(3):505-14.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium causes a
loss of Hedgehog expression, intestinal hyperplasia, and early postnatal
lethality.

Jones RG(1), Li X, Gray PD, Kuang J, Clayton F, Samowitz WS, Madison BB, Gumucio 
DL, Kuwada SK.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium, unlike in
epidermal and mammary epithelia, of mice does not result in decreased cell
adhesion and proliferation, but instead causes a profound increase in epithelial 
proliferation with dysplasia and polypoid structures. The increased epithelial
proliferation inhibited epithelial differentiation that caused severe
malnutrition and early postnatal lethality. The striking similarities between
beta1 integrin-deleted mice and neonatal mice with defective Hedgehog signaling
led to the discovery that Hedgehog expression was markedly reduced in the former 
mice. beta1 integrins were found to drive the expression of Hedgehogs in
intestinal epithelial cells in an HNF-3beta (Foxa2)-dependent fashion. The
expression of Tcf-4, a transcription factor known to be required for intestinal
epithelial stem cell proliferation, was increased and mislocalized in the
intestinal epithelia of the beta1 integrin-deleted mice and in newborn mice
treated with the Hedgehog signaling inhibitor cyclopamine. This study shows that 
beta1 integrins are key regulators of proliferation and homeostasis in the
intestine and achieve this not through anchorage-dependent effects but by
generating Hh expression and signaling.

PMCID: PMC2064526
PMID: 17088430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):6723-9.

E2-2 regulates the expansion of pro-B cells and follicular versus marginal zone
decisions.

Wikström I(1), Forssell J, Goncalves M, Colucci F, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

The E-proteins E2A, HeLa E-box binding protein, and E2-2 constitute a class of
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that differentially affect B cell
development. E2A is by far the most investigated and appears to operate at
several levels during B cell ontogeny. Less is known concerning the role of the
other E-proteins. To address the role of E2-2, we have performed transfers of
fetal liver (FL) cells into irradiated Rag-deficient mice. Although the transfer 
of E2-2-deficient cells alone can reconstitute all B cell subpopulations, albeit 
with a moderate reduction in cellularity, E2-2-deficient cells have a
disadvantage when transferred together with wild-type cells. Cultivation of
E2-2(-/-) day 14.5 FL cells on stromal cells and IL-7 revealed a reduced
frequency of responding B cell progenitors despite normal IL-7Ralpha surface
expression. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that E2-2 mRNA expression is high at 
the pro-B cell stage and drops sharply at the pre-B cell stage, consistent with a
role for E2-2 in pro-B cells. In contrast, E2A mRNA was most abundant in pre-B
cells. Analysis of the peripheral repertoire revealed that mice reconstituted
with E2-2(-/-) FL cells had an increased proportion of marginal zone (MZ) B
cells. Interestingly, E2-2 mRNA was elevated approximately 2-fold (p < 0.01) in
follicular compared with MZ B cells. Although E2A mRNA showed a similar tendency,
the difference was not significant. Collectively, our findings indicate that E2-2
is required for optimal expansion of pro-B cells, and also influences the
follicular vs MZ decision.

PMID: 17082585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Diabetes. 2006 Nov;55(11):3189-92.

TCF7L2 variation predicts hyperglycemia incidence in a French general population:
the data from an epidemiological study on the Insulin Resistance Syndrome (DESIR)
study.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Choquet H, Dina C, Born C, Marre M, Balkau B, Froguel P;
DESIR Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3635.

Recently, case-control studies demonstrated that a TCF7L2 (transcription factor
7-like 2 gene) noncoding variant (rs7903146 T at-risk allele) was strongly
associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the predictive
value of this marker in a nonselected general population remains unknown. In this
study, our aim was to assess the contribution of this variant to the prevalence
and incidence of hyperglycemia (type 2 diabetes and impaired fasting glucose) and
insulin regulation in a 9-year prospective study of 4,976 middle-aged
participants in the French DESIR (Data from an Epidemiological Study on the
Insulin Resistance Syndrome) cohort. Our data support previous studies
associating the T at-risk allele with a higher prevalence of hyperglycemia at
baseline (P = 0.049) and a higher incidence of hyperglycemia after 9 years of
follow-up (P = 0.014). The population-attributable risk to develop hyperglycemia 
due to the T at-risk allele was estimated to be 10.4% at the end of the
prospective study. The most likely inheritance model was found to be additive (P 
= 0.002) rather than deviating from linearity (hazard ratio 1.21 [95% CI
1.05-1.39], P = 0.008) [corrected] An increase in the incidence of hyperglycemia 
was confirmed by survival analyses among C/C, C/T, and T/T carriers during the 9 
years of follow-up (P = 0.028 by log-rank test). Interestingly, in control
individuals, there was weak evidence of association of the T at-risk allele with 
reduced fasting insulin levels and insulin secretion index (homeostasis model
assessment of beta-cell function) in control individuals. We conclude that the
TCF7L2 T at-risk allele variation (rs7903146) predicts hyperglycemia incidence in
a general French population, possibly through a deleterious effect on insulin
secretion.

PMID: 17065361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):212-3. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Analysis of the type 2 diabetes gene, TCF7L2, in 13,795 type 1 diabetes cases and
control subjects.

Field SF, Howson JM, Smyth DJ, Walker NM, Dunger DB, Todd JA.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1780.

PMCID: PMC2151139
PMID: 17063324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):G599-607. Epub 2006 Oct 
19.

Dual alterations in casein kinase I-epsilon and GSK-3beta modulate beta-catenin
stability in hyperproliferating colonic epithelia.

Umar S(1), Wang Y, Morris AP, Sellin JH.

Author information: 
(1)Div of Gastroenterology, Univ of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555-0632, USA. shumar@utmb.edu

Casein kinase I (CKI)-epsilon and GSK-3beta phosphorylate beta-catenin at Ser(45)
(beta-cat(45)) and Thr(41)/Ser(37,33) (beta-cat(33,37,41)) residues, thereby
facilitating its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. We used a
Citrobacter rodentium-induced transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia (TMCH)
model to determine Ser/Thr phosphorylation and biological function of
beta-catenin during crypt hyperproliferation. TMCH was associated with 3-fold and
3.3-fold increases in CKI-epsilon cellular abundance and 2-fold and 1.8-fold
increase in its activity at 6 and 12 days after infection, respectively.
beta-Catenin coimmunoprecipitated with both cellular and nuclear CKI-epsilon and 
cellular axin at these time points. Cellular beta-catenin was constitutively
phosphorylated at Ser(45) and underwent subcellular redistribution to
cytoskeletal and nuclear fractions at days 6 and 12 of TMCH, respectively.
beta-cat(33,37,41), however, exhibited only subtle changes in either
phosphorylation status or subcellular distribution even after blocking
proteasomal degradation in vivo. Interestingly, GSK-3beta underwent increased
phosphorylation at Ser(9), leading to 40% and 70% decreases in its activity at
these time points, respectively. Coimmunoprecipitation studies exhibited strong
association of GSK-3beta with PKC-zeta at either time point. Cellular
beta-cat(45) stabilized and, along with unphosphorylated beta-catenin, underwent 
nuclear translocation, associated with nuclear accumulated Tcf-4 and cAMP
response element binding protein binding protein, and was significantly
acetylated, leading to increases in DNA binding. Priming of beta-catenin at
Ser(45) exists in vivo. However, beta-cat(45) does not necessarily enter the
degradation pathway. Impairment in linking beta-cat(45) to subsequent
GSK-3beta-mediated phosphorylation and degradation may account for increased
steady-state levels of both unphosphorylated as well as Ser(45)-phosphorylated
beta-catenin, which may be causally linked to increases in cell census during
TMCH.

PMID: 17053159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):293-300.

Crystal structure of a beta-catenin/BCL9/Tcf4 complex.

Sampietro J(1), Dahlberg CL, Cho US, Hinds TR, Kimelman D, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

The canonical Wnt pathway plays critical roles in embryonic development, stem
cell growth, and tumorigenesis. Stimulation of the Wnt pathway leads to the
association of beta-catenin with Tcf and BCL9 in the nucleus, resulting in the
transactivation of Wnt target genes. We have determined the crystal structure of 
a beta-catenin/BCL9/Tcf-4 triple complex at 2.6 A resolution. Our studies reveal 
that the beta-catenin binding site of BCL9 is distinct from that of most other
beta-catenin partners and forms a good target for developing drugs that block
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. The BCL9 beta-catenin binding domain (CBD) 
forms an alpha helix that binds to the first armadillo repeat of beta-catenin,
which can be mutated to prevent beta-catenin binding to BCL9 without affecting
cadherin or alpha-catenin binding. We also demonstrate that beta-catenin Y142
phosphorylation, which has been proposed to regulate BCL9-2 binding, does not
directly affect the interaction of beta-catenin with either BCL9 or BCL9-2.

PMID: 17052462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):59-62. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Association of variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in the Dutch Breda cohort.

van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV(1), Shiri-Sverdlov R, Zhernakova A, Strengman E, van
Haeften TW, Hofker MH, Wijmenga C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel
50 (UNS50/11), P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: A strong association between susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
and common variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), encoding an
enteroendocrine transcription factor involved in glucose homeostasis, has been
reported in three different populations (Iceland, Denmark and USA) by Grant et
al. We aimed to replicate these findings in a Dutch cohort.
METHODS: We analysed the genotypes of two intronic single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 gene in 502 unrelated type 2 diabetes patients and
in a set of healthy controls (n = 920). The two SNPs showed almost complete
linkage disequilibrium (D' = 0.91).
RESULTS: We were able to replicate the previously reported association in our
Breda cohort. The minor alleles of both variants were significantly
over-represented in cases (odds ratio [OR] 1.29, 95% CI 1.09-1.52, [Formula: see 
text] for rs12255372; OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.19-1.66, [Formula: see text] for
rs7903146). In addition, TCF7L2 haplotypes were analysed for association with the
disease. The analysis of haplotypes did not reveal any strong association beyond 
that expected from analysing individual SNPs. The TT haplotype carrying the minor
alleles was more frequent among cases (OR 1.38, [Formula: see text]).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data strongly confirm that variants of the TCF7L2
gene contribute to the risk of type 2 diabetes. The population-attributable risk 
from this factor in the Dutch type 2 diabetes population is 10%.

PMID: 17031610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Gastroenterology. 2006 Oct;131(4):1142-52. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Nitric oxide-induced down-regulation of beta-catenin in colon cancer cells by a
proteasome-independent specific pathway.

Prévotat L(1), Filomenko R, Solary E, Jeannin JF, Bettaieb A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Immunothérapie des Cancers, EPHE/INSERM U517,
IFR100, Faculty of Medicine, 7 bd. Jeanne d'Arc, 21079 Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We have previously reported that nitric oxide could induce the
death of colon cancer cells. Because an inappropriate activation of beta-catenin 
has been associated with intestinal cell malignant transformation, we explored
whether nitric oxide could affect beta-catenin expression and function.
METHODS: Human colon cancer cell lines were treated with the nitric oxide donor
glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) before analyzing beta-catenin expression by
immunofluorescence, immunoblotting, and immunoprecipitation methods and its
transcriptional activity using a luciferase reporter gene driven by a T-cell
factor-responsive promotor.
RESULTS: GTN induces beta-catenin degradation and down-regulates its
transcriptional activity in colon cancer cells. This effect is preceded by
GTN-induced tyrosine nitration of beta-catenin, together with its
dephosphorylation on serine 33, 37, and 45 and threonine 41. GTN-induced
beta-catenin degradation involves proteases that are sensitive to a
broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor, z-VAD-fmk, and to serine protease inhibitors
N-tosyl-L-phenylalaline chloromethyl ketone (TPCK) and
[4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonylfluoride] (AEBSF), whereas the
ubiquitin/proteasome pathway is not involved. Interestingly, only TPCK and AEBSF 
restore beta-catenin transcriptional activity and preserve beta-catenin nuclear
localization in GTN-treated colon cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure of colon cancer cells to nitric oxide unraveled a
so-far-unidentified mechanism of beta-catenin regulation. The protein is nitrated
and dephosphorylated, and its transcriptional activity is reduced through
degradation by a TPCK and AEBSF-sensitive protease.

PMID: 17030184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS Med. 2006 Oct;3(10):e374.

Combining information from common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms improves
disease prediction.

Weedon MN(1), McCarthy MI, Hitman G, Walker M, Groves CJ, Zeggini E, Rayner NW,
Shields B, Owen KR, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes Research and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical
School, Exeter, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: A limited number of studies have assessed the risk of common diseases
when combining information from several predisposing polymorphisms. In most
cases, individual polymorphisms only moderately increase risk (approximately
20%), and they are thought to be unhelpful in assessing individuals' risk
clinically. The value of analyzing multiple alleles simultaneously is not well
studied. This is often because, for any given disease, very few common risk
alleles have been confirmed.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Three common variants (Lys23 of KCNJ11, Pro12 of PPARG, and
the T allele at rs7903146 of TCF7L2) have been shown to predispose to type 2
diabetes mellitus across many large studies. Risk allele frequencies ranged from 
0.30 to 0.88 in controls. To assess the combined effect of multiple
susceptibility alleles, we genotyped these variants in a large case-control study
(3,668 controls versus 2,409 cases). Individual allele odds ratios (ORs) ranged
from 1.14 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05 to 1.23) to 1.48 (95% CI, 1.36 to
1.60). We found no evidence of gene-gene interaction, and the risks of multiple
alleles were consistent with a multiplicative model. Each additional risk allele 
increased the odds of type 2 diabetes by 1.28 (95% CI, 1.21 to 1.35) times.
Participants with all six risk alleles had an OR of 5.71 (95% CI, 1.15 to 28.3)
compared to those with no risk alleles. The 8.1% of participants that were
double-homozygous for the risk alleles at TCF7L2 and Pro12Ala had an OR of 3.16
(95% CI, 2.22 to 4.50), compared to 4.3% with no TCF7L2 risk alleles and either
no or one Glu23Lys or Pro12Ala risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining information from several known common risk polymorphisms
allows the identification of population subgroups with markedly differing risks
of developing type 2 diabetes compared to those obtained using single
polymorphisms. This approach may have a role in future preventative measures for 
common, polygenic diseases.

PMCID: PMC1584415
PMID: 17020404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3396-403.

Expression of the AmphiTcf gene in amphioxus: insights into the evolution of the 
TCF/LEF gene family during vertebrate evolution.

Lin HC(1), Holland LZ, Holland ND.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.
h3lin@ucsd.edu

T-cell factor (TCF) and lymphoid enhancer factors (LEF) genes encode proteins
that are transcription factors mediating beta-catenin/Wnt signaling. Whereas
mammals have four such genes, the Florida amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae)
apparently has only one such gene (AmphiTcf). From cleavage through early
gastrula, cytoplasmic maternal transcripts of this gene are localized toward the 
animal pole. In gastrulae, AmphiTcf expression begins in the mesendoderm. In
neurulae, there is expression in the pharynx, hindgut, anterior notochord,
somites, and at the anterior end of the neural plate. In early larvae, expression
is detectable in the floor of the diencephalon, notochord, tail bud, forming
somites, pharynx, and ciliated pit (a presumed homolog of the vertebrate
adenohypophysis). Phylogenetic analysis of TCF/LEF proteins placed AmphiTcf as
the sister group of a clade comprising vertebrate Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, and Tcf4.
Comparison of developmental expression for amphioxus AmphiTcf and vertebrate
TCF/LEF genes indicates that this gene family has undergone extensive
subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization during vertebrate evolution.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17013891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 15;299(2):330-44. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

BMPs restrict the position of premuscle masses in the limb buds by influencing
Tcf4 expression.

Bonafede A(1), Köhler T, Rodriguez-Niedenführ M, Brand-Saberi B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology II, University of Freiburg, PO Box 111, 
D-79001 Freiburg, Germany.

Previous studies have shown the distally retreating source of Scatter
factor/Hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF) can account for the distal migration of 
myogenic precursor cells in the limb bud mesenchyme. However, the normal
expression pattern of Sf/Hgf alone does not explain the distribution of muscle
precursor cells. Hence, the position of the dorsal and ventral premuscle masses
suggests the presence of additional patterning factors. We present evidence that 
BMP2 and 4 can act as such factors by inhibiting the expression of Tcf4, a
downstream element of the canonical Wnt pathway. The normal position of muscle
cells depends on the correct distribution of BMP and SF/HGF throughout the limb
bud mesenchyme. Removal or inhibition of the BMP signals within the limb margins 
leads to a shift in position resulting in the fusion of the dorsal and ventral
premuscle masses towards the manipulated areas. In the absence of BMPs,
mispositioning requires the presence of SF/HGF. Consequently, ectopic application
of exogenous SF/HGF in the presence of BMP signals does not change muscle
positioning. We conclude that correct positioning of the premuscle masses in the 
limb buds is controlled by the combined influence of SF/HGF signals--guiding
cells mainly in the proximo-distal axis--and BMP signals that restrict the
positioning to the dorsal and ventral central portions of the limb buds.

PMID: 17005177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2903-8.

Transcription factor TCF7L2 genetic study in the French population: expression in
human beta-cells and adipose tissue and strong association with type 2 diabetes.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Dina C, Choquet H, Samson C, Gallina S, Balkau B,
Charpentier G, Pattou F, Stetsyuk V, Scharfmann R, Staels B, Frühbeck G, Froguel 
P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

Recently, the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been associated
with type 2 diabetes in subjects of European origin in the DeCode study. We
genotyped the two most associated variants (rs7903146 and rs12255372) in 2,367
French type 2 diabetic subjects and in 2,499 control subjects. Both the T-allele 
of rs7903146 and the T-allele of rs12255372 significantly increase type 2
diabetes risk with an allelic odds ratio (OR) of 1.69 (95% CI 1.55-1.83) (P = 6.0
x 10(-35)) and 1.60 (1.47-1.74) (P = 7.6 x 10(-28)), respectively. In nonobese
type 2 diabetic subjects (BMI <30 kg/m2, n = 1,346), the ORs increased to 1.89
(1.72-2.09) (P = 2.1 x 10(-38)) and 1.79 (1.62-1.97) (P = 5.7 x 10(-31)),
respectively. The rs7903146 T at-risk allele associates with decreased BMI and
earlier age at diagnosis in the type 2 diabetic subjects (P = 8.0 x 10(-3) and P 
= 3.8 x 10(-4), respectively), which is supported by quantitative family-based
association tests. TCF7L2 is expressed in most human tissues, including mature
pancreatic beta-cells, with the exception of the skeletal muscle. In the
subcutaneous and omental fat from obese type 2 diabetic subjects, TCF7L2
expression significantly decreased compared with obese normoglycemic individuals.
During rat fetal beta-cell differentiation, TCF7L2 expression pattern mimics the 
key marker NGN3 (neurogenin 3), suggesting a role in islet development. These
data provide evidence that TCF7L2 is a major determinant of type 2 diabetes risk 
in European populations and suggests that this transcription factor plays a key
role in glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 17003360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2890-5.

Common single nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF7L2 are reproducibly associated with
type 2 diabetes and reduce the insulin response to glucose in nondiabetic
individuals.

Saxena R(1), Gianniny L, Burtt NP, Lyssenko V, Giuducci C, Sjögren M, Florez JC, 
Almgren P, Isomaa B, Orho-Melander M, Lindblad U, Daly MJ, Tuomi T, Hirschhorn
JN, Ardlie KG, Groop LC, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA.

Recently, common noncoding variants in the TCF7L2 gene were strongly associated
with increased risk of type 2 diabetes in samples from Iceland, Denmark, and the 
U.S. We genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across TCF7L2 in
8,310 individuals in family-based and case-control designs from Scandinavia,
Poland, and the U.S. We convincingly confirmed the previous association of TCF7L2
SNPs with the risk of type 2 diabetes (rs7903146T odds ratio 1.40 [95% CI
1.30-1.50], P = 6.74 x 10(-20)). In nondiabetic individuals, the risk genotypes
were associated with a substantial reduction in the insulinogenic index derived
from an oral glucose tolerance test (risk allele homozygotes have half the
insulin response to glucose of noncarriers, P = 0.003) but not with increased
insulin resistance. These results suggest that TCF7L2 variants may act through
insulin secretion to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17003358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;66(18):9245-51.

Adenomatous polyposis coli determines sensitivity to histone deacetylase
inhibitor-induced apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Huang X(1), Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, North Dakota 58105, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) inhibit malignant cell growth and
induce apoptosis through unknown mechanisms. Here, we report that the expression 
status of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein determines the relative
sensitivity of colon cancer cells to HDAC inhibitor-induced apoptosis. HCA-7
cells (expressing wild-type beta-catenin and APC proteins) are more sensitive to 
apoptosis induced by HDAC inhibitors valproic acid (VPA) and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid than SW620 or HT-29 cells (both expressing mutant APC). When
wild-type APC protein was expressed using an inducible expression system, HT-29
cells became sensitive to apoptosis in response to VPA. Conversely, knocking down
of endogenous APC protein by small interfering RNA (siRNA) blocked VPA-induced
apoptosis in HCA-7 cells. APC mediated VPA-induced apoptosis through
down-regulation of survivin. The level of survivin protein decreased in HCA-7 and
HT-29/APC cells, but not in SW620 and HT-29/beta-Gal cells after VPA treatment.
Whereas knocking down of survivin by siRNA sensitized SW620 cells to VPA-induced 
apoptosis, overexpression of survivin blocked VPA-induced apoptosis in HCA-7
cells. Down-regulation of survivin transcription occurred through changes in
GSK-3beta/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling molecules. VPA also induced
proteasome-mediated degradation of survivin protein in HCA-7 cells. Furthermore, 
we have shown that APC mutation-mediated resistance to apoptosis can be overcome 
by cotreatment with Flavopiridol, which promotes survivin degradation. These
results suggest that APC is a critical determinant of HDAC inhibitor-induced
apoptosis in colon cancer cells and survivin is a potential target to enhance
apoptotic response to HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 16982769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. BMJ. 2006 Sep 9;333(7567):509-10.

Predictive genetic testing for type 2 diabetes.

Janssens AC, Gwinn M, Valdez R, Narayan KM, Khoury MJ.

PMCID: PMC1562463
PMID: 16960189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8418-26. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Rapid loss of intestinal crypts upon conditional deletion of the Wnt/Tcf-4 target
gene c-Myc.

Muncan V(1), Sansom OJ, Tertoolen L, Phesse TJ, Begthel H, Sancho E, Cole AM,
Gregorieff A, de Alboran IM, Clevers H, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Nederlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Inhibition of the mutationally activated Wnt cascade in colorectal cancer cell
lines induces a rapid G1 arrest and subsequent differentiation. This arrest can
be overcome by maintaining expression of a single Tcf4 target gene, the
proto-oncogene c-Myc. Since colorectal cancer cells share many molecular
characteristics with proliferative crypt progenitors, we have assessed the
physiological role of c-Myc in adult crypts by conditional gene deletion.
c-Myc-deficient crypts are lost within weeks and replaced by c-Myc-proficient
crypts through a fission process of crypts that have escaped gene deletion.
Although c-Myc(-/-) crypt cells remain in the cell cycle, they are on average
much smaller than wild-type cells, cycle slower, and divide at a smaller cell
size. c-Myc appears essential for crypt progenitor cells to provide the necessary
biosynthetic capacity to successfully progress through the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1636776
PMID: 16954380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Cell. 2006 Sep;11(3):325-37.

Wnt signaling inhibitors regulate the transcriptional response to morphogenetic
Shh-Gli signaling in the neural tube.

Lei Q(1), Jeong Y, Misra K, Li S, Zelman AK, Epstein DJ, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, 08854, USA.

Shh-Gli signaling controls cell fates in the developing ventral neural tube by
regulating the patterned expression of transcription factors in neural
progenitors. However, the molecular mechanisms that limit target gene responses
to specific domains are unclear. Here, we show that Wnt pathway inhibitors
regulate the threshold response of a ventral Shh target gene, Nkx2.2, to
establish its restricted expression in the ventral spinal cord. Identification
and characterization of an Nkx2.2 enhancer reveals that expression is directly
regulated by positive Shh-Gli signaling and negative Tcf repressor activity. Our 
data indicate that the dorsal limit of Nkx2.2 is controlled by Tcf4-mediated
transcriptional repression, and not by a direct requirement for high-level
Shh-Gli signaling, arguing against a simple model based on differential Gli
factor affinities in target genes. These results identify a transcriptional
mechanism that integrates graded Shh and Wnt signaling to define progenitor gene 
expression domains and cell fates in the neural tube.

PMID: 16950124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2654-9.

Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated
with type 2 diabetes in the Amish: replication and evidence for a role in both
insulin secretion and insulin resistance.

Damcott CM(1), Pollin TI, Reinhart LJ, Ott SH, Shen H, Silver KD, Mitchell BD,
Shuldiner AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. cdamcott@medicine.umaryland.edu

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) regulates genes involved in cell
proliferation and differentiation. The TCF7L2 gene is located on chromosome 10q25
in a region of replicated linkage to type 2 diabetes. Recently, a microsatellite 
marker in intron 3 (DG10S478) and five correlated single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) were identified in Icelandic individuals that showed strong association
with type 2 diabetes, which was replicated in Danish and European-American
cohorts. We genotyped four of the SNPs (rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205, and
rs12255372) in Amish subjects with type 2 diabetes (n = 137), impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT; n = 139), and normal glucose tolerance (NGT; n = 342). We
compared genotype frequencies in subjects with type 2 diabetes with those with
NGT and found marginal association for rs7901695 (P = 0.05; odds ratio [OR]
1.51); comparison between NGT control subjects and the combined type 2
diabetes/IGT case group showed strong association with rs7901695 and rs7903146 (P
= 0.008-0.01; OR 1.53-1.57) and marginal association with rs11196205 and
rs12255372 (P = 0.07 and P = 0.04, respectively). In an expanded set of 698 Amish
subjects without diabetes, we found no association with insulin and glucose
levels during a 3-h oral glucose tolerance test. We also genotyped these SNPs in 
nondiabetic, non-Amish subjects (n = 48), in whom intravenous glucose tolerance
tests were performed, and found an association between rs7901695 and rs7903146
and insulin sensitivity (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005, respectively) and disposition
index (P = 0.04 and P = 0.007, respectively). These data provide replicating
evidence that variants in TCF7L2 increase the risk for type 2 diabetes and novel 
evidence that the variants likely influence both insulin secretion and insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 16936218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2649-53.

Association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants with type 2
diabetes in a Finnish sample.

Scott LJ(1), Bonnycastle LL, Willer CJ, Sprau AG, Jackson AU, Narisu N, Duren WL,
Chines PS, Stringham HM, Erdos MR, Valle TT, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Mohlke KL,
Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA. ljst@umich.edu

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is part of the Wnt signaling pathway.
Genetic variants within TCF7L2 on chromosome 10q were recently reported to be
associated with type 2 diabetes in Icelandic, Danish, and American (U.S.)
samples. We previously observed a modest logarithm of odds score of 0.61 on
chromosome 10q, approximately 1 Mb from TCF7L2, in the Finland-United States
Investigation of NIDDM Genetics study. We tested the five associated TCF7L2
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants in a Finnish sample of 1,151 type 2
diabetic patients and 953 control subjects. We confirmed the association with the
same risk allele (P value <0.05) for all five SNPs. Our strongest results were
for rs12255372 (odds ratio [OR] 1.36 [95% CI 1.15-1.61], P = 0.00026) and
rs7903146 (1.33 [1.14-1.56], P = 0.00042). Based on the CEU HapMap data, we
selected and tested 12 additional SNPs to tag SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with
rs12255372. None of these SNPs showed stronger evidence of association than
rs12255372 or rs7903146 (OR < or =1.26, P > or = 0.0054). Our results strengthen 
the evidence that one or more variants in TCF7L2 are associated with increased
risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16936217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2645-8.

Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and the risk of type 2
diabetes in large cohorts of U.S. women and men.

Zhang C(1), Qi L, Hunter DJ, Meigs JB, Manson JE, van Dam RM, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. cuilin.zhang@channing.harvard.edu

Emerging evidence indicates that variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene may play a role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. In a
prospective, nested, case-control study (n = 3,520) within the Nurses' Health
Study (687 type 2 diabetic case and 1,051 control subjects) and the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (886 case and 896 control subjects), we examined
the association of a common variant of the TCF7L2 gene (rs12255372 [T/G]) with
type 2 diabetes risk among Caucasians. Frequencies of the T-allele were
significantly higher among case than control subjects; each copy of the T-allele 
was associated with a 1.32-fold (P = 0.0002) and 1.53-fold (P < 0.0001) increased
type 2 diabetes risk in women and men, respectively. The odds ratios (95% CI)
associated with homozygous carriers of the T-allele were 1.86 (1.30-2.67) and
2.15 (1.48-3.13) in women and men, respectively. Population-attributable risks
for diabetes associated with the T-allele were 14.8 and 22.3% for women and men, 
respectively. In a meta-analysis of 3,347 case and 3,947 control subjects, each
copy of the T-allele was associated with a 1.48-fold increased risk (P <
10(-16)). Our findings confirm that the TCF7L2 gene represents an important locus
for predicting inherited susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16936216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2640-4.

Association analysis of 6,736 U.K. subjects provides replication and confirms
TCF7L2 as a type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene with a substantial effect on
individual risk.

Groves CJ(1), Zeggini E, Minton J, Frayling TM, Weedon MN, Rayner NW, Hitman GA, 
Walker M, Wiltshire S, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, 
Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3635.

Recent data suggest that common variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene is associated with type 2 diabetes. Evaluation of such associations
in independent samples provides necessary replication and a robust assessment of 
effect size. Using four TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; including
the two most associated in the previous study), we conducted a case-control study
in 2,158 type 2 diabetic subjects and 2,574 control subjects and a family-based
association analysis in 388 parent-offspring trios all from the U.K. All SNPs
showed powerful associations with diabetes in the case-control analysis, with
strongest effects at rs7903146 (allele-wise relative risk 1.36 [95% CI
1.24-1.48], P = 1.3 x 10(-11)). Data were consistent with a multiplicative model.
The family-based analyses provided independent evidence for association at all
loci (e.g., rs4506565, 62% transmission, P = 7 x 10(-5)) with no parent-of-origin
effects. The frequency of diabetes-associated TCF7L2 genotypes was greater in
cases ascertained for positive family history and early onset (rs4606565, P =
0.02); the population-attributable risk, estimated from the least-selected cases,
is approximately 16%. The overall evidence for association for these variants (P 
= 4.4 x 10(-14) combining case-control and family-based analyses for rs4506565)
exceeds genome-wide significance criteria and clearly establishes TCF7L2 as a
type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene of substantial importance.

PMID: 16936215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 Oct;33(2):136-49. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Potential target genes of EMX2 include Odz/Ten-M and other gene families with
implications for cortical patterning.

Li H(1), Bishop KM, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, 10010 N. Torrey Pines
Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

EMX2 and PAX6 are expressed by cortical progenitors and specify area patterning. 
We used representational difference analysis (RDA) to compare expressed RNAs from
wild type and Emx2-/- cortex and identified 41 unique clones. Using secondary
screening by in situ hybridization, we selected five genes for further analysis, 
Cdk4, Cofilin1, Crmp1, ME2, and Odz4, involved in neuronal proliferation,
differentiation, migration, and axon guidance. Each exhibits differential
expression in wild type cortex. Odz4 is one of four members of a vertebrate gene 
family homologous to the Drosophila pair-rule patterning gene, Odd Oz (Odz), a
transmembrane receptor. We show that Odz genes are expressed in complementary
patterns in cortex, as well as in nuclei-specific patterns in thalamus that
relates to their area-unique cortical expression. In addition, each of the genes 
analyzed shows different expression patterns in wild type cortex, Emx2, and Pax6 
mutant cortex, consistent with potential roles in area patterning. These findings
identify potential targets of EMX2 that might account for its function and the
defects in Emx2-/- cortex, and suggest that the Odz family of transmembrane
proteins influences cortical area patterning downstream to EMX2 and PAX6.

PMID: 16919471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;338:21-9.

Identification and mapping of paralogous genes on a known genomic DNA sequence.

Bina M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

The completion of whole genome sequencing projects offers the opportunity to
examine the organization of genes and the discovery of evolutionarily related
genes in a given species. For the beginners in the field, through a specific
example, this chapter provides a step-by-step procedure for identifying
paralogous genes, using the genome browser at UCSC (http://genome.ucsc.edu/). The
example describes identification and mapping in the human genome, the paralogs of
TCF12/HTF4. The example identifies TCF3 and TCF4 as paralogs of the TCF12/HTF4
gene. The example also identifies a related sequence, corresponding to a
pseudogene, in one of the introns of the JAK2 gene. The procedure described
should be applicable to the discovery and creation of maps of paralogous genes in
the genomic DNA sequences that are available at the genome browser at UCSC.

PMID: 16888348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 1;66(15):7571-7.

Up-regulation of CYP26A1 in adenomatous polyposis coli-deficient vertebrates via 
a WNT-dependent mechanism: implications for intestinal cell differentiation and
colon tumor development.

Shelton DN(1), Sandoval IT, Eisinger A, Chidester S, Ratnayake A, Ireland CM,
Jones DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene seem to
underlie the initiation of many colorectal carcinomas. Loss of APC function
results in accumulation of beta-catenin and activation of
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription. Recent studies have implicated APC in
controlling retinoic acid biosynthesis during normal intestinal development
through a WNT-independent mechanism. Paradoxically, however, previous studies
found that dietary supplementation of Apc(MIN) mice with retinoic acid failed to 
abrogate adenoma formation. While investigating the above finding, we found that 
expression of CYP26A1, a major retinoic acid catabolic enzyme, was up-regulated
in Apc(MIN) mouse adenomas, human FAP adenomas, human sporadic colon carcinomas, 
and in the intestine of apc(mcr) mutant zebrafish embryos. Mechanistically,
cyp26a1 induction following apc mutation is dependent on WNT signaling as
antisense morpholino knockdown of tcf4 or injection of a dnLEF construct into
apc(mcr) mutant zebrafish suppressed expression of cyp26a1 along with known WNT
target genes. In addition, injection of stabilized beta-catenin or dnGSK3beta
into wild-type embryos induced cyp26a1 expression. Genetic knockdown or
pharmacologic inhibition of cyp26a1 in apc(mcr) mutant zebrafish embryos rescued 
gut differentiation defects such as expression of intestinal fatty acid-binding
protein and pancreatic trypsin. These findings support a novel role for APC in
balancing retinoic acid biosynthesis and catabolism through WNT-independent and
WNT-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 16885356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 15;119(10):2294-303.

Induction of p16INK4A mediated by beta-catenin in a TCF4-independent manner:
implications for alterations in p16INK4A and pRb expression during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Excessive beta-catenin is considered to contribute to tumor progression by
inducing transcription of cell cycle-related genes such as cyclin D1 and c-myc.
In contrast, our recent studies demonstrated that beta-catenin could inhibit cell
proliferation through activation of p14(ARF)/p53/p21(WAF1) pathway during
trans-differentiation toward morular phenotype of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca)
cells. Here, we focused on associations with alterations in p16(INK4A) and pRb
expression during this process. In clinical cases, p16(INK4A) immunoreactivity
was found to frequently overlap with nuclear beta-catenin accumulation in
small-sized morules and surrounding glandular carcinomas (Sur-Ca), demonstrating 
a significant positive correlation (r = 0.447, p < 0.0001) overall, while the
immunoreactions showed stepwise decrease in enlarged morules, despite persistent 
accumulation of beta-catenin and p21(WAF1) in nuclei. Immunoreactivity for both
total pRb and its phosphorylated form was apparently decreased in all morules as 
compared to Sur-Ca lesions, with a significantly positive correlation. In cell
lines, transcriptional activation of p16(INK) (4A) promoter by active form
beta-catenin, as well as p21(WAF1), occurred through the region from -385 to -280
bp relative to the translation start site, in a TCF4-independent manner.
Moreover, cell proliferation was accompanied with phosphorylation of pRb and
increased p16(INK4A) expression, while its inhibition by serum starvation caused 
decreased expression of total pRb but not p16(INK4A), resulting in high relative 
amounts of the latter. These findings indicate that induction of p16(INK4A)
mediated by nuclear beta-catenin and p21(WAF1), along with loss of pRb
expression, may be important for initial steps during trans-differentiation of Em
Ca cells. In addition, its down-regulation is associated with progression of
lesions.

PMID: 16858682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):306-8.

Genetic variants and common diseases--better late than never.

O'Rahilly S, Wareham NJ.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):241-50.

PMID: 16855272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):241-50.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms and progression to diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention
Program.

Florez JC(1), Jablonski KA, Bayley N, Pollin TI, de Bakker PI, Shuldiner AR,
Knowler WC, Nathan DM, Altshuler D; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study Coordinating Center, George
Washington University, Rockville, Md 20852, USA. dppmail@biostat.bsc.gwu.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):306-8.

BACKGROUND: Common polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) have recently been associated with type 2 diabetes. We examined whether 
the two most strongly associated variants (rs12255372 and rs7903146) predict the 
progression to diabetes in persons with impaired glucose tolerance who were
enrolled in the Diabetes Prevention Program, in which lifestyle intervention or
treatment with metformin was compared with placebo.
METHODS: We genotyped these variants in 3548 participants and performed Cox
regression analysis using genotype, intervention, and their interactions as
predictors. We assessed the effect of genotype on measures of insulin secretion
and insulin sensitivity at baseline and at one year.
RESULTS: Over an average period of three years, participants with the
risk-conferring TT genotype at rs7903146 were more likely to have progression
from impaired glucose tolerance to diabetes than were CC homozygotes (hazard
ratio, 1.55; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.20 to 2.01; P<0.001). The effect
of genotype was stronger in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 1.81; 95 percent
confidence interval, 1.21 to 2.70; P=0.004) than in the metformin and
lifestyle-intervention groups (hazard ratios, 1.62 and 1.15, respectively; P for 
the interaction between genotype and intervention not significant). The TT
genotype was associated with decreased insulin secretion but not increased
insulin resistance at baseline. Similar results were obtained for rs12255372.
CONCLUSIONS: Common variants in TCF7L2 seem to be associated with an increased
risk of diabetes among persons with impaired glucose tolerance. The
risk-conferring genotypes in TCF7L2 are associated with impaired beta-cell
function but not with insulin resistance. (ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT00004992. [ClinicalTrials.gov]).

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMCID: PMC1762036
PMID: 16855264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):7024-31.

Regulation of human nitric oxide synthase 2 expression by Wnt beta-catenin
signaling.

Du Q(1), Park KS, Guo Z, He P, Nagashima M, Shao L, Sahai R, Geller DA, Hussain
SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO.), an important mediator of inflammation, and beta-catenin, a
component of the Wnt-adenomatous polyposis coli signaling pathway, contribute to 
the development of cancer. We have identified two T-cell factor 4 (Tcf-4)-binding
elements (TBE1 and TBE2) in the promoter of human inducible NO synthase 2 (NOS2).
We tested the hypothesis that beta-catenin regulates human NOS2 gene. Mutation in
either of the two TBE sites decreased the basal and cytokine-induced NOS2
promoter activity in different cell lines. The promoter activity was
significantly reduced when both TBE1 and TBE2 sites were mutated (P < 0.01).
Nuclear extract from HCT116, HepG2, or DLD1 cells bound to NOS2 TBE1 or TBE2
oligonucleotides in electrophoretic mobility shift assays and the specific
protein-DNA complexes were supershifted with anti-beta-catenin or anti-Tcf-4
antibody. Overexpression of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 significantly increased both
basal and cytokine-induced NOS2 promoter activity (P < 0.01), and the induction
was dependent on intact TBE sites. Overexpression of beta-catenin or Tcf-4
increased NOS2 mRNA and protein expression in HCT116 cells. Lithium chloride
(LiCl), an inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, increased cytosolic and
nuclear beta-catenin level, NOS2 expression, and NO. production in primary human 
and rat hepatocytes and cancer cell lines. Treatment with Wnt-3A-conditioned
medium increased beta-catenin and NOS2 expression in fetal human hepatocytes.
When administered in vivo, LiCl increased hepatic beta-catenin level in a
dose-dependent manner with simultaneous increase in NOS2 expression. These data
are consistent with the hypothesis that beta-catenin up-regulates NOS2 and
suggest a novel mechanism by which the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway may
contribute to cancer by increasing NO. production.

PMID: 16849547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):145-56.

Gene expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and sensitive to
bortezomib.

Shringarpure R(1), Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar K, Tai YT, Kessler B,
Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Chauhan D,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown impressive clinical activity alone 
and in combination with conventional and other novel agents for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma (MM). Although bortezomib is known to be a selective proteasome 
inhibitor, the downstream mechanisms of cytotoxicity and drug resistance are
poorly understood. However, resistance to bortezomib as a single agent develops
in the majority of patients, and activity in other malignancies has been less
impressive. To elucidate mechanisms of bortezomib resistance, we compared
differential gene expression profiles of bortezomib-resistant SUDHL-4 and
bortezomib-sensitive SUDHL-6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma lines in response to
bortezomib. At concentrations that effectively inhibited proteasome activity,
bortezomib induced apoptosis in SUDHL-6 cells, but not in SUDHL-4 cells. We
showed that overexpression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), ATF4,
ATF5, c-Jun, JunD and caspase-3 is associated with sensitivity to
bortezomib-induced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of heat shock protein
(HSP)27, HSP70, HSP90 and T-cell factor 4 is associated with bortezomib
resistance.

PMID: 16846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Apr;1068:117-30.

Canonical Wnt signaling in osteoblasts is required for osteoclast
differentiation.

Glass DA 2nd(1), Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Bone Disease Program of Texas,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Inactivation of Lrp5, a gene encoding a likely Wnt co-receptor, results in low
bone mass (osteopenia) by decreasing bone formation, suggesting that Wnt
signaling in osteoblasts regulates bone formation. Here we show that Tcf1 and
Tcf4 are expressed in osteoblasts during development and after birth;
stabilization of beta-catenin, an essential component of canonical Wnt signaling,
in differentiated osteoblasts results in high bone mass while its deletion from
differentiated osteoblasts leads to osteopenia. Histological analysis showed that
these mutations affect bone resorption. Cellular and molecular studies showed
that beta-catenin together with TCF proteins regulates in osteoblasts the
expression of Osteoprotegerin, a major inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation.
These findings demonstrate that, in differentiated osteoblasts, beta-catenin and 
presumably Wnt signaling are negative regulators of osteoclast differentiation;
thus they broaden our knowledge about functions that Wnt proteins may have at
various stages of skeletogenesis.

PMID: 16831912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Versicherungsmedizin. 2006 Jun 1;58(2):94.

[Important diabetes gene detected].

[Article in German]

Bürger J.

PMID: 16800149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2326-37. Epub 2006 May 25.

HIC1 attenuates Wnt signaling by recruitment of TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the
nuclear bodies.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Doubravska L, Fafilek B, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic.

The hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) gene is epigenetically inactivated in
cancer, and in addition, the haploinsufficiency of HIC1 is linked to the
development of human Miller-Dieker syndrome. HIC1 encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor that acts as a transcriptional repressor. Additionally, the 
HIC1 protein oligomerizes via the N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and forms discrete
nuclear structures known as HIC1 bodies. Here, we provide evidence that HIC1
antagonizes the TCF/beta-catenin-mediated transcription in Wnt-stimulated cells. 
This appears to be due to the ability of HIC1 to associate with TCF-4 and to
recruit TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the HIC1 bodies. As a result of the
recruitment, both proteins are prevented from association with the TCF-binding
elements of the Wnt-responsive genes. These data indicate that the intracellular 
amounts of HIC1 protein can modulate the level of the transcriptional stimulation
of the genes regulated by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC1478201
PMID: 16724116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Nov;27(11):2157-69. Epub 2006 May 16.

The function of melanotransferrin: a role in melanoma cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis.

Dunn LL(1), Sekyere EO, Suryo Rahmanto Y, Richardson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Iron Metabolism
and Chelation Program P.O. Box 81, High Street, Randwick, Sydney, New South
Wales, 2031 Australia.

Melanotransferrin (MTf) or melanoma tumor antigen p97 is an iron (Fe) binding
transferrin homolog expressed highly on melanomas and at lower levels on normal
tissues. It has been suggested that MTf is involved in a variety of processes
such as Fe metabolism and cellular differentiation. Considering the crucial role 
of Fe in many metabolic pathways, for example, DNA synthesis, it is important to 
understand the function of MTf. To define the roles of MTf, two models were
developed: (i) an MTf knockout (MTf-/-) mouse and (ii) downregulation of MTf
expression in melanoma cells by post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS).
Examination of the MTf-/- mice demonstrated no differences compared with
wild-type littermates. However, microarray analysis showed differential
expression of molecules involved in proliferation such as Mef2a, Tcf4, Gls and
Apod in MTf-/- mice compared with MTf+/+ littermates. Considering the role of MTf
in melanoma cells, PTGS was used to downregulate MTf mRNA and protein levels by
>90 and >80%, respectively. This resulted in inhibition of proliferation and
migration. As found in MTf-/- mice, in melanoma cells with suppressed MTf
expression, hMEF2A and hTCF4 were upregulated compared with parental cells.
Furthermore, when melanoma cells with decreased MTf expression were injected into
nude mice, tumor growth was markedly reduced, suggesting a role for MTf in
proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16704991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Gen Virol. 2006 Jun;87(Pt 6):1613-23.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat prevents dephosphorylation of Sp1 by
TCF-4 in astrocytes.

Rossi A(1), Mukerjee R, Ferrante P, Khalili K, Amini S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 1900 N 12th Street (015-96), Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

Previous examination of the effect of TCF-4 on transcription of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) promoter in human astrocytic cells found
that TCF-4 affects the HIV-1 promoter through the GC-rich domain (nt -80 to nt
-68). Here, the physical interaction and a functional consequence of TCF4-Sp1
contact were characterized. It was shown that expression of TCF-4 in U-87 MG
(human astrocytic) cells decreased basal and Sp1-mediated transcription of the
HIV-1 promoter. Results from a GST pull-down assay, as well as combined
immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis of protein extracts from U-87 MG
cells, revealed an interaction of Sp1 with TCF-4. Using in vitro protein
chromatography, the region of Sp1 that contacts TCF-4 was mapped to aa 266-350.
It was also found that, in cell-free extracts, TCF-4 prevented dsDNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK)-mediated Sp1 phosphorylation. Surprisingly, TCF-4 failed 
to decrease Sp1-mediated transcription of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
and Sp1 phosphorylation in cells expressing HIV-1 Tat. Results from
immunoprecipitation/Western blotting demonstrated that TCF-4 lost its ability to 
interact with Sp1, but not with Tat, in Tat-transfected cells. Taken together,
these findings suggest that activity at the HIV-1 promoter is influenced by
phosphorylation of Sp1, which is affected by Tat and DNA-PK. Interactions among
TCF-4, Sp1 and/or Tat may determine the level of viral gene transcription in
human astrocytic cells.

PMID: 16690926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15405-11. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Physiological and functional interactions between Tcf4 and Daxx in colon cancer
cells.

Tzeng SL(1), Cheng YW, Li CH, Lin YS, Hsu HC, Kang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Daxx, a human cell death-associated protein, was isolated as a Tcf4-interacting
protein, using a yeast two-hybrid screen. Co-immunoprecipitation in HEK-293T
cells and yeast two-hybrid screen in Y190 cells were performed to identify the
interaction between Tcf4 with Daxx and to map the binding regions of Tcf4. In the
nucleus, Daxx reduced DNA binding activity of Tcf4 and repressed Tcf4
transcriptional activity. Overexpression of Daxx altered the expression of genes 
downstream of Tcf4, including cyclin D1 and Hath-1, and induced G1 phase arrest
in colon cancer cells. A reduction in Daxx protein expression was also observed
in colon adenocarcinoma tissue when compared with normal colon tissue. This
evidence suggests a possible physiological function of Daxx, via interaction with
Tcf4, to regulate proliferation and differentiation of colon cells.

PMID: 16569639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Proteins. 2006 Jul 1;64(1):60-7.

Inhibition of protein-protein interactions: the discovery of druglike
beta-catenin inhibitors by combining virtual and biophysical screening.

Trosset JY(1), Dalvit C, Knapp S, Fasolini M, Veronesi M, Mantegani S, Gianellini
LM, Catana C, Sundström M, Stouten PF, Moll JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Nerviano Medical Sciences, Nerviano, MI, Italy.
jytrosset@gmail.com

The interaction between beta-catenin and Tcf family members is crucial for the
Wnt signal transduction pathway, which is commonly mutated in cancer. This
interaction extends over a very large surface area (4800 A(2)), and inhibiting
such interactions using low molecular weight inhibitors is a challenge. However, 
protein surfaces frequently contain "hot spots," small patches that are the main 
mediators of binding affinity. By making tight interactions with a hot spot, a
small molecule can compete with a protein. The Tcf3/Tcf4-binding surface on
beta-catenin contains a well-defined hot spot around residues K435 and R469. A
17,700 compounds subset of the Pharmacia corporate collection was docked to this 
hot spot with the QXP program; 22 of the best scoring compounds were put into a
biophysical (NMR and ITC) screening funnel, where specific binding to
beta-catenin, competition with Tcf4 and finally binding constants were
determined. This process led to the discovery of three druglike, low molecular
weight Tcf4-competitive compounds with the tightest binder having a K(D) of 450
nM. Our approach can be used in several situations (e.g., when selecting
compounds from external collections, when no biochemical functional assay is
available, or when no HTS is envisioned), and it may be generally applicable to
the identification of inhibitors of protein-protein interactions.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16568448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 12;343(3):893-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Beta-catenin control of T-cell transcription factor 4 (Tcf4) importation from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus contributes to Tcf4-mediated transcription in 293 cells.

Hsu HT(1), Liu PC, Ku SY, Jung KC, Hong YR, Kao C, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807,
Taiwan.

Beta-catenin has essential roles in morphogenesis and human cancer, both as a
subunit of adhesive complexes in the cell membrane and as a transcriptional
coactivator in the Wnt signaling pathway. In addition, beta-catenin also has the 
ability to transport lymphoid enhancer binding factor-1 into the nucleus. In this
study, we examined a constitutive active mutation, beta-catenin (T41A, S45A), for
its potential as a nuclear import receptor for T-cell transcription factor 4 in
293 cells. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that this constitutive active form of
beta-catenin increased the amount of Tcf4 in the nucleus about 4-5-fold compared 
to controls. However, the overall expression of Tcf4 remained the same with or
without over-expression of beta-catenin (T41A, S45A). T-cell transcription factor
4 reporter gene and electrophoretic mobility shift assay further indicated that
the increase in Tcf4 in the nucleus was consistent with its accrued DNA binding
capacity and transcription activity. Microscopic immunofluorescence examination
showed that Tcf4 was mainly located in the cytoplasm and transported into the
nucleus, without or with over-expression of beta-catenin (T41A, S45A),
respectively. Our results suggest that beta-catenin might be a major factor
regulating the import of Tcf4 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus, consequently
controlling its transcription activity.

PMID: 16564030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Cell Sci. 2006 Apr 1;119(Pt 7):1453-63.

Nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of beta-catenin is regulated by retention.

Krieghoff E(1), Behrens J, Mayr B.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Glückstr. 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

beta-catenin is the central signalling molecule of the canonical Wnt pathway,
where it activates target genes in a complex with LEF/TCF transcription factors
in the nucleus. The regulation of beta-catenin activity is thought to occur
mainly on the level of protein degradation, but it has been suggested that
beta-catenin nuclear localization and hence its transcriptional activity may
additionally be regulated via nuclear import by TCF4 and BCL9 and via nuclear
export by APC and axin. Using live-cell microscopy and fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP), we have directly analysed the impact of these
factors on the subcellular localization of beta-catenin, its nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling and its mobility within the nucleus and the cytoplasm. We show that
TCF4 and BCL9/Pygopus recruit beta-catenin to the nucleus, and APC, axin and
axin2 enrich beta-catenin in the cytoplasm. Importantly, however, none of these
factors accelerates the nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of beta-catenin, i.e.
increases the rate of beta-catenin nuclear import or export. Moreover, the
cytoplasmic enrichment of beta-catenin by APC and axin is not abolished by
inhibition of CRM-1-dependent nuclear export. TCF4, APC, axin and axin2 move more
slowly than beta-catenin in their respective compartment, and concomitantly
decrease beta-catenin mobility. Together, these data indicate that beta-catenin
interaction partners mainly regulate beta-catenin subcellular localization by
retaining it in the compartment in which they are localized, rather than by
active transport into or out of the nucleus.

PMID: 16554443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Oncogene. 2006 Jul 27;25(32):4441-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

TCF-4 isoforms absent in TCF-4 mutated MSI-H colorectal cancer cells colocalize
with nuclear CtBP and repress TCF-4-mediated transcription.

Cuilliere-Dartigues P(1), El-Bchiri J, Krimi A, Buhard O, Fontanges P, Fléjou JF,
Hamelin R, Duval A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U762, Paris, F-75010, France.

TCF-4 is the main effector of the Wnt/Wingless signalling pathway. As with other 
TCF/LEF factors, numerous alternative splicings at its 3' end affect its
expression. Such a mechanism leads to the synthesis of numerous TCF-4 isoforms
among which some contain binding domains for CtBP, an ubiquitous transcriptional 
corepressor. Of interest, we described a frequent TCF-4 frameshift mutation in
mismatch-repair deficient colorectal cancers (MSI-H cancers) that leads to the
selective loss of TCF-4 isoforms with CtBP binding abilities. We provide here
data that argue for a partial colocalization of CtBP with TCF-4 isoforms
containing CtBP binding domains in cellulo, and for a functional role of CtBP in 
repressing TCF-4 mediated transcription. We also demonstrate that such a
colocalization is not observed in MSI-H colorectal cancer cells that harbour the 
TCF-4 frameshift mutation, and that CtBP is not able to repress TCF-4-mediated
transcription in this context. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that 
CtBP would play a role in regulating TCF-4 mediated transcription upon its
binding with some TCF-4 isoforms encoded by alternatively spliced mRNA. They also
suggest a role for TCF-4 frameshift mutation during MSI-H colorectal tumour
progression, by regulating the relative proportion of the different TCF-4
isoforms.

PMID: 16547505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Oncogene. 2006 Jul 20;25(31):4361-9. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Repressor roles for TCF-4 and Sfrp1 in Wnt signaling in breast cancer.

Shulewitz M(1), Soloviev I, Wu T, Koeppen H, Polakis P, Sakanaka C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

Mutations in Wnt pathway genes are rare in human breast cancer, yet activation of
the pathway is evident from the misolocalization of beta-catenin. We searched for
relationships in the expression of Wnt pathway genes and found that both secreted
frizzled related protein 1 (Sfrp1) and TCF-4 transcripts were all highly
downregulated in a common subset of breast cancers relative to normal breast
tissue. Sfrp1 has been previously characterized as a Wnt inhibitor, and we found 
that interfering with its expression in the human mammary epithelial cell line
MCF10A activated Wnt signaling. Reduction of TCF-4 levels in breast cancer was
surprising as it is a transcription factor that is responsive to Wnt signaling.
Therefore, we investigated a possible inhibitory role for TCF-4 in human breast
cells as well as further characterizing Sfrp1. We identified CD24 as a Wnt target
in MCF10A cells and used its expression a marker of Wnt signaling. Interfering
with either Sfrp1 or TCF-4 in this cell line enhanced CD24 expression.
Furthermore, removal of TCF/LEF binding sites in a CD24-luciferase reporter
resulted in elevated reporter gene expression. Our results indicate that both
Sfrp1 and TCF-4 repress Wnt signaling in breast tissue and their downregulation
contributes to the activation of Wnt signaling.

PMID: 16532032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Horm Metab Res. 2006 Feb;38(2):137-8.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCFL2) - a novel factor involved in pathogenesis
of type 2 diabetes. Comment on: Grant et al., Nature Genetics 2006, Published
online 15 January 2006.

Kiessling A(1), Ehrhart-Bornstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dresden, Germany.
andrea.kiessling@uniklinikum-dresden.de

PMID: 16523417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. JAMA. 2006 Mar 1;295(9):987-8.

Gene variant confers risk of diabetes.

Hampton T.

PMID: 16507789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):2279-86.

SKI-606 decreases growth and motility of colorectal cancer cells by preventing
pp60(c-Src)-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of beta-catenin and its nuclear
signaling.

Coluccia AM(1), Benati D, Dekhil H, De Filippo A, Lan C, Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy.

Inhibition of deregulated protein tyrosine kinases represents an attractive
strategy for controlling cancer growth. However, target specificity is an
essential aim of this strategy. In this report, pp60(c-Src) kinase and
beta-catenin were found physically associated and constitutively activated on
tyrosine residues in human colorectal cancer cells. The use of specific
small-interfering RNAs (siRNA) validated pp60(c-Src) as the major kinase
responsible for beta-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation in colorectal cancer.
Src-dependent activation of beta-catenin was prevented by SKI-606, a novel Src
family kinase inhibitor, which also abrogated beta-catenin nuclear function by
impairing its binding to the TCF4 transcription factor and its trans-activating
ability in colorectal cancer cells. These effects were seemingly specific, as
cyclin D1, a crucial beta-catenin/TCF4 target gene, was also down-regulated by
SKI-606 in a dose-dependent manner accounting, at least in part, for the reduced 
growth (IC50, 1.5-2.4 micromol/L) and clonogenic potential of colorectal cancer
cells. Protein levels of beta-catenin remained substantially unchanged by
SKI-606, which promoted instead a cytosolic/membranous retention of beta-catenin 
as judged by immunoblotting analysis of cytosolic/nuclear extracts and cell
immunofluorescence staining. The SKI-606-mediated relocalization of beta-catenin 
increased its binding affinity to E-cadherin and adhesion of colorectal cancer
cells, with ensuing reduced motility in a wound healing assay. Interestingly, the
siRNA-driven knockdown of beta-catenin removed the effect of SKI-606 on
cell-to-cell adhesion, which was associated with prolonged stability of
E-cadherin protein in a pulse-chase experiment. Thus, our results show that
SKI-606 operates a switch between the transcriptional and adhesive function of
beta-catenin by inhibiting its pp60(c-Src)-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation;
this could constitute a new therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16489032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 1;119(Pt 5):819-27. Epub 2006 Feb 14.

APC inhibits ERK pathway activation and cellular proliferation induced by RAS.

Park KS(1), Jeon SH, Kim SE, Bahk YY, Holmen SL, Williams BO, Chung KC, Surh YJ, 
Choi KY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Inactivating mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC), and
activating mutations in RAS, occur in a majority of colorectal carcinomas.
However, the relationship between these changes and tumorigenesis is poorly
understood. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was reduced by
overexpressing APC in DLD-1 colorectal cancer cells. ERK activity was increased
by Cre-virus-induced Apc knockout in primary Apc(flox/flox) mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, indicating that APC inhibits ERK activity. ERK activity was
increased by overexpression and decreased by knock down of beta-catenin. The
activation of Raf1, MEK and ERK kinases by beta-catenin was reduced by
co-expression of APC. These results indicate that APC inhibits the ERK pathway by
an action on beta-catenin. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was reduced 
by the dominant negative form of TCF4, indicating that the ERK pathway regulation
by APC/beta-catenin signaling is, at least, partly caused by effects on
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene expression. The GTP loading and the protein level
of mutated RAS were decreased in cells with reduced ERK activity as a result of
APC overexpression, indicating that APC regulates RAS-induced ERK activation at
least partly by reduction of the RAS protein level. APC regulates cellular
proliferation and transformation induced by activation of both RAS and
beta-catenin signaling.

PMID: 16478791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Cell Physiol. 2006 May;207(2):287-92.

Repression of HIP/RPL29 expression induces differentiation in colon cancer cells.

Liu JJ(1), Huang BH, Zhang J, Carson DD, Hooi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

We had previously shown that the expression of heparin/heparan sulfate
interacting protein/ribosomal protein L29 (HIP/RPL29) was upregulated in colon
cancer tissues. The present study investigated the role of HIP/RPL29 in
differentiation in colon cancer cells. Inducing cellular differentiation in HT-29
cells by both sodium butyrate and glucose deprivation resulted in a significant
downregulation of HIP/RPL29 expression. The beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway is the
most important pathway controlling the switch between cellular differentiation
and proliferation in intestinal epithelial cells. Inducing differentiation by
dominant-negative inhibition of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes in LS174T cells 
also resulted in downregulation of HIP/RPL29. To determine whether a lower
expression of HIP/RPL29 could induce differentiation in cancer cells, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting HIP/RPL29 was transfected into LS174T cells.
The resultant knockdown of HIP/RPL29 expression induced cellular differentiation,
as shown by the increased expression of two known markers of differentiation in
LS174T cells, galectin-4 and mucin-2. In addition, the differentiation process
induced by repression of HIP/RPL29 expression was accompanied by the upregulation
of p21 and p53. In conclusion, HIP/RPL29 plays a role in the cellular
differentiation process in colon cancer cells. The differentiation process is at 
least partially mediated by the upregulation of p21 and p53 pathways.

PMID: 16475173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;34(9):599-600.

[The roles of important molecules of Wnt signaling pathway in non-small-cell lung
cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CY, Cui ZS, Lu Y, Zhang Y, Gao J, Wang EH.

PMID: 16468315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):929-39.

Activation of beta-catenin signaling in prostate cancer by peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase Pin1-mediated abrogation of the androgen receptor-beta-catenin
interaction.

Chen SY(1), Wulf G, Zhou XZ, Rubin MA, Lu KP, Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Hematology-Oncology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) interacts with beta-catenin and can suppress its
coactivation of T cell factor 4 (Tcf4) in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. Pin1 is a 
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase that stabilizes beta-catenin by inhibiting
its binding to the adenomatous polyposis coli gene product and subsequent
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta)-dependent degradation. Higher Pin1
expression in primary PCa is correlated with disease recurrence, and this study
found that Pin1 expression was markedly increased in metastatic PCa. Consistent
with this result, increased expression of Pin1 in transfected LNCaP PCa cells
strongly accelerated tumor growth in vivo in immunodeficient mice. Pin1
expression in LNCaP cells enhanced beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity, as
assessed using Tcf4-regulated reporter genes, and increased expression of
endogenous Tcf4 and c-myc. However, in contrast to results in cells with intact
PTEN and active GSK-3beta, Pin1 expression in LNCaP PCa cells, which are PTEN
deficient, did not increase beta-catenin. Instead, Pin1 expression markedly
inhibited the beta-catenin interaction with AR, and Pin1 abrogated the ability of
AR to antagonize beta-catenin/Tcf4 binding and transcriptional activity. These
findings demonstrate that AR can suppress beta-catenin signaling, that the
AR-beta-catenin interaction can be regulated by Pin1, and that abrogation of this
interaction can enhance beta-catenin/Tcf4 signaling and contribute to aggressive 
biological behavior in PCa.

PMCID: PMC1347015
PMID: 16428447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Int J Immunogenet. 2006 Feb;33(1):25-32.

Evidence for linkage and association between autoimmune thyroid diseases and the 
18q12-q21 region in a large Tunisian family.

Hadj Kacem H(1), Rebai A, Kaffel N, Abid M, Ayadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax;
Tunisie.

Many studies have shown linkage between IDDM6 locus on 18q12-q21 chromosome and
several autoimmune diseases, suggesting that it might harbour susceptibility
genes common to autoimmunity. Using 12 families deriving from a large Tunisian
multiplex family (the Akr family) from which 38 people were affected with
autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD), and 193 unrelated AITD patients, tested
against 100 healthy subjects, we tried to replicate the positive results
previously reported for the IDDM6. Akr members were genotyped with eight
microsatellite markers harbouring the IDDM6 region. Multipoint non-parametric
linkage analysis have shown a clear peak values of NPL score around D18S41 marker
(Z = 3.72, P = 0.0001). Family-based association test (FBAT) and transmission
disequilibrium test (TDT) have confirmed linkage results. In particular, a
significant association with allele 3 of D18S41 and allele 2 of D18S57 markers
was found. Case-control studies, using one intragenic microsatellite (locus
CTG18.1) marker in the immunoglobulin transcription factor (ITF2) gene, a 5'
flanking AC repeat of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 gene as well as two SNPs at
positions +52 and +1955 from transcription start site of BCL-2, showed no
significant association between neither genes and AITD. Our study is the first
replication of the 18q12-q21 chromosome region as a potential candidate to AITD
genetic susceptibility. The Akr family has shown evidence for linkage between
IDDM6 locus and AITD. Moreover, case-control study does not support the
involvement of ITF2 and BCL2 genes in AITD pathogenesis.

PMID: 16426239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 Apr;73(4):491-500.

Role of the basic helix-loop-helix protein ITF2 in the hormonal regulation of
Sertoli cell differentiation.

Muir T(1), Sadler-Riggleman I, Stevens JD, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4231, USA.

Sertoli cells are a post-mitotic terminally differentiated cell population that
forms the seminiferous tubules in the adult testis and provides the
microenvironment and structural support for developing germ cells. During
pubertal development, Sertoli cells are responsive to follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) to promote the expression of differentiated gene products. The
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and inhibitors of differentiation (Id)
transcription factors are involved in the differentiation of a variety of cell
lineages during development. Both bHLH and Id transcription factors have been
identified in Sertoli cells. A yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted using a rat 
Sertoli cell cDNA library to identify bHLH dimerization partners for the Id1
transcription factor. The ubiquitous bHLH protein ITF2 (i.e., E2-2) was
identified as one of the interacting partners. The current study investigates the
expression and function of ITF2 in Sertoli cells. ITF2 was found to be
ubiquitously expressed in all testicular cell types including germ cells,
peritubular myoid cells, and Sertoli cells. Stimulation of cultured Sertoli cells
with FSH or dibutryl cAMP resulted in a transient decrease in expression of ITF2 
mRNA levels followed by a rise in expression with FSH treatment. ITF2 expression 
was at its highest in mid-pubertal 20-day-old rat Sertoli cells. ITF2 was found
to directly bind to negative acting Id HLH proteins and positive acting bHLH
proteins such as scleraxis. Transient overexpression of ITF2 protein in cultured 
Sertoli cells stimulated transferrin promoter activity, which is a marker of
Sertoli cell differentiation. Co-transfections of ITF2 and Id proteins
sequestered the inhibitory effects of the Id family of proteins. Observations
suggest ITF2 can enhance FSH actions through suppressing the inhibitory actions
of the Id family of proteins and increasing the actions of stimulatory bHLH
proteins (i.e., scleraxis) in Sertoli cells.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16425294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dis Colon Rectum. 2006 Mar;49(3):399-406.

Accumulation profile of frameshift mutations during development and progression
of colorectal cancer from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer.

Yamaguchi T(1), Iijima T, Mori T, Takahashi K, Matsumoto H, Miyamoto H, Hishima
T, Miyaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Role and timing of frameshift mutations during carcinogenesis in
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer have not been examined. This study was 
designed to clarify the relationship between frameshift mutations and
clinicopathologic features in colorectal cancer from patients with hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
METHODS: Thirty-one colorectal cancers from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer at different clinicopathologic stages were analyzed for
frameshift mutation in 18 genes.
RESULTS: The frameshift mutations of the ACVR2 and PTHLH genes were found to have
an extremely high frequency (94-100 percent) in all pathologic stages, and
mutation of the MARCKS gene also was high (94 percent) in Dukes B and C cancers. 
These frequencies were higher than the frequency of TGFbetaRII gene inactivation 
(64-88 percent). Mutations of the hMSH3, TCF4, CASP5, RIZ, RAD50, and MBD4 genes 
were comparatively frequent (>35 percent) in all stages. Frequencies of
inactivation of the MARCKS, BAX, IGFIIR, and PTEN genes were significantly higher
in Dukes B and C cancers than in Dukes A cancer (P < 0.05). The number of
accumulated frameshift mutations was larger in Dukes B and C cancers (9.4) than
in Dukes A cancer (6.8) (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: The present data suggest that the disruption of the transforming
growth factor-beta super-family signaling pathway by the alteration of the ACVR2 
and/or TGFbetaRII genes and the disruption of antiproliferative function by the
PTHLH gene alteration contribute to the development of early colorectal cancer.
Moreover, the further accumulation of alterations in the MARCKS, BAX, IGFIIR, and
PTEN genes seem to be associated with progression from early to advanced
colorectal cancer from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16421660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nat Genet. 2006 Mar;38(3):320-3. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene confers risk of type 2
diabetes.

Grant SF(1), Thorleifsson G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Manolescu A, Sainz
J, Helgason A, Stefansson H, Emilsson V, Helgadottir A, Styrkarsdottir U,
Magnusson KP, Walters GB, Palsdottir E, Jonsdottir T, Gudmundsdottir T, Gylfason 
A, Saemundsdottir J, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP, Rader DJ, Bagger Y, Christiansen C, 
Gudnason V, Sigurdsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. struan.grant@decode.is

We have previously reported suggestive linkage of type 2 diabetes mellitus to
chromosome 10q. We genotyped 228 microsatellite markers in Icelandic individuals 
with type 2 diabetes and controls throughout a 10.5-Mb interval on 10q. A
microsatellite, DG10S478, within intron 3 of the transcription factor 7-like 2
gene (TCF7L2; formerly TCF4) was associated with type 2 diabetes (P = 2.1 x
10(-9)). This was replicated in a Danish cohort (P = 4.8 x 10(-3)) and in a US
cohort (P = 3.3 x 10(-9)). Compared with non-carriers, heterozygous and
homozygous carriers of the at-risk alleles (38% and 7% of the population,
respectively) have relative risks of 1.45 and 2.41. This corresponds to a
population attributable risk of 21%. The TCF7L2 gene product is a high mobility
group box-containing transcription factor previously implicated in blood glucose 
homeostasis. It is thought to act through regulation of proglucagon gene
expression in enteroendocrine cells via the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 16415884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell. 2006 Jan 13;124(1):47-59.

Genome-wide prediction of mammalian enhancers based on analysis of
transcription-factor binding affinity.

Hallikas O(1), Palin K, Sinjushina N, Rautiainen R, Partanen J, Ukkonen E,
Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cancer Biology Program, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jan 13;124(1):21-3.

Understanding the regulation of human gene expression requires knowledge of the
"second genetic code," which consists of the binding specificities of
transcription factors (TFs) and the combinatorial code by which TF binding sites 
are assembled to form tissue-specific enhancer elements. Using a novel
high-throughput method, we determined the DNA binding specificities of GLIs 1-3, 
Tcf4, and c-Ets1, which mediate transcriptional responses to the Hedgehog (Hh),
Wnt, and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways. To identify mammalian enhancer elements
regulated by these pathways on a genomic scale, we developed a computational
tool, enhancer element locator (EEL). We show that EEL can be used to identify Hh
and Wnt target genes and to predict activated TFs based on changes in gene
expression. Predictions validated in transgenic mouse embryos revealed the
presence of multiple tissue-specific enhancers in mouse c-Myc and N-Myc genes,
which has implications for organ-specific growth control and tumor-type
specificity of oncogenes.

PMID: 16413481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Oncogene. 2006 May 18;25(21):3065-70.

Interplay between VHL/HIF1alpha and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways during colorectal
tumorigenesis.

Giles RH(1), Lolkema MP, Snijckers CM, Belderbos M, van der Groep P, Mans DA, van
Beest M, van Noort M, Goldschmeding R, van Diest PJ, Clevers H, Voest EE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway initiates the transformation of
colorectal epithelial cells, although the transition to metastatic cancer
requires angiogenesis. We have investigated the expression of the von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor in the intestines from humans and mice.
Here, we show that VHL expression is regulated by TCF4 and is restricted to the
proliferative compartment at the bottom of intestinal crypts. Accordingly, VHL is
completely absent from the proliferative intestinal pockets of Tcf4(-/-)
perinatal mice. We observed complementary staining of the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) 1alpha to VHL in normal intestinal epithelium as well as in all
stages of colorectal cancer (CRC). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report demonstrating the presence of nuclear HIF1alpha in normoxic healthy 
adult tissue. Although we observed upregulated levels of VHL in very early CRC
lesions from sporadic and familial adenomatous polyposis patients - presumably
due to activated Wnt signaling - a clear reduction of VHL expression is observed 
in later stages of CRC progression, coinciding with stabilization of HIF1alpha.
As loss of VHL in later stages of CRC progression results in stabilization of
HIF, these data provide evidence that selection for VHL downregulation provides a
proangiogenic impulse for CRC progression.

PMID: 16407833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):318-28. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 have distinct roles in regulating Wnt target genes.

Standley HJ(1), Destrée O, Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology ML7007, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Wnt signaling pathways have essential roles in developing embryos and adult
tissue, and alterations in their function are implicated in many disease
processes including cancers. The major nuclear transducers of Wnt signals are the
Tcf/LEF family of transcription factors, which have binding sites for both the
transcriptional co-repressor groucho, and the co-activator beta-catenin. The
early Xenopus embryo expresses three maternally inherited Tcf/LEF mRNAs, and
their relative roles in regulating the expression of Wnt target genes are not
understood. We have addressed this by using antisense oligonucleotides to deplete
maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 mRNAs in oocytes. We find that XTcf1 represses
expression of Wnt target genes ventrally and laterally, and activates their
expression dorsally. Double depletions of XTcf1 and XTcf3 suggest that they act
cooperatively to repress Wnt target genes ventrally. In contrast, XTcf4 has no
repressive role but is required to activate expression of Xnr3 and chordin in
organizer cells at the gastrula stage. This work provides evidence for distinct
roles for XTcfs in regulating Wnt target gene expression.

PMID: 16325796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Dec;153(6):929-38.

Lithium stimulates proliferation in cultured thyrocytes by activating
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling.

Rao AS(1), Kremenevskaja N, Resch J, Brabant G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medical School
Hannover, Carl Neuberg Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Lithium, clinically used in the treatment of bipolar disorders, is
well known to induce thyroid growth. However, the mechanism involved is only
incompletely characterized. Although it is conventionally believed that thyroid
proliferation depends on the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)/cAMP/cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) pathway, recent data indicate that
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling may be of critical importance. In other cell types
lithium activates canonical Wnt signalling by GSK-3beta inhibition, which in turn
stabilizes cytosolic free beta-catenin. Here we investigated the potential
modulation of Wnt/beta-catenin signalling under lithium treatment in primary and 
neoplastic human thyrocytes.
METHODS: Primary (S18) and neoplastic (NPA, FTC133) thyrocytes treated with and
without LiCl were analysed using Western blotting, immunoprecipitation,
reporter-gene assay, MTT proliferation assay and transfection studies.
RESULTS: LiCl dose-dependently inhibited GSK-3beta, stabilized free beta-catenin 
and inhibited beta-catenin degradation. Furthermore, LiCl altered the assembly of
adherens junction by upregulating the E-cad-herin repressor, Snail, and
downregulated E-cadherin expression. At a dose of 5 mM, LiCl significantly
increased the proliferative potency of thyrocytes, which appeared to be mediated 
by beta-catenin, since nuclear beta-catenin stimulated T-cell factor/lymphoid
enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)-mediated transcription and upregulated downstream
targets like cyclin D1. To characterize the specificity of
Wnt/beta-catenin-driven thyrocyte proliferation, we transfected primary
thyrocytes and FTC133 cells with dominant negative TCF4 to block Wnt-dependent
pathways or with dominant negative CREB to inhibit the TSH/cAMP cascade. In cells
transfected with dominant negative CREB lithium-stimulated proliferation was
unchanged whereas blocking Wnt/beta-catenin by dominant negative TCF4 reduced
proliferation by approx. 50%.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that Wnt/beta-catenin signalling is of major
importance in the control of lithium-dependent thyrocyte proliferation.

PMID: 16322400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Hum Pathol. 2005 Dec;36(12):1294-301. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Nuclear translocations of beta-catenin and TCF4 in gastric cancers correlate with
lymph node metastasis but probably not with CD44 expression.

Chen XY(1), Wang ZC, Li H, Cheng XX, Sun Y, Wang XW, Wu ML, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute and Liaoning Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, College of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027, PR China.

Interaction of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4 is the end point of canonical Wnt
signaling, which is believed to trigger the transcription of multiple
cancer-associated genes, including CD44. So far, the combined status of
beta-catenin and TCF4 and its relevance for lymph node metastasis and CD44
expression have not been well studied in gastric cancers (GCs). To address these 
issues, we examined 31 GCs, 17 premalignant tissues, 10 noncancerous gastric
mucosae, 17 regional lymph node metastases, and 4 human GC cell lines (MGC803,
MGC823, AGS, and HGC-27) using immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence
staining, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot
analysis. Frequent TCF4 up-regulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin
were found in both primary and metastatic tumors. Standard CD44 was detected in
all gastric tissue samples. The frequency of variant CD44 expression increased in
parallel with stepwise gastrocarcinogenesis and tumor spread, but the rates of
detection did not match that of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4, especially in the 
premalignant and noncancerous samples. The data from the 4 cell lines were in
accordance with the in vivo findings in terms of beta-catenin nuclear
translocation, TCF4 activation, and CD44 expression. Our results suggest an
established Wnt signaling pathway in most GCs, a close correlation of
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated signaling with tumor dissemination, and the
unlikelihood of a direct effect of activated Wnt signaling on CD44 expression.
The influence of beta-catenin-TCF4 interaction on alternative CD44 splicing was
not established. These 3 alterations may be regarded as unfavorable features of
GC.

PMID: 16311123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1401-11. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Presenilin-1 interacts with plakoglobin and enhances plakoglobin-Tcf-4
association. Implications for the regulation of beta-catenin/Tcf-4-dependent
transcription.

Raurell I(1), Castaño J, Francí C, García de Herreros A, Duñach M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biofísica, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat 
de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Spain.

Alzheimer disease-linked Presenilin-1 (PS1) is a negative modulator of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity. However, the mechanism underlying this effect is not
well understood. We show here that the effects of PS1 on the activity of this
complex in epithelial cells are independent of its gamma-secretase activity and
its interaction with beta-catenin. As presented in this report PS1 also binds
plakoglobin with similar affinity as beta-catenin, although this interaction does
not involve equivalent residues in the two catenins. Moreover, PS1 association
with plakoglobin enhances the interaction of this molecule with Tcf-4 and
prevents its binding to DNA. These effects were observed with the unprocessed
form of PS1, which has higher affinity for plakoglobin and beta-catenin than
processed PS1. These results provide a new explanation for the effects of PS1 on 
gene transcription mediated by beta-catenin in epithelial cells.

PMID: 16306047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell Cycle. 2005 Dec;4(12):1808-16. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Caveolin-1-deficient mice have an increased mammary stem cell population with
upregulation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Sotgia F(1), Williams TM, Cohen AW, Minetti C, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology & Medicine, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Here, we show that a caveolin-1 (Cav-1) deficiency leads to an amplification of
the adult mammary stem cell population, both in vivo and in vitro. First, the
expression of two stem cell markers, Sca-1 and Keratin 6, is dramatically
increased in the hyperplastic mammary ducts of Cav-1 deficient mice, suggesting
that loss of Cav-1 induces the accumulation of a progenitor cell population in
the mammary gland. To independently validate these results, we reconstituted
mammary acini formation in vitro via a 3D Matrigel assay system--using primary
cultures of mammary epithelial cells derived from WT and Cav-1 deficient mice. We
show that Cav-1 null 3D epithelial structures display an intense increase in the 
expression of three stem cell markers, i.e., Sca-1, keratin 6 and keratin 5.
Overall, we observed a 2-to-3 fold increase in the number of Cav-1 KO acini that 
are positive for a given stem cell marker. Also, we show that such amplification 
of progenitor cells has functional consequences, as demonstrated by the abnormal 
presence of myoepithelial cells in the hyperplastic lesions of Cav-1 deficient
mammary glands. Finally, we provide evidence that hyper-activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may constitute one of the down-stream mechanisms
leading to mammary stem cell accumulation. The longevity and slow-dividing
properties of mammary stem cells facilitates the accumulation of genetic
alterations, and renders these progenitor cells the likely precursors of
malignant derivatives. As such, we propose that loss of Cav-1 induces the
accumulation of mammary stem cells, and that this event may be an initiating
factor during mammary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16294019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Feb;69(2):520-31. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Positive inter-regulation between beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 signaling and
endothelin-1 signaling potentiates proliferation and survival of prostate cancer 
cells.

Sun P(1), Xiong H, Kim TH, Ren B, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Jul;70(1):435.

Both malignant and normal prostate epithelial cells produce endothelin-1 (ET-1), 
a critical factor in prostate cancer (CaP) progression. beta-Catenin (beta-cat), 
a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway, is also implicated in CaP
progression via beta-cat/T cell factor (Tcf) signaling. We recently demonstrated 
that beta-cat/Tcf-4 regulates transcription of ET-1 in colon cancer cells. In the
present study, we found that Tcf-4 specifically bound to and activated the ET-1
promoter in vivo in human CaP cells and mouse prostate tissue. Expression of ET-1
in DU145 CaP cells was down-regulated by knocking down endogenous beta-cat or
Tcf-4. Ectopic activation of beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling significantly elevated
expression of ET-1 in LNCaP cells. In addition, genetic ablation of beta-cat
significantly inhibited transcription of ET-1 in primary prostate epithelial
cells. Meanwhile, exogenous ET-1 enhanced beta-cat/Tcf signaling and ET-1
expression in DU145 cells, which was blocked by both selective
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (LY294002) and endothelin-A
receptor antagonist cyclo(L-Leu-D-Trp-D-Asp-L-Pro-D-Val) (BQ123). Furthermore,
knockdown of either beta-cat or Tcf-4 substantially reduced cell proliferation
and potentiated paclitaxel-induced apoptosis in DU145 cells, which largely were
rescued by treatment with exogenous ET-1. Together, our results suggest that
beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling transcriptionally activates ET-1 in CaP cells;
meanwhile, ET-1 enhances beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling and in turn further increases
ET-1 expression in a PI3K-dependent manner. The positive inter-regulation between
beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling and ET-1 signaling potentiates proliferation and
survival of CaP cells, thereby representing a novel mechanism that contributes to
CaP progression.

PMID: 16291872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Int J Oncol. 2005 Dec;27(6):1483-7.

Identification of SP5 as a downstream gene of the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway and
its enhanced expression in human colon cancer.

Takahashi M(1), Nakamura Y, Obama K, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Mutations in APC, CTNNB1, AXIN1 or AXIN2 cause impairment in the beta-catenin
degradation pathway and result in accumulation of beta-catenin in a wide range of
human cancers. Accumulated beta-catenin then associates with Tcf/LEF
transcription factors and transactivates their target genes. To uncover in detail
the role of accumulated beta-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, we searched
for genes involved in the beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway by cDNA microarray. 
We identified and characterized a human gene, SP5, that was down-regulated after 
depletion of beta-catenin by transduction of wild-type APC into SW480 cells. SP5 
is a member of the Sp transcription factor family, which binds to the GC box or
closely related sequences in promoters of many genes and control their
expression. Reporter assays and an electromobility-shift assay revealed a DNA
fragment between -285 and -279 in the 5' flanking region of this gene to be a
target of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. Our results indicate that SP5 is a novel
direct down-stream target in the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 16273202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Mar;27(3):454-64. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

Reduced expression of EphB2 that parallels invasion and metastasis in colorectal 
tumours.

Guo DL(1), Zhang J, Yuen ST, Tsui WY, Chan AS, Ho C, Ji J, Leung SY, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

EphB2, a receptor tyrosine kinase regulated by the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex, is 
expressed in the proliferative compartment of mouse intestine and regulates
bidirectional migration of intestinal precursor cells in the crypt-villus axis
through repulsive interaction with Ephrin-B ligands. Recently, it has been shown 
that reduction of EphB activity accelerates colon tumour progression in the
Apc(Min/+) mice. In this study, we examined the expression of EphB2 in normal
colon, adenomas, primary colorectal cancers (CRCs), lymph node metastases and
liver metastases using immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. In addition,
EphB2 was overexpressed in SW480 colon cancer cells to study its effect in vitro.
We found that EphB2 was expressed in 100% of normal colon crypt base cells, 78%
of adenomas, 55.4% of primary CRCs, 37.8% of lymph node metastases and 32.9% of
liver metastases (all differences were statistically significant at P < 0.001
compared with primary CRCs). Patients with CRCs that lose EphB2 expression had
more advanced tumour stage (P = 0.005), poor differentiation (P < 0.001), poor
overall survival (P = 0.005) and disease-free survival (P = 0.001), with the
latter being independent of tumour stage. In vitro studies showed that
overexpression of EphB2 inhibited colon cancer cell growth in colony formation
assay and activation of EphB2 receptor inhibited colon cancer cell adhesion and
migration. Our data demonstrated a progressive loss of EphB2 expression in each
critical step of colon carcinogenesis, including the onset of invasion,
dedifferentiation and metastasis which are paralleled by adverse patient outcome.
EphB2 may achieve its tumour suppressor function through regulation of cell
survival, adhesion and migration.

PMID: 16272170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Nov;20(11):1951-9. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

Missense mutations in LRP5 are not a common cause of idiopathic osteoporosis in
adult men.

Crabbe P(1), Balemans W, Willaert A, van Pottelbergh I, Cleiren E, Coucke PJ, Ai 
M, Goemaere S, van Hul W, de Paepe A, Kaufman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Patricia.Crabbe@UGent.be

We studied whether the LRP5 gene contributes to the clinical phenotype of IO in
men. Mutation analysis in 66 IO men revealed a range of sequence variants, of
which two missense variants were shown to be of functional
relevance.INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the LDL receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)
gene have been associated with extreme bone phenotypes, which makes LRP5 a
plausible candidate gene for idiopathic osteoporosis (IO).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 66 men with IO, all 23 exons and exon-intron boundaries
of the LRP5 gene were screened for mutations, and functional analyses were
performed for those that were putatively involved in the phenotype.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis in the IO probands revealed five missense mutations,
of which 1067C>T (S356L), 1364C>T (S455L), and 4609G>A (A1537T) were of potential
functional significance because they were located in highly conserved regions of 
LRP5 and not found in a control panel. Segregation analysis in the respective
families could not exclude their possible causality for IO. Furthermore,
functional analyses clearly showed an inhibitory effect of mutations 1067C>T and 
1364C>T on Wnt signal transduction. These effects are most likely caused by
impaired LRP5 synthesis in the case of 1067C>T and failure of protein trafficking
to the cell surface for 1364C>T.
CONCLUSIONS: For 2 of 66 IO probands, a mutation in the LRP5 gene with proven
functionality was found. The findings indicate that carrying an LRP5 mutation is 
a risk factor for IO, but that overall, IO in men is infrequently underlied by
such a mutation.

PMID: 16234968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Nov;16(5):959-63.

Comparative genomics on FGF16 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

We have previously reported comparative genomics analyses on FGF3, FGF4, FGF6,
FGF7, FGF8, FGF10, FGF11, FGF17, FGF18, FGF19, FGF20, FGF22 and FGF23 genes.
Here, we performed comparative genomics analyses on FGF1, FGF2, FGF5, FGF9,
FGF12, FGF13, FGF14, FGF16 and FGF21 genes, and further characterized the FGF16
gene. Chimpanzee FGF16, chicken fgf16, and zebrafish fgf16 genes were identified 
within NW_121938.1, NW_060344.1, and CR855117.3 genome sequences, respectively.
Chimpanzee FGF16 (207 aa), chicken fgf16 (207 aa), and zebrafish fgf16 (203 aa)
showed 100%, 89.9%, and 79.2% total amino-acid identity with human FGF16. Because
FGF16, FGF9, and FGF20 constitute FGF subfamily without N-terminal signal
peptide, we next searched for uncharacterized FGF9 or FGF20 orthologs. Zebrafish 
fgf9 gene was identified within BX927112.11 genome sequence, and chicken fgf20
gene within NW_060349.1 genome sequence. Although N-terminal part was divergent, 
middle and C-terminal parts were well conserved among vertebrate FGF16, FGF9 and 
FGF20 orthologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that zebrafish fgf9 and fgf20
were more related to each other than to their chicken or mammalian orthologs.
TCF/LEF binding site and TATA box were well conserved among the human FGF16, rat 
Fgf16, and mouse Fgf16 promoters. Because nuclear complex consisting of TCF/LEF
(TCF1, TCF3, TCF4 or LEF1), beta-catenin, PYGO (PYGO1 or PYGO2) and Legless (BCL9
or BCL9L) binds to the TCF/LEF-binding site to up-regulate WNT/beta-catenin
target genes, FGF16 gene was characterized as the evolutionarily conserved target
of the WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway, just like FGF18 and FGF20 genes. These
facts indicate that FGF16, FGF18 and FGF20 are pharmacogenomics targets in the
field of oncology and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 16211270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Endocrinology. 2006 Jan;147(1):141-54. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Testosterone inhibits adipogenic differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells: nuclear
translocation of androgen receptor complex with beta-catenin and T-cell factor 4 
may bypass canonical Wnt signaling to down-regulate adipogenic transcription
factors.

Singh R(1), Artaza JN, Taylor WE, Braga M, Yuan X, Gonzalez-Cadavid NF, Bhasin S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Charles R. Drew
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90059, USA.
rajansingh@mednet.ucla.edu

Testosterone supplementation in men decreases fat mass; however, the mechanisms
by which it inhibits fat mass are unknown. We hypothesized that testosterone
inhibits adipogenic differentiation of preadipocytes by activation of androgen
receptor (AR)/beta-catenin interaction and subsequent translocation of this
complex to the nucleus thereby bypassing canonical Wnt signaling. We tested this 
hypothesis in 3T3-L1 cells that differentiate to form fat cells in adipogenic
medium. We found that these cells express AR and that testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone dose-dependently inhibited adipogenic differentiation as
analyzed by Oil Red O staining and down-regulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-alpha and -delta and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma2
protein and mRNA. These inhibitory effects of androgens were partially blocked by
flutamide or bicalutamide. Androgen treatment was associated with nuclear
translocation of beta-catenin and AR. Immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated
association of beta-catenin with AR and T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) in the presence of
androgens. Transfection of TCF4 cDNA inhibited adipogenic differentiation,
whereas a dominant negative TCF4 cDNA construct induced adipogenesis and blocked 
testosterone's inhibitory effects. Our gene array analysis indicates that
testosterone treatment led to activation of some Wnt target genes. Expression of 
constitutively activated AR fused with VP-16 did not inhibit the expression of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha in the absence of androgens. Testosterone
and dihydrotestosterone inhibit adipocyte differentiation in vitro through an
AR-mediated nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and activation of downstream
Wnt signaling. These data provide evidence for a regulatory role for androgens in
inhibiting adipogenic differentiation and a mechanistic explanation consistent
with the observed reduction in fat mass in men treated with androgens.

PMCID: PMC4417624
PMID: 16210377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 2;280(48):39795-801. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

TIS7 regulation of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 target gene osteopontin (OPN) is
histone deacetylase-dependent.

Vietor I(1), Kurzbauer R, Brosch G, Huber LA.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter, Division of Cell Biology, Medical University Innsbruck,
Fritz-Pregl-Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced sequence 7 (TIS7) acts as a
transcriptional co-repressor interacting with SIN3, the histone
deacetylase-containing complex. The overexpression of TIS7 down-regulates
expression of a specific set of genes. Homozygous deletion of this gene in mice
delays injury-induced muscle regeneration and inhibits muscle satellite cell
differentiation and fusion of myoblasts in vitro. Osteopontin (OPN), a known
beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) downstream target gene, is up-regulated in
tumors and in cells with increased motility such as muscle cells. OPN promoter
sequence contains binding sites for Sp1, glucocorticoid receptor, E-box-binding
factors, octamer motif-binding protein, c-Myc, and other transcription factors.
Previously we have shown that TIS7 regulates the OPN expression through the
inhibition of the Sp1-activating effects. Here we show that TIS7 has the capacity
to inhibit OPN expression also through Lef-1, the second identified OPN
regulatory element. TIS7 has the capacity to down-regulate beta-catenin/Tcf-4
transcriptional activity. TIS7 homologous deletion in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
increased not only the TOPflash reporter gene transcriptional activity but also
the expression of c-Myc and OPN. Furthermore, we show that TIS7 overexpression
leads to the beta-catenin interaction with enzymatically active histone
deacetylases. We propose that TIS7 down-regulates the beta-catenin/Tcf-4
transcriptional activity via its interaction with histone deacetylase-containing 
complex thereby inhibiting the expression of beta-catenin downstream target genes
such as c-Myc and OPN. We hypothesize that TIS7 as a negative regulator of
transcriptional activity represses expression of OPN and beta-catenin/Tcf-4
target genes, which are involved in myogenesis, muscle maintenance, and
regeneration in a histone deacetylase dependent manner.

PMID: 16204248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):9063-72.

Phosphorylation of beta-catenin by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase stabilizes
beta-catenin through inhibition of its ubiquitination.

Hino S(1), Tanji C, Nakayama KI, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, Japan.

The mechanism of cross talk between the Wnt signaling and cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A [PKA]) pathways was studied.
Prostaglandin E(1) (PGE(1)), isoproterenol, and dibutyryl cAMP (Bt(2)cAMP), all
of which activate PKA, increased the cytoplasmic and nuclear beta-catenin protein
level, and these actions were suppressed by a PKA inhibitor and RNA interference 
for PKA. PGE(1) and Bt(2)cAMP also increased T-cell factor (Tcf)-dependent
transcription through beta-catenin. Bt(2)cAMP suppressed degradation of
beta-catenin at the protein level. Although PKA did not affect the formation of a
complex between glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta), beta-catenin, and
Axin, phosphorylation of beta-catenin by PKA inhibited ubiquitination of
beta-catenin in intact cells and in vitro. Ser675 was found to be a site for
phosphorylation by PKA, and substitution of this serine residue with alanine in
beta-catenin attenuated inhibition of the ubiquitination of beta-catenin by PKA, 
PKA-induced stabilization of beta-catenin, and PKA-dependent activation of Tcf.
These results indicate that PKA inhibits the ubiquitination of beta-catenin by
phosphorylating beta-catenin, thereby causing beta-catenin to accumulate and the 
Wnt signaling pathway to be activated.

PMCID: PMC1265785
PMID: 16199882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;7(10):932.

Tumorigenesis: TCF4 feeds c-Jun.

Raftopoulou M.

PMID: 16195746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37853-67. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Interaction of beta-catenin and TIF2/GRIP1 in transcriptional activation by the
androgen receptor.

Song LN(1), Gelmann EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20007-2197, USA.

The multifunctional oncoprotein beta-catenin interacts with the activation
function-2 domain of androgen receptor (AR) to stimulate androgen receptor
transcriptional activity, increase sensitivity, and broaden specificity of ligand
interactions. beta-Catenin interacts with androgen receptor in close proximity to
the binding groove for P160 coactivators such as transcriptional intermediary
factor-2 (TIF2)/glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein-1 (GRIP1).
beta-Catenin can also bind directly to TIF2/GRIP1. Both N- and C-terminal regions
of beta-catenin are needed for optimal interaction with TIF2/GRIP1. We show that 
distinct residues of beta-catenin are responsible for both binding and functional
interactions with androgen receptor and with TCF4, thus allowing the introduction
of missense mutations that selectively affect these interactions. beta-Catenin
and TIF2/GRIP1 are each able to mediate binding between the other and androgen
receptor in functional interactions that enhance ligand-dependent transcription. 
The data strongly imply that AR, beta-catenin, and TIF2/GRIP1 bind in a three-way
interaction that mediates transcription. Lastly, we observed that a beta-catenin 
C-terminal peptide containing 229 amino acids can bind TIF2/GRIP1 and AR but has 
a profound dominant inhibitory effect on ligand-dependent transcription. We
propose that beta-catenin may play an integral role in formation of the
androgen-receptor transcriptional complex.

PMID: 16141201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan;1762(1):73-9. Epub 2005 Aug 22.

The Wnt pathway is active in a small subset of pancreas cancer cell lines.

Pujal J(1), Capellá G, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Barcelona, Spain.

Activation of the Wnt pathway plays an important role in the development of a
wide variety of tumor types. Two genes involved in the activation of this pathway
in tumors are Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) and beta-catenin. Here, we analyze
the activity of the Wnt pathway in cultured cells derived from ductal and acinar 
pancreatic adenocarcinomas using a reporter assay dependent on the activity of
the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. We find that low-level Wnt activity can be
detected in several pancreas cancer lines. High levels of reporter activity were 
detected exclusively in RWP-1 cells. These cells display nuclear beta-catenin and
express a truncated APC protein resulting from a CAA>TAA mutation (Q1303X).
Expression of a dominant negative Tcf4 protein inhibited proliferation of RWP-1
cells but not in other lines lacking beta-catenin-dependent reporter activity,
supporting the functional relevance of this mutation. Our findings indicate that 
activation of the Wnt pathway may play a role in a small subset of ductal
pancreatic cancers. Alternatively, RWP-1 cells may have been derived from a tumor
arising in a structure adjacent to the pancreas such as the biliary tract or the 
Ampulla of Vater. Additional studies on the role of Wnt pathway components in the
development/progression of tumors of the peripancreatic region merit
consideration.

PMID: 16137866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8009-23.

PIAS1 activates the expression of smooth muscle cell differentiation marker genes
by interacting with serum response factor and class I basic helix-loop-helix
proteins.

Kawai-Kowase K(1), Kumar MS, Hoofnagle MH, Yoshida T, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, 415 Lane Road, MR5, Room 1220, P.O. Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Although a critical component of vascular disease is modulation of the
differentiated state of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), the mechanisms
governing SMC differentiation are relatively poorly understood. We have
previously shown that E-boxes and the ubiquitously expressed class I basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, including E2-2 and E12, are important in
regulation of the SMC differentiation marker gene, the SM alpha-actin gene. The
aim of the present study was to identify proteins that bind to class I bHLH
proteins in SMC and modulate transcriptional regulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes. Herein we report that members of the protein inhibitor of activated
STAT (PIAS) family interact with class I bHLH factors as well as serum response
factor (SRF). PIAS1 interacted with E2-2 and E12 based on yeast two-hybrid
screens, mammalian two-hybrid assays, and/or coimmunoprecipitation assays.
Overexpression of PIAS1 significantly activated the SM alpha-actin promoter and
mRNA expression, as well as SM myosin heavy chain and SM22alpha, whereas a small 
interfering RNA for PIAS1 decreased activity of these promoters, as well as
endogenous mRNA expression, and SRF binding to SM alpha-actin promoter within
intact chromatin in cultured SMC. Of significance, PIAS1 bound to SRF and
activated SM alpha-actin promoter expression in wild-type but not SRF(-/-)
embryonic stem cells. These results provide novel evidence that PIAS1 modulates
transcriptional activation of SMC marker genes through cooperative interactions
with both SRF and class I bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC1234309
PMID: 16135793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 14;336(1):142-9.

A negative regulatory element-dependent inhibitory role of ITF2B on IL-2 receptor
alpha gene.

Lu Y(1), Sheng DQ, Mo ZC, Li HF, Wu NH, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, China.

Despite the fact that the negative regulatory element (NRE) within the upstream
regulatory region of human IL-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) gene has been
identified two decades ago, mechanisms of the NRE function on the gene are
hitherto unknown. In this paper, we report for the first time that the
immunoglobulin transcription factor 2B (ITF2B) encoded by transcription factor 4 
(TCF4) gene is a NRE binding protein. The full-length TCF4 cDNA clone was
obtained from a HTLV-1 transformed human peripheral T cell MACHERMAKER cDNA
library with NRE as the bait in yeast one-hybrid system. The NRE binding ability 
of ITF2B was further confirmed in chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay.
Competitive RT-PCR-based promoter activity assay showed that over-expression of
ITF2B protein inhibited the expression of IL-2Ralpha gene in Jurkat cells in an
NRE-dependent manner. The function of ITF2B on the inhibition of both the
IL-2Ralpha and the 5'LTR activity of HIV-1 shed light on the essence of NRE
binding protein as a potential target for immune therapy and treatment in AIDS
patients.

PMID: 16126178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Anim Breed Genet. 2005 Aug;122(4):281-4.

An independent confirmation of a quantitative trait locus for milk yield and
composition traits on bovine chromosome 26.

Jiang Z(1), De S, Garcia MD, Griffin KB, Wu XL, Xiao Q, Michal JJ, Sharma BS,
Jansen GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-6351, USA. jiangz@wsu.edu

Several reports have demonstrated that bovine chromosome 26 (BTA26) harbours
significant or suggestive quantitative trait loci (QTL) for milk production and
composition traits in dairy cattle. Our previous study showed that a C/T
substitution in the bovine TCF7L2 gene on BTA26 was significantly linked to QTL
for protein yield (PY) in a Canadian dairy cattle population. Actually, this
polymorphism was one of the markers derived from a genome-wide screening of QTL
for milk PY using an amplified fragment length polymorphism technique combined
with a DNA pooling strategy. In the present study, 990 Holstein bulls with
complete genotype and phenotype data from 14 sire families were analysed to
confirm, if the QTL effects exist in other populations. Statistical analysis
revealed that this marker was significantly associated with PY, protein
percentage, milk yield and fat yield (FY) (p < 0.001) in the US Holstein
population. These results indicate that this QTL region has a pleiotrophic
effecton different milk traits and is portable in different populations.

PMID: 16060496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mutat Res. 2005 Dec 11;591(1-2):161-72. Epub 2005 Jul 27.

Lysosomal trafficking of beta-catenin induced by the tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate.

Dashwood WM(1), Carter O, Al-Fageeh M, Li Q, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, 571 Weniger Hall, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331-6512, USA.

beta-Catenin is a cadherin-binding protein involved in cell-cell adhesion, which 
also functions as a transcriptional activator when complexed in the nucleus with 
members of the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family of
proteins. There is considerable interest in mechanisms that down-regulate
beta-catenin, since this provides an avenue for the prevention of colorectal and 
other cancers in which beta-catenin is frequently over-expressed. We show here
that physiologically relevant concentrations of the tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) inhibited beta-catenin/TCF-dependent reporter
activity in human embryonic kidney 293 cells transfected with wild type or mutant
beta-catenins, and there was a corresponding decrease in beta-catenin protein
levels in the nuclear, cytosolic and membrane-associated fractions. However,
beta-catenin accumulated as punctate aggregates in response to EGCG treatment,
including in human colon cancer cells over-expressing beta-catenin endogenously. 
Confocal microscopy studies revealed that the aggregated beta-catenin in HEK293
cells was extra-nuclear and co-localized with lysosomes, suggesting that EGCG
activated a pathway involving lysosomal trafficking of beta-catenin. Lysosomal
inhibitors leupeptin and transepoxysuccinyl-l-leucylamido(4-guanido)butane
produced an increase in beta-catenin protein in total cell lysates, without a
concomitant increase in beta-catenin transcriptional activity. These data provide
the first evidence that EGCG facilitates the trafficking of beta-catenin into
lysosomes, presumably as a mechanism for sequestering beta-catenin and
circumventing further nuclear transport and activation of beta-catenin/TCF/LEF
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2276571
PMID: 16054165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 6;24(44):6637-45.

Overexpression of EB1 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) may
promote cellular growth by activating beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

Wang Y(1), Zhou X, Zhu H, Liu S, Zhou C, Zhang G, Xue L, Lu N, Quan L, Bai J,
Zhan Q, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute & Cancer Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has a multifactorial etiology involving
environmental and/or genetic factors. End-binding protein 1 (EB1), which was
cloned as an interacting partner of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor
suppressor protein, was previously found overexpressed in ESCC. However, the
precise role of EB1 in the development of this malignancy has not yet been
elucidated. In this study, we analysed freshly resected ESCC specimens and
demonstrated that EB1 was overexpressed in approximately 63% of tumor samples
compared to matched normal tissue. We report that overexpression of EB1 in the
ESCC line EC9706 significantly promotes cell growth, whereas suppression of EB1
protein level by RNA interference significantly inhibited growth of esophageal
tumor cells. In addition, EB1 overexpression induced nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin and promoted the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/T-cell
factor (TCF). These effects were partially or completely abolished by
coexpression of APC or DeltaN TCF4, respectively. Also, we found that EB1
affected the interaction between beta-catenin and APC. Furthermore, EB1
overexpression was correlated with cytoplasmic/nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin in primary human ESCC. Taken together, these results support the
novel hypothesis that EB1 overexpression may play a role in the development of
ESCC by affecting APC function and activating the beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

PMID: 16007168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nature. 2005 Sep 8;437(7056):281-5. Epub 2005 Jul 10.

Interaction of phosphorylated c-Jun with TCF4 regulates intestinal cancer
development.

Nateri AS(1), Spencer-Dene B, Behrens A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, CR UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn 
Fields Laboratories, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

The proto-oncoprotein c-Jun is a component of the AP-1 transcription factor, the 
activity of which is augmented in many tumour types. An important mechanism in
the stimulation of AP-1 function is amino-terminal phosphorylation of c-Jun by
the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs). Phosphorylated c-Jun is biologically more
active, partially because it acquires the ability to interact with binding
partners. Here we show that phosphorylated c-Jun interacts with the HMG-box
transcription factor TCF4 to form a ternary complex containing c-Jun, TCF4 and
beta-catenin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed JNK-dependent
c-Jun-TCF4 interaction on the c-jun promoter, and c-Jun and TCF4 cooperatively
activated the c-jun promoter in reporter assays in a beta-catenin-dependent
manner. In the Apc(Min) mouse model of intestinal cancer, genetic abrogation of
c-Jun N-terminal phosphorylation or gut-specific conditional c-jun inactivation
reduced tumour number and size and prolonged lifespan. Therefore, the
phosphorylation-dependent interaction between c-Jun and TCF4 regulates intestinal
tumorigenesis by integrating JNK and APC/beta-catenin, two distinct pathways
activated by WNT signalling.

PMID: 16007074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jan 1;118(1):35-42.

Transactivation of MCP-1/CCL2 by beta-catenin/TCF-4 in human breast cancer cells.

Mestdagt M(1), Polette M, Buttice G, Noël A, Ueda A, Foidart JM, Gilles C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental and Tumour Biology, University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium.

The loss of E-cadherin expression and the translocation of beta-catenin to the
nucleus are frequently associated with the metastatic conversion of epithelial
cells. In the nucleus, beta-catenin binds to the TCF/LEF-1 (T-cell factor/
lymphoid enhancer factor) transcription factor family resulting in the activation
of several genes, some of them having important implications in tumour
progression. In our study, we investigated the potential regulation of monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) expression by the beta-catenin/TCF pathway.
This CC-chemokine has been implicated in tumour progression events such as
angiogenesis or tumour associated macrophage (TAM) infiltration. We thus
demonstrated that MCP-1 expression correlates with the reorganization of the
E-cadherin/beta-catenin complexes. Indeed, MCP-1 was expressed by invasive breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, BT549 and Hs578T), which do not express E-cadherin but 
was not produced by noninvasive breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and T47D)
expressing high level of E-cadherin. In addition, the MCP-1 promoter was
activated in BT549 breast cancer cells transfected with beta-catenin and TCF-4
cDNAs. The MCP-1 mRNA level was similarly upregulated. Moreover, we showed that
MCP-1 mRNA was downregulated after transfection with a siRNA against beta-catenin
in both BT549 and Hs578T cells. Our results therefore identify MCP-1 as a target 
of the beta-catenin/TCF/LEF pathway in breast tumour cells, a regulation which
could play a key role in breast tumour progression.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2965755
PMID: 16003740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Placenta. 2005 Aug;26(7):527-39.

Tissue-specific and ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors in
human placental trophoblasts.

Meinhardt G(1), Husslein P, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna, AKH,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Tissue-specific class B basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors,
dimerising with ubiquitously produced class A bHLH proteins, play a major role in
murine trophoblast development. Here, we investigated expression patterns of
class A and B bHLH factors in the human placenta and different trophoblast
culture systems. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and RNase protection assay revealed
expression of the tissue-restricted factors Hash-2, I-mfa and Stra13 in placentae
of early and late pregnancy, in purified villous trophoblasts as well as in
invasive trophoblasts isolated from first trimester villous explant cultures.
Accordingly, RNA in situ hybridisation localised Hash-2, I-mfa and Stra13 to the 
trophoblast epithelium, cell columns and extravillous trophoblasts invading
maternal decidua. Villous stromal cells in situ and cultivated placental
fibroblasts also produced I-mfa and Stra13 but failed to express Hash-2. The
widely expressed class A proteins, E12/E47 were absent from all placental cell
types while ITF-2 was restricted to placental stromal cells of early and late
gestation. In contrast, HEB was identified in all trophoblast cell types using
RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. The negative HLH-regulators
Id-1 and Id-2 lacking the DNA-binding domain, were detected in villous stromal
cells and different cytotrophoblast subtypes but were absent from the syncytium. 
The data suggest that a complex interplay of activators (Hash-2, HEB) and
repressors (Stra13, I-mfa) could be involved in extravillous trophoblast
differentiation whereas downregulation of Id proteins could play a role in
syncytialisation.

PMID: 15993702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nature. 2005 Jun 23;435(7045):1126-30.

EphB receptor activity suppresses colorectal cancer progression.

Batlle E(1), Bacani J, Begthel H, Jonkheer S, Gregorieff A, van de Born M, Malats
N, Sancho E, Boon E, Pawson T, Gallinger S, Pals S, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Center for Biomedical Genetics, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2005 Aug 11;436(7052):881. Jonkeer, Suzanne [corrected to Jonkheer,
Suzanne].

Most sporadic colorectal cancers are initiated by activating Wnt pathway
mutations, characterized by the stabilization of beta-catenin and constitutive
transcription by the beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) complex. EphB guidance 
receptors are Tcf4 target genes that control intestinal epithelial architecture
through repulsive interactions with Ephrin-B ligands. Here we show that, although
Wnt signalling remains constitutively active, most human colorectal cancers lose 
expression of EphB at the adenoma-carcinoma transition. Loss of EphB expression
strongly correlates with degree of malignancy. Furthermore, reduction of EphB
activity accelerates tumorigenesis in the colon and rectum of Apc(Min/+) mice,
and results in the formation of aggressive adenocarcinomas. Our data demonstrate 
that loss of EphB expression represents a critical step in colorectal cancer
progression.

PMID: 15973414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Am J Pathol. 2005 Jul;167(1):233-42.

The loss of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPase 3 expression is 
an early event during the multistep process of colon carcinogenesis.

Brouland JP(1), Gélébart P, Kovàcs T, Enouf J, Grossmann J, Papp B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris,
France.

Calcium accumulation in the endoplasmic reticulum is accomplished by
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPases (SERCA enzymes). To better 
characterize the role of SERCA3 in colon carcinogenesis, its expression has been 
investigated in colonic epithelium, benign lesions, adenomas, and
adenocarcinomas. In addition, the regulation of SERCA3 expression was analyzed in
the context of the adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4)
pathway and of specificity protein 1 (Sp1)-like factor-dependent transcription.
We report that SERCA3 expression increased along the crypts as cells
differentiated in normal colonic mucosa and in hyperplastic polyps, was
moderately and heterogeneously expressed in colonic adenomas with expression
levels inversely correlated with the degree of dysplasia, was barely detectable
in well and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas, and was absent in poorly
differentiated tumors. Inhibition of Sp1-like factor-dependent transcription
blocked SERCA3 expression during cell differentiation, and SERCA3 expression was 
induced by the expression of dominant-negative TCF4 in colon cancer cells. These 
data link SERCA3 expression to the state of differentiation of colonic epithelial
cells, and relate SERCA3 expression, already decreased in adenomas, to enhanced
adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent signaling and deficient
Sp1-like factor-dependent transcription. In conclusion, intracellular calcium
homeostasis becomes progressively anomalous during colon carcinogenesis as
reflected by deficient SERCA3 expression.

PMCID: PMC1603437
PMID: 15972967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Aug 1;95(5):1057-68.

Wnt-mediated regulation of chondrocyte maturation: modulation by TGF-beta.

Dong Y(1), Drissi H, Chen M, Chen D, Zuscik MJ, Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Wnt proteins are expressed during limb morphogenesis, yet their role and
mechanism of action remains unclear during long bone growth. Wnt expression,
effects and modulation of signaling events by BMP and transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) were evaluated in chick embryonic chondrocytes.
Chondrocyte cell cultures underwent spontaneous maturation with increased
expression of colX and this was associated with an increase in the expression of 
multiple Wnts, including Wnt 4, 5a, 8c, and 9a. Both parathyroid hormone related 
peptide (PTHrP) and TGF-beta inhibited colX, but had disparate effects on Wnt
expression. While TGF-beta strongly inhibited all Wnts, PTHrP did not inhibit
either Wnt8c or Wnt9a and had lesser effects on the expression of the other Wnts.
BMP-2 induced colX expression, and also markedly increased Wnt8c expression.
Overexpression of beta-catenin and/or T cell factor (TCF)-4 also induced the type
X collagen promoter. Overexpression of Wnt8c induced maturation, as did
overexpression of beta-catenin. The Wnt8c/beta-catenin maturational effects were 
enhanced by BMP-2 and inhibited by TGF-beta. TGF-beta also inhibited activation
of the Topflash reporter by beta-catenin, suggesting a direct inhibitory effect
since the Topflash reporter contains only beta-catenin binding sequences. In turn
beta-catenin inhibited activation of the p3TP-Luc reporter by TGF-beta, although 
the effect was partial. Thus, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is a critical regulator 
of the rate of chondrocyte differentiation. Moreover, this pathway is modulated
by members of the TGF-beta family and demonstrates the highly integrated nature
of signals controlling endochondral ossification.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2649667
PMID: 15962307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;11(12):4580-8.

Activation of p53-dependent apoptosis by acute ablation of glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta in colorectal cancer cells.

Ghosh JC(1), Altieri DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

PURPOSE: The restoration of checkpoint mechanisms may provide a rational
anticancer approach, but the molecular circuitries of how this can be achieved
therapeutically are poorly understood. A pivotal signaling network in colorectal 
cancer cells involves glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta), a
multifunctional kinase whose role in tumor cell survival is not defined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used molecular, genetic, and pharmacologic antagonists of
GSK3beta in p53+/+ or p53-/- colorectal cancer cells. We monitored kinase
activity in immunoprecipitation, protein expression by immunoblotting, and cell
death by multiparametric flow cytometry. A xenograft colorectal cancer model was 
used to study antitumor activity in vivo.
RESULTS: Treatment of p53+/+ colorectal cancer cells with pharmacologic
inhibitors of GSK3beta resulted in sustained elevation of p53, with up-regulation
of p21(Waf1/Cip1) and loss of survivin levels. Molecular targeting of GSK3beta by
overexpression of a GSK3beta dominant-negative mutant, or acute-silencing of
GSK3beta by RNA interference, reproduced the induction of transcriptionally
active p53 in colorectal cancer cells. This pathway was recapitulated by
deregulated Wnt/T-cell factor signaling, with elevation of the tumor suppressor
p14ARF, and reduced expression of the p53 antagonist, MDM2. Rather than cell
cycle arrest, GSK3beta blockade resulted in p53-dependent apoptosis, which was
contributed by acute loss of survivin and inhibition of colorectal cancer growth 
in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute ablation of GSK3beta in colorectal cancer cells activates
p53-dependent apoptosis and antagonizes tumor growth. This pathway may be
exploited for rational treatment of colorectal cancer patients retaining
wild-type p53.

PMID: 15958644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;11(12):4295-304.

Elevated expression of Wnt antagonists is a common event in hepatoblastomas.

Koch A(1), Waha A, Hartmann W, Hrychyk A, Schüller U, Waha A, Wharton KA Jr,
Fuchs SY, von Schweinitz D, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany.

Hepatoblastomas are the most frequent malignant liver tumors of childhood. A high
frequency of activating beta-catenin mutations in hepatoblastomas indicates that 
the Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in the development of this
embryonic neoplasm. Stabilization of beta-catenin leads to an increased formation
of nuclear beta-catenin-T-cell factor complexes and altered expression of
Wnt-inducible target genes. In this study, we analyzed the mRNA expression levels
of nine Wnt genes, including c-JUN, c-MYC, CYCLIN D1, FRA-1, NKD-1, ITF-2, MMP-7,
uPAR, and beta-TRCP, by competitive reverse transcription-PCR. We analyzed 23
hepatoblastoma biopsies for which matching liver tissue was available, 6
hepatoblastoma cell lines, and 3 human fetal liver samples. beta-TRCP and NKD-1
were highly expressed in all hepatoblastoma samples, independent of the
beta-catenin mutational status, in comparison with their nontumorous
counterparts. beta-TRCP mRNA overexpression was associated with accumulation of
intracytoplasmic and nuclear beta-TrCP protein. In human liver tumor cells
without beta-catenin mutations, Nkd-1 inhibited the Wnt-3a-activated
Tcf-responsive-luciferase reporter activity, whereas Nkd-1 in hepatoblastomas
with beta-catenin mutations had no antagonistic effect. Our data emphasize the
inhibitory effect of beta-TrCP and Nkd-1 on the Wnt signaling pathway in a manner
analogous to Conductin (AXIN2) and Dkk-1, inhibitors shown previously to be
up-regulated in hepatoblastomas. Our findings indicate that overexpression of the
Wnt antagonists Nkd-1 and beta-TrCP reveals an activation of the Wnt signaling
pathway as a common event in hepatoblastomas. We propose that Nkd-1 and beta-TrCP
may be used as possible diagnostic markers for the activated Wnt signaling
pathway in hepatoblastomas.

PMID: 15958610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Gastroenterology. 2005 Jun;128(7):1919-36.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 is a component of the oncogenic T-cell
factor-4/beta-catenin complex.

Idogawa M(1), Yamada T, Honda K, Sato S, Imai K, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: T-cell factor (TCF)-4 regulates a certain set of genes related
to growth and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. Aberrant
transactivation of these TCF-4-regulated genes by beta-catenin protein plays a
crucial role in early intestinal carcinogenesis, and the transcriptional
machinery of the TCF-4/beta-catenin complex is likely to contain targets for
molecular therapy. We explored the molecular composition of the
TCF-4/beta-catenin transcriptional complex by means of proteomics.
METHODS & RESULTS: A protein of approximately 112 kilodaltons was consistently
coimmunoprecipitated with FLAG-tagged TCF-4 transiently expressed in HEK293
cells, and the protein was identified by mass spectrometry as poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1). PARP-1 physically interacted with TCF-4 and augmented the 
transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. Knockdown of PARP-1
by RNA interference significantly suppressed both transcriptional activity and
proliferation by colorectal cancer cells. Auto-polyADP-ribosylation of the PARP-1
protein induced by DNA damage inhibited the functional interaction of PARP-1 with
TCF-4. PARP-1 was overexpressed in the intestinal adenomas of patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis and multiple intestinal polyposis mice. The
expression of PARP-1 was closely associated with the accumulation of beta-catenin
and with the undifferentiated status of intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified PARP-1 as a novel coactivator of the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. Although PARP-1 has been believed to play a
protective role against carcinogenesis, these expression patterns and functional 
properties of PARP-1 were highly suggestive of its participation in early
colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15940627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Gastroenterology. 2005 Jun;128(7):1907-18.

Oncogenic K-ras stimulates Wnt signaling in colon cancer through inhibition of
GSK-3beta.

Li J(1), Mizukami Y, Zhang X, Jo WS, Chung DC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Two key genetic events underlying the development of colon
cancer are activation of the K-ras and Wnt signaling pathways. We have previously
shown that these 2 pathways can cooperate to regulate vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) gene expression. The goal of this study was to define the molecular
basis for this interaction.
METHODS: The effects of K-ras(Val12) on VEGF and T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4) promoter
activity, nuclear levels of beta-catenin and beta-catenin/TCF-4 complexes,
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) phosphorylation, and GSK-3beta kinase 
activity were measured. LY294002 and PD98059 were used to define the role of
specific ras effector pathways.
RESULTS: Oncogenic K-ras up-regulated the activity of the VEGF promoter, and
selective mutagenesis of TCF-4 binding sites significantly blocked this
induction. K-ras(Val12) also induced the activity of a heterologous TCF-4
reporter construct in Caco-2 and HeLa cells. LY294002 and dominant negative
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase nearly completely blocked this induction.
K-ras(Val12) increased the stability of beta-catenin, the levels of nuclear
beta-catenin, and the formation of nuclear beta-catenin/TCF-4 complexes, and
these effects were also blocked by LY294002. Finally, K-ras(Val12) inhibited the 
kinase activity of total cellular GSK-3beta and GSK-3beta complexed with Axin.
This effect was not mediated through phosphorylation at serine 9 but did depend
on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a unique cooperative interaction between 2
critical oncogenic pathways in colorectal tumorigenesis and highlight the pivotal
role of GSK-3beta.

PMID: 15940626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jun 15;1735(1):30-40. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

Molecular and cellular effects of cis-9, trans-11-conjugated linoleic acid in
enterocytes: effects on proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression.

Lampen A(1), Leifheit M, Voss J, Nau H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Lebensmitteltoxikologie, Stiftung Tierärztliche Hochschule
Hannover, Germany. Alfonso.Lampen@tiho-hannover.de

It has been hypothesized that dietary conjugated linoleic acids (CLA) may inhibit
colon tumorigenesis. The aim of our study was to investigate the cellular and
molecular effects of cis-9 (9Z), trans-11 (11E)-CLA on the proliferation,
differentiation, interaction with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs), and expression of genes relevant in the APC-beta-catenin-TCF4 signalling
pathway in human HT-29 and Caco-2 colon cells. We found that 9Z,11E-CLA inhibited
the proliferation of HT-29 and Caco-2 cells. Trans-vaccenic acid (VA) showed no
antiproliferative effects at all. We determined that 9Z,11E-CLA induced cell
differentiation as measured by intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) enzyme
activity in Caco-2 cells, mRNA expression of IAP, and activation of a 5' flanking
region of IAP. The 9Z,11E-CLA activated human PPARdelta as measured in a reporter
gene assay. Treatment of HT29 cells in the poliferation phase with 9Z,11E-CLA
repressed mRNA-expression of proliferation genes such as c-myc, cyclin D1 and
c-jun in a concentration dependent manner. The promoter activities of c-myc and
AP1 were also inhibited after incubation with 9Z,11E-CLA. beta-Catenin mRNA and
protein expression was also repressed by the treatment with 9Z,11E-CLA. In
addition, the mRNA expression of PPARdelta was repressed by treatment of the
HT-29 cells with 9Z,11E-CLA. We conclude that 9Z,11E-CLA has an antiproliferative
effect at the cellular and molecular levels in human colon cells. The results
indicate that the preventive effects of CLA in the development of colon cancer
may be due to their downregulation of some target genes of the
APC-beta-catenin-TCF-4- and PPARdelta signalling pathway.

PMID: 15935729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Br J Cancer. 2005 Jun 20;92(12):2233-9.

HOXB13 is downregulated in colorectal cancer to confer TCF4-mediated
transactivation.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Zhang H, Lee SJ, Sheng H, Loehrer PJ, Gardner TA, Jeng MH, Kao
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Mutations in the Wnt signalling cascade are believed to cause aberrant
proliferation of colorectal cells through T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) and its
downstream growth-modulating factors. HOXB13 is exclusively expressed in prostate
and colorectum. In prostate cancers, HOXB13 negatively regulates
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transactivation and subsequently inhibits cell growth.
To study the role of HOXB13 in colorectal tumorigenesis, we evaluated the
expression of HOXB13 in 53 colorectal tumours originated from the distal left
colon to rectum with their matching normal tissues using quantitative RT-PCR
analysis. Expression of HOXB13 is either lost or diminished in 26 out of 42 valid
tumours (62%), while expression of TCF4 RNA is not correlated with HOXB13
expression. TCF4 promoter analysis showed that HOXB13 does not regulate TCF4 at
the transcriptional level. However, HOXB13 downregulated the expression of TCF4
and its target gene, c-myc, at the protein level and consequently inhibited
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated signalling. Functionally, forced expression of HOXB13
drove colorectal cancer (CRC) cells into growth suppression. This is the first
description of the downregulation of HOXB13 in CRC and its mechanism of action is
mediated through the regulation of TCF4 protein stability. Our results suggest
that loss of HOXB13 may be an important event for colorectal cell transformation,
considering that over 90% of colorectal tumours retain mutations in the
APC/beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2361828
PMID: 15928669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Apr;14(2):188-98.

Differential gene expression profiling of CD34+ CD133+ umbilical cord blood
hematopoietic stem progenitor cells.

He X(1), Gonzalez V, Tsang A, Thompson J, Tsang TC, Harris DT.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Group, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Umbilical cord blood (CB)-derived primitive hematopoietic stem progenitor cells
(HSPC) are a promising source for stem cell-based gene therapy due to the reduced
incidence and severity of graftversus- host disease (GVHD) after human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-disparate CB transplantation. Cell-surface markers such as CD34 and
CD133 have been used in combination to enrich primitive HSPC for research and
clinical applications. To understand the molecular characteristics of the CB
HSPC, we compared the global gene expression of freshly isolated CB CD34+ CD133+ 
cells with their progenies using a cDNA microarray containing 22,000 human cDNA
clones printed on a single chip. A total of 139 genes were differentially
expressed between CB HSPC and their progenies. These transcripts included a
number of known genes that might play roles in key functions of CB HSPC as well
as many genes of unknown function. Among the genes showing the greatest
differential expression levels in HSPC were: psoriasin 1, CRHBP, HDAC3, MLLT3,
HBEX2, SPINK2, c-kit, H2BFQ, CD133, HHEX, TCF4, ALDH1A1, and FHL1. These data
provide more information on the molecular phenotype of CB HSPC and may lead to
the identification of new genes critical to stem cell function.

PMID: 15910245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cancer Lett. 2006 Feb 20;233(1):165-71.

Genetic and cellular characterizations of human TCF4 with microsatellite
instability in colon cancer and leukemia cell lines.

Chang HR(1), Cheng TL, Liu TZ, Hu HS, Hsu LS, Tseng WC, Chen CH, Tsao DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung Hsien 840, 
Taiwan, ROC.

It has been reported that the mutational inactivation of the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) and beta-catenin genes play important roles in colorectal
carcinogenesis. However, alteration of the components in the Wnt signaling
pathway in colorectal cancer (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) has been
elucidated. To define the precise role of the Wnt signaling components in CRC and
leukemia cell lines with MSI, mutational analyses of the T cell factor 4 (TCF4)
genes were performed. Here we describe for the first time a TCF4 MSI+ phenotype
in leukemia cell lines except in colon cancer cell lines. Moreover, we found that
these cell lines exhibited deletion and insertion of 1-2A in an (A)9 repeat so as
to result in (A)7, (A)8, (A)10 and (A)11 repeat, respectively. To characterize
the cellular function of these special TCF4 mutant clones, transient transfection
and fluorescent microscopy were analyzed and the results revealed that the TCF4
frameshift gene products all localized in nuclei. Surprisingly, these TCF4
frameshift mutants lost transcriptional activity with beta-catenin and
down-regulate the target gene expression. These results delineate a novel role
for MSI+TCF4 in leukemia and colon cancer progression.

PMID: 15905022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biophys J. 2005 Aug;89(2):1214-26. Epub 2005 May 13.

Backbone dynamics of a symmetric calmodulin dimer in complex with the
calmodulin-binding domain of the basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor
SEF2-1/E2-2: a highly dynamic complex.

Larsson G(1), Schleucher J, Onions J, Hermann S, Grundström T, Wijmenga SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umeå, Sweden.

Calmodulin (CaM) interacts specifically as a dimer with some dimeric
basic-Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors via a novel high affinity
binding mode. Here we report a study of the backbone dynamics by (15)N-spin
relaxation on the CaM dimer in complex with a dimeric peptide that mimics the CaM
binding region of the bHLH transcription factor SEF2-1. The relaxation data were 
measured at multiple magnetic fields, and analyzed in a model-free manner using
in-house written software designed to detect nanosecond internal motion. Besides 
picosecond motions, all residues also experience internal motion with an
effective correlation time of approximately 2.5 ns with squared order parameter
(S(2)) of approximately 0.75. Hydrodynamic calculations suggest that this can be 
attributed to motions of the N- and C-terminal domains of the CaM dimer in the
complex. Moreover, residues with significant exchange broadening are found. They 
are clustered in the CaM:SEF2-1mp binding interface, the CaM:CaM dimer interface,
and in the flexible helix connecting the CaM N- and C-terminal domains, and have 
similar exchange times (approximately 50 micros), suggesting a cooperative
mechanism probably caused by protein:protein interactions. The dynamic features
presented here support the conclusion that the conformationally heterogeneous
bHLH mimicking peptide trapped inside the CaM dimer exchanges between different
binding sites on both nanosecond and microsecond timescales. Nature has thus
found a way to specifically recognize a relatively ill-fitting target. This novel
mode of target-specific binding, which neither belongs to lock-and-key nor
induced-fit binding, is characterized by dimerization and continuous exchange
between multiple flexible binding alternatives.

PMCID: PMC1366606
PMID: 15894636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. FEBS Lett. 2005 May 23;579(13):2965-71. Epub 2005 Apr 21.

The inhibitory mechanism of curcumin and its derivative against beta-catenin/Tcf 
signaling.

Park CH(1), Hahm ER, Park S, Kim HK, Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Seoul National University,
Korea.

We investigated the inhibitory mechanism of curcumin and its derivative (CHC007) 
against beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling in various cancer cell lines. 
Curcumin is known to inhibit beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity in HCT116 
cells but not in SW620 cells. To clarify the inhibitory effect of curcumin
against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling, we tested several cancer cell lines. In
addition, in order to verify the inhibitory mechanism, we performed reporter gene
assay, Western blot, immunoprecipitation, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Since inhibitors downregulated the transcriptional activity of
beta-catenin/Tcf in HEK293 cells transiently transfected with S33Y mutant
beta-catenin gene, whose product is not induced to be degraded by adenomatous
polyposis coli-Axin-glycogen synthase kinase 3beta complex, we concluded that the
inhibitory mechanism was related to beta-catenin itself or downstream components.
Western blot analysis suggested that no change in the amount of cytosolic and
membranous beta-catenin in a cell occurred; however, nuclear beta-catenin and
Tcf-4 proteins were markedly reduced by inhibitors and this lead to the
diminished association of beta-catenin with Tcf-4 and to the reduced binding to
the consensus DNA. In the present study, we demonstrate that curcumin and its
derivative are excellent inhibitors of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in all tested
cancer cell lines and the reduced beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity is
due to the decreased nuclear beta-catenin and Tcf-4.

PMID: 15893313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biochem J. 2005 Sep 1;390(Pt 2):493-9.

The human D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase gene is transcriptionally activated through
the beta-catenin-TCF4 pathway.

Ghiselli G(1), Agrawal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 1020
Locust Street, JAH 371, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
Giancarlo.Ghiselli@jefferson.edu

Heparan sulphate (HS) is a ubiquitous constituent of the extracellular matrix
that is required for the biological activity of circulating soluble and insoluble
extracellular ligands. GLCE (D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase), an enzyme responsible
for the epimerization of D-glucuronic acid into L-iduronic acid of HS, endows the
nascent polysaccharide chain with the ability to bind to growth factors and
cytokines. In order to examine the mechanism of regulation of GLCE expression,
the functional organization of the human GLCE gene promoter has been
investigated. Studies utilizing stepwise deleted and site-directed mutagenized
promoter constructs have shed light on the functional relevance of two cis-acting
binding elements for the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex (where TCF4 stands for T-cell 
factor 4) that are located in the enhancer region of the promoter. The ability of
the putative binding sequences to bind the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex has been
confirmed through electrophoretic mobility-shift and supershift analyses. We have
found that, in a set of human colon carcinoma cell lines, the expression of GLCE 
correlates with the degree of activation of the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation
complex. Furthermore, the ectopic expression of beta-catenin-TCF4 in cells that
constitutively express low levels of the transactivation complex produces a
significant increase of GLCE transcript level and, at the same time, enhances the
rate of D-glucuronic acid epimerization in HS. The data obtained are consistent
with the idea that the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation pathway plays a major
role in modulating GLCE expression, thus contributing to the regulation of HS
biosynthesis and its structural organization.

PMCID: PMC1198929
PMID: 15853773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(9):3506-18.

SUMO-1 modification of PIASy, an E3 ligase, is necessary for PIASy-dependent
activation of Tcf-4.

Ihara M(1), Yamamoto H, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

We have previously shown that modification of Tcf-4, a transcription factor in
the Wnt pathway, with SUMO by PIASy, a SUMO E3 ligase, enhances its
transcriptional activity. Since PIASy itself was also modified with SUMO-1, we
studied the role of sumoylation of PIASy in the regulation of Tcf-4. Lys(35) was 
found to be a sumoylation site of PIASy. PIASy(K35R), in which Lys(35) was
mutated to Arg, did not enhance sumoylation of Tcf-4, although this PIASy mutant 
did not lose the ligase activity of sumoylation for other proteins. Wild-type
PIASy and PIASy(K35R) showed a distinct distribution in the nucleus, although
both were colocalized with Tcf-4. Promyelocytic leukemia protein, which is
involved in transcriptional regulation, was associated with PIASy(K35R) more
frequently than wild-type PIASy in the nucleus. PIASy(K35R) could not stimulate
the transcriptional activity of Tcf-4 under the conditions in which wild-type
PIASy enhanced it. Conjugation of SUMO-1 to the amino terminus of PIASy(K35R)
neither enhanced sumoylation of Tcf-4 nor stimulated the transcriptional activity
of Tcf-4. These results suggest that sumoylation of Lys(35) in PIASy determines
the nuclear localization of PIASy and that it is necessary for PIASy-dependent
sumoylation and transcriptional activation of Tcf-4.

PMCID: PMC1084305
PMID: 15831457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Lab Invest. 2005 Jun;85(6):768-79.

Upregulation of TCF4 expression as a transcriptional target of beta-catenin/p300 
complexes during trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kitasato,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Nuclear stabilization of beta-catenin and its interaction with TCF/LEF factors
are key events in transduction of the Wnt/beta-catenin signal pathway. Our
previous study indicated that nuclear beta-catenin accumulation provides an
initial signal for trans-differentiation toward the squamoid phenotype of
endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells in a TCF4-dependent manner, which makes this 
a possible factor for a positive prognosis. However, little is known about
regulation of TCF4 expression in Em Cas. We show here that beta-catenin can
directly induce transcription from the TCF4 promoter, the effect being enhanced
by the p300 coactivator. In clinical cases, nuclear beta-catenin accumulation was
found to frequently overlap with TCF4 immunoreactivity in morules and surrounding
glandular carcinoma lesions, showing a significant positive correlation (r =
0.82, P < 0.0001), in contrast to areas of squamous metaplasia (SqM) within Em
Cas. In cases with coexistence of two squamoid features in trans-differentiated
areas, loss of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4 immunoreactivity was closely related
to change in the morphology from the morular to the SqM phenotype. The TCF4
promoter contains a single consensus TCF-binding site that is critical for
activation by beta-catenin. The p300 coactivator, in particular N-terminal
residues 1 to 670, appears sufficient to enhance beta-catenin-dependent
transcription, again with TCF4-dependence. These findings indicate that a
positive feedback loop of TCF4 expression mediated by beta-catenin/p300 may be
important for initial steps during trans-differentiation of Em Ca cells. In
addition, its downregulation is associated with induction of a
more-differentiated squamoid phenotype.

PMID: 15806138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Neoplasia. 2005 Feb;7(2):99-108.

Genetic and epigenetic changes of components affecting the WNT pathway in
colorectal carcinomas stratified by microsatellite instability.

Thorstensen L(1), Lind GE, Løvig T, Diep CB, Meling GI, Rognum TO, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

An unselected series of 310 colorectal carcinomas, stratified according to
microsatellite instability (MSI) and DNA ploidy, was examined for mutations
and/or promoter hypermethylation of five components of the WNT signaling cascade 
[APC, CTNNB1 (encoding beta-catenin), AXIN2, TCF4, and WISP3] and three genes
indirectly affecting this pathway [CDH1 (encoding E-cadherin), PTEN, and TP53].
APC and TP53 mutations were each present more often in microsatellite-stable
(MSS) tumors than in those with MSI (P < .001 for both). We confirmed that the
aneuploid MSS tumors frequently contained TP53 mutations (P < .001), whereas
tumors with APC mutations and/or promoter hypermethylation revealed no
associations to ploidy. Mutations in APC upstream of codons 1020 to 1169,
encoding the beta-catenin binding site, were found in 15/144 mutated tumors and
these patients seemed to have poor clinical outcome (P = .096). Frameshift
mutations in AXIN2, PTEN, TCF4, and WISP3 were found in 20%, 17%, 46%, and 28% of
the MSI tumors, respectively. More than half of the tumors with heterozygote
mutations in AXIN2 were concurrently mutated in APC. The present study showed
that more than 90% of all samples had alteration in one or more of the genes
investigated, adding further evidence to the vital importance of activated WNT
signaling in colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1501125
PMID: 15802015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Anat Sci Int. 2005 Mar;80(1):30-6.

Signaling cascade coordinating growth of dorsal and ventral tissues of the
vertebrate brain, with special reference to the involvement of Sonic Hedgehog
signaling.

Ishibashi M(1), Saitsu H, Komada M, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology and Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. ishibash@anat1.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The vertebrate brain is a complex and highly organized structure with numerous
neurons and glial cells. During development, undifferentiated progenitor cells
proliferate from neural stem/precursor cells and gradually restrict their fates
according to their environment. Differentiated cells are arranged precisely to
accomplish their function and to maintain integrity as a whole brain. In this
respect, cells must receive signals to know where and when they determine their
fates. Secreted and membrane molecules convey the information between cells. The 
secreted glycoprotein Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is one of such signaling molecules.
Sonic hedgehog is widely known to specify ventral neuronal types according to the
concentration of Shh, whereas differentiation of dorsal neurons is largely
independent of Shh. However, in the diencephalon and midbrain, dorsal parts are
also affected in Shh-mutant embryos. Detailed analysis demonstrated that Shh
signaling indirectly regulates the growth of the dorsal tissue in these regions. 
One of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) members, namely FGF15, has been
reported to be downstream to Shh signaling in the mouse embryonic brain.
Luciferase assays and transgenic analysis revealed that the Fgf15 gene is a
direct target of Shh. Downregulation of Tcf4 and upregulation of Bmp4 in Shh
mutants suggest that Wnt and BMP signals from the dorsal midline are also
involved in the dorsal brain phenotype. These data suggest the coordinating role 
of the Shh-FGF15-Wnt/BMP signaling cascade between the ventral and dorsal parts
of the brain.

PMID: 15794128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Am J Pathol. 2005 Apr;166(4):1239-46.

Inactivation of p21WAF1/cip1 enhances intestinal tumor formation in Muc2-/- mice.

Yang W(1), Velcich A, Lozonschi I, Liang J, Nicholas C, Zhuang M, Bancroft L,
Augenlicht LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein Cancer
Center, 111 East 210th St., Bronx, NY 10467, USA. wyang@montefiore.org

In the Apc1638(+/-) mouse model of intestinal tumorigenesis, targeted
inactivation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/cip1) is highly
effective in enhancing Apc-initiated tumor formation in the intestine. Because
p21(WAF1/cip1) plays a critical role in regulating intestinal cell proliferation,
maturation, and tumorigenesis, we examined whether its inactivation would enhance
tumor formation in a different mouse model of colon cancer. Therefore, we mated
p21(-/-) mice with mice carrying a genetic deficiency of the Muc2 gene, which
encodes the major gastrointestinal mucin. Muc2(-/-) mice develop tumors in the
small and large intestine and the rectum, but in contrast to tumors in
Apc1638(+/-) mice, this does not involve increased expression or nuclear
localization of beta-catenin. We found that inactivation of p21(WAF1/cip1)
significantly increased the frequency and size of intestinal tumors in Muc2
knockout mice and also led to development of more invasive adenocarcinomas. This 
enhanced tumorigenesis significantly decreased mouse life span. Further,
inactivation of p21(WAF1/cip1) increased cell proliferation, decreased apoptosis,
and decreased intestinal trefoil factor expression in the mucosa of both the
small and large intestine. Surprisingly, reduced expression of p27(kip1) was also
observed in the Muc2(-/-), p21(+/-), and p21(-/-) mice. In contrast, the
expression of c-myc was significantly elevated. Thus, p21 modulates the formation
of tumors whose initiation does (Apc) or does not (Muc2) involve altered
beta-catenin-Tcf4 signaling, but which may converge on common elements downstream
of this signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1602374
PMID: 15793302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;7(4):381-6. Epub 2005 Mar 20.

Wnt signalling induces maturation of Paneth cells in intestinal crypts.

van Es JH(1), Jay P, Gregorieff A, van Gijn ME, Jonkheer S, Hatzis P, Thiele A,
van den Born M, Begthel H, Brabletz T, Taketo MM, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signalling, which is transduced through beta-catenin/TCF4, maintains the
undifferentiated state of intestinal crypt progenitor cells. Mutational
activation of the pathway initiates the adenomacarcinoma sequence. Whereas all
other differentiated epithelial cells migrate from the crypt onto the villus,
Paneth cells home towards the source of Wnt signals--that is, the crypt bottom.
Here, we show that expression of a Paneth gene programme is critically dependent 
on TCF4 in embryonic intestine. Moreover, conditional deletion of the Wnt
receptor Frizzled-5 abrogates expression of these genes in Paneth cells in the
adult intestine. Conversely, adenomas in Apc-mutant mice and colorectal cancers
in humans inappropriately express these Paneth-cell genes. These observations
imply that Wnt signals in the crypt can separately drive a stem-cell/progenitor
gene programme and a Paneth-cell maturation programme. In intestinal cancer, both
gene programmes are activated simultaneously.

PMID: 15778706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Apr;42(4):213-21.

Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in mouse skin carcinogenesis.

Bhatia N(1), Spiegelman VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300
University Avenue B-25, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Although Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway has been shown to be an important
factor in the development of many malignancies including colorectal, ovarian,
prostate, and many other cancers, little is known about its role in non-melanoma 
skin cancers. Here, we report the first evidence that beta-catenin/Tcf signaling 
pathway is constitutively activated in non-melanocytic skin tumors induced by two
stage chemical carcinogenesis protocol. Mouse skin tumors showed cytoplasmic and 
nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, and upregulation of beta-catenin/Tcf target
genes (c-myc and c-jun). We found high levels of skin-expressed Wnt proteins (Wnt
3, 4, and 10b) in different parts of the tumors, likely representing key upstream
events in beta-catenin/Tcf activation during mouse skin carcinogenesis.
Inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling by ectopic expression of dominant
negative Tcf4 resulted in significant inhibition of growth in squamous cell
carcinoma cells. A role of the constitutive activation of beta-catenin/Tcf
signaling in skin carcinogenesis is discussed.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15765534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dev Dyn. 2005 May;233(1):233-9.

Expression pattern of zebrafish tcf7 suggests unexplored domains of
Wnt/beta-catenin activity.

Veien ES(1), Grierson MJ, Saund RS, Dorsky RI.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Tcf/Lef transcription factors play an important role in mediating canonical Wnt
signaling. When bound by beta-catenin, Tcf/Lef proteins either activate or
de-repress gene transcription. In zebrafish, four members have been identified:
Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf3b, and Tcf4. Here, we report the cloning and expression of the
tcf7 gene. Forms of Tcf7 expressed in the embryo contain two highly conserved
regions: an N-terminal beta-catenin binding domain and a C-terminal HMG domain.
Tcf7 lacks a putative Groucho corepressor binding site, suggesting that, like
Lef1, it functions as a transcriptional activator. We isolated three C-terminal
splice variants of tcf7 corresponding to human B, C, and D isoforms. tcf7
expression overlaps with lef1 expression maternally, in the tail bud, fin buds,
and paraxial mesoderm, and we expect that the two genes function redundantly in
those areas. tcf7 is also expressed in nonoverlapping areas such as the
prechordal mesoderm, dorsal retina, and median fin fold, suggesting unique
functions.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15765502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(1):33-41.

Loss of beta 1 integrin function results in upregulation of connexin expression
in embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.

Czyz J(1), Guan K, Zeng Q, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University,
Cracow, Poland.

We show that loss of beta1 integrin function affects connexin (Cx) expression in 
embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Both loss of beta1 integrin
function and inhibition of integrin clustering by RGD peptides in wild type ES
cells correlated with upregulated expression of gap junctional proteins in
ES-derived cardiomyocytes. The upregulation of connexin transcript levels in
beta1 integrin-deficient cells is paralleled by a higher fraction of cells
co-expressing Cx40 and Cx43. These observations demonstrate that the expression
of connexins in developing cardiomyocytes is correlated to integrin-dependent
mechanisms. Further, we found that upregulated cardiac connexin expression in
beta1 integrin-deficient cells is related to Rho- and Wnt-dependent pathways.
beta1 integrin-deficient cardiac cells displayed high levels of cytoplasmic
gamma- and beta-catenins throughout the differentiation period. The
administration of lithium, an activator of beta-catenin-dependent pathways,
resulted in up-regulated connexin mRNA levels in wild type cardiomyocytes at
intermediate, but not at early stages, indicating that the effects are restricted
to advanced stages of cardiac differentiation. On the other hand, inhibition of
Rho-dependent integrin signaling by treatment of cardiac cells with exoenzyme C3 
resulted in immediate up-regulation of cardiac connexin transcript levels at
early differentiation stages. Our data indicate that integrin function affects
connexin expression in cardiomyocytes via direct effects on RhoA-dependent
signaling mechanisms at early differentiation stages and of
beta-catenin/Wnt-dependent pathways at advanced stages.

PMID: 15744665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2005 Mar 18;44(13):1987-90.

A small-molecule agonist of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Liu J(1), Wu X, Mitchell B, Kintner C, Ding S, Schultz PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, SR202, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

PMID: 15724259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Psychiatr Genet. 2005 Mar;15(1):37-44.

Candidate psychiatric illness genes identified in patients with pericentric
inversions of chromosome 18.

Pickard BS(1), Malloy MP, Clark L, Lehellard S, Ewald HL, Mors O, Porteous DJ,
Blackwood DH, Muir WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular Medicine Centre, University of
Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK.
ben.pickard@ed.ac.uk

Both the long and short arms of chromosome 18 have been consistently identified
as potential locations for schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder
susceptibility genes. We previously described the identification of two
independent pericentric inversions of chromosome 18 [inv(18)(p11.31;q21.2) and
inv(18)(p11.31;q21.1)] occurring in two small families in which carriers have
been diagnosed with schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder, respectively.
Using fluorescence in situ hybridization on patient metaphase chromosomes we have
identified the locations of all four chromosome breakpoints in the inversion
carriers. Neither pericentric inversion results in a direct gene disruption.
However, each inversion breakpoint has the potential to perturb local gene
expression by position effect or by the separation of important regulatory
(enhancer) sequences from the core gene sequences. Five genes in the localities
of the breakpoints have been identified as good candidates for the genetic basis 
of psychiatric illness in these families; TTMA, a novel membrane spanning
protein; TCF4, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor; DLGAP1, an
interactor of the PSD-95 synaptic protein; and ARKL1 and ARKL2, novel members of 
the ubiquitin ligase gene family.

PMID: 15722956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Development. 2005 Mar;132(6):1443-51. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

Crypt-restricted proliferation and commitment to the Paneth cell lineage
following Apc loss in the mouse intestine.

Andreu P(1), Colnot S, Godard C, Gad S, Chafey P, Niwa-Kawakita M, Laurent-Puig
P, Kahn A, Robine S, Perret C, Romagnolo B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR8104, Université Paris V, 24 rue du Fb
St-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Loss of Apc appears to be one of the major events initiating colorectal cancer.
However, the first events responsible for this initiation process are not well
defined and the ways in which different epithelial cell types respond to Apc loss
are unknown. We used a conditional gene-ablation approach in transgenic mice
expressing tamoxifen-dependent Cre recombinase all along the crypt-villus axis to
analyze the immediate effects of Apc loss in the small intestinal epithelium,
both in the stem-cell compartment and in postmitotic epithelial cells. Within 4
days, Apc loss induced a dramatic enlargement of the crypt compartment associated
with intense cell proliferation, apoptosis and impairment of cell migration. This
result confirms the gatekeeper role of Apc in the intestinal epithelium in vivo. 
Although Apc deletion activated beta-catenin signaling in the villi, we observed 
neither proliferation nor morphological change in this compartment. This
highlights the dramatic difference in the responses of immature and
differentiated epithelial cells to aberrant beta-catenin signaling. These
distinct biological responses were confirmed by molecular analyses, revealing
that Myc and cyclin D1, two canonical beta-catenin target genes, were induced in 
distinct compartments. We also showed that Apc is a crucial determinant of cell
fate in the murine intestinal epithelium. Apc loss perturbs differentiation along
the enterocyte, goblet and enteroendocrine lineages, and promotes commitment to
the Paneth cell lineage through beta-catenin/Tcf4-mediated transcriptional
control of specific markers of Paneth cells, the cryptdin/defensin genes.

PMID: 15716339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Apr 14;21(2):144-51. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

Evolution of vertebrate E protein transcription factors: comparative analysis of 
the E protein gene family in Takifugu rubripes and humans.

Hikima J(1), Lennard ML, Wilson MR, Miller NW, Clem LW, Warr GW.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Sciences Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

E proteins are essential for B lymphocyte development and function, including
immunoglobulin (Ig) gene rearrangement and expression. Previous studies of B
cells in the channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) identified E protein homologs 
that are capable of binding the muE5 motif and driving a strong transcriptional
response. There are three E protein genes in mammals, HEB (TCF12), E2A (TCF3),
and E2-2 (TCF4). The major expressed E proteins found in catfish B cells are
homologs of HEB and of E2A. Here we sought to define the complete family of E
protein genes in a teleost fish, Takifugu rubripes, taking advantage of the
completed genome sequence. The catfish CFEB (HEB homolog) sequence identified
homologous E-protein-encoding sequences in five scaffolds in the Takifugu genome 
database. Detailed comparative analysis with the human genome revealed the
presence of five E protein homologs in Takifugu. Single genes orthologous to HEB 
and to E2-2 were identified. In contrast, two members of the E2A gene family were
identified in Takifugu; one of these shows the alternative processing of
transcripts that identifies it as the ortholog of the E12/E47-encoding mammalian 
E2A gene, whereas the second Takifugu E2A gene has no predicted alternative
splice products. A novel fifth E protein gene (EX) was identified in Takifugu.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed four E protein branches among vertebrates: EX,
E2A, HEB, and E2-2.

PMID: 15713784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;65(2):493-8.

Calcium sensing receptor in human colon carcinoma: interaction with Ca(2+) and
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3).

Chakrabarty S(1), Wang H, Canaff L, Hendy GN, Appelman H, Varani J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. schakrab@mdanderson.org

Recent studies show that the human parathyroid calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) is
expressed in human colon epithelium and functions to regulate epithelial
proliferation and differentiation. In this study, we show that the cells of the
colon crypt acquire CaSR expression as they differentiate and migrate towards the
apex of the crypt. CaSR expression was weak in colon carcinomas with a
more-differentiated histologic pattern, whereas CaSR expression was undetectable 
in less-differentiated tumors. We found that Ca(2+) and/or 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)
stimulated CaSR promoter activity and CaSR protein expression in the human colon 
carcinoma CBS cells, which possessed a functional CaSR. Both agents concomitantly
induced a series of changes in the CBS cells that influence proliferation and
differentiation, but cellular responses to the two agents were not identical.
Ca(2+) strongly induced E-cadherin expression and inhibited the expression of the
nuclear transcription factor, TCF4. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) was weaker in its effect on
E-cadherin and was not able to inhibit TCF4 expression. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) was as
strong or stronger than Ca(2+) in its induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors, P21 and p27. It is concluded that CaSR may function in the colon to
regulate epithelial differentiation and that loss of CaSR expression may be
associated with abnormal differentiation and/or malignant progression.
Extracellular Ca(2+) and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) are potential candidates involved in
regulating CaSR expression in the colon and the chemopreventive actions of Ca(2+)
and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in colon cancer may be mediated, in part, through the CaSR.

PMID: 15695391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 4;328(1):227-34.

Quercetin, a potent inhibitor against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 colon
cancer cells.

Park CH(1), Chang JY, Hahm ER, Park S, Kim HK, Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Dysregulation of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a central role in early events in
colorectal carcinogenesis. We examined the effect of quercetin, a famous
anti-tumor agent, against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 cells. Quercetin
inhibited the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/Tcf in SW480 and also in
HEK293 cells transiently transfected with constitutively active mutant
beta-catenin gene, whose product is not induced to be degraded by
APC-Axin-GSK3beta complex, so we concluded that its inhibitory mechanism was
related to beta-catenin itself or downstream components. To investigate the
precise inhibitory mechanism, we performed EMSA showing that binding of the Tcf
complexes to its specific DNA-binding sites was strongly suppressed by quercetin.
Immunoprecipitation analysis also showed that the binding of beta-catenin to
Tcf-4 was also disrupted by quercetin. Western blot analysis proved these
decreased bindings resulted from decreased level of beta-catenin and Tcf-4
product in nucleus caused by quercetin. Together, we suggest that quercetin is an
excellent inhibitor of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 cell lines, and the
reduced beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity is due to the decreased nuclear
beta-catenin and Tcf-4 proteins.

PMID: 15670774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Chin Med J (Engl). 2005 Jan 20;118(2):136-40.

Expression of T cell factor-4 in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Li CY(1), Wang Y, Cui ZS, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Devices and Supplies, Center of Medical Laboratory
Technology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: T cell factor-4 (TCF-4) plays an important role in development and
carcinogenesis. Recently, the role of TCF-4 has been described in colon cancer
and other cancers. However, whether TCF-4 plays a similar role in lung cancer is 
unknown. To answer this question, we studied the expression of TCF-4 protein and 
mRNA in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the relation of TCF-4 expression
pattern to histological type and cell differentiation.
METHODS: Tissue samples from sixty cases of pathologically diagnosed NSCLC and
eight normal tissue samples were obtained between September 2001 and March 2003. 
Immunohistochemistry was used to investigate the distribution of TCF-4 protein.
The staining patterns of the tumors were divided into 4 categories: nuclear
staining alone or nuclear staining greater than cytoplasmic staining; cytoplasmic
staining or cytoplasmic staining greater than nuclear staining; equal nuclear and
cytoplasmic staining; no nuclear staining or cytoplasmic staining. The integrated
optical density (OD) values of all sections were analyzed by UIC MetaMorph image 
analysis software. The expression of TCF-4 mRNA was detected by one-step reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The integrated density values
of the PCR products were analyzed semi-quantitatively.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed that there was no expression of TCF-4 in
normal tissue. However, TCF-4 was expressed in 86.7% (52/60) of NSCLC samples,
mainly in the nuclei of tumor cells. Furthermore, there was a significant
difference in TCF-4 localization patterns between squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas (P < 0.05). The integrated OD values of TCF-4 expression was
significantly higher in tumors with moderate-poor cell differentiation than in
well differentiated tumors (51.63 +/- 6.67 vs 46.13 +/- 12.31, P < 0.01). There
was no TCF-4 mRNA expression in normal tissue. However, 63.9% (23/36) of
carcinoma samples expressed TCF-4 mRNA. TCF-4 mRNA expression was significantly
higher in tumors with moderate-poor cell differentiation than in well
differentiated tumors (P < 0.05). There were no significant differences in mRNA
expression in comparison with histological type.
CONCLUSIONS: The sub-cellular distribution of TCF-4 may correlate with NSCLC
histological type. High expression of TCF-4 mRNA and protein may be associated
with the degree of cell differentiation in NSCLC.

PMID: 15667799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Blood. 2005 May 1;105(9):3699-706. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Flt3 tandem duplication mutations cooperate with Wnt signaling in leukemic signal
transduction.

Tickenbrock L(1), Schwäble J, Wiedehage M, Steffen B, Sargin B, Choudhary C,
Brandts C, Berdel WE, Müller-Tidow C, Serve H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology, and Oncology, University of Münster,
Domagkstr. 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Activating Flt3 mutations occur in about 30% of patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), often as in-frame internal tandem duplication (ITD) at the
juxtamembrane domain of the receptor. These mutations transform hematopoietic
cell lines and primary mouse bone marrow. Here, we analyzed the interaction
between oncogenic Flt3-ITD mutations and the Wingless-type (Wnt) signaling
pathway in the myeloid progenitor cell line 32D. Microarray analyses revealed
higher mRNA expression of Frizzled-4, a receptor for Wnt ligands in 32D/Flt3-ITD 
cells. Findings were verified by quantitative realtime reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and on the protein level.
Compared with 32D/Flt3-WT (wild-type) cells, 32D/Flt3-ITD cells also showed
greatly enhanced beta-catenin protein levels, irrespective of their exposure to
Wnt3a, a ligand inducing the canonical Wnt signal transduction pathway. In
addition, 5 of 7 AML samples with Flt3-ITD mutations expressed high beta-catenin 
protein levels, whereas patients with wild-type Flt3 did not. Also, Flt3-ITD
induced enhanced T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent transcriptional activity and the
induction of the Wnt target gene c-myc. In the presence of Flt3-WT or Flt3-ITD
signaling, Wnt3a slightly increased 32D cell proliferation. However, transfection
experiments with dominant-negative (dn) TCF4 revealed a strong dependence of
Flt3-ITD-mediated clonogenic growth on TCF activity. Taken together, our results 
indicate that Flt3-ITD and Wnt-dependent signaling pathways synergize in myeloid 
transformation.

PMID: 15650056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Yi Chuan. 2004 Jan;26(1):1-7.

[Microsatellite instability and relative gene expressions in sporadic and
familial adenomatous polyposis adenomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng L(1), Wang HP, Huang Q, Lai MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310006, P.R.China. Chenglei1107@hotmail.com

In order to understand the role of mismatch repair (MMR) gene in colorectal
carcinogenesis,microsatellite instability (MSI) status of 16 microsatellite loci 
of 62 adenomas from 59 patients, including sporadic and familial adeonmatous
polyposis (FAP) adenomas were detected by microdissection-PCR-SSLP, and protein
expressions of beta-catenin, P53, and BAX, etc. were assayed by
immunohistochemistry. Results were as following: (1)The overall MSI alteration
rate of the 16 loci was 14.4%. Different adenomas from the same patient showed
different microsatellite alterations at the same loci; (2)All of the five FAP
patients were MSI-L, three of which showed MSI at the locus of hMSH3; (3)The
membrane expression rate of beta-catenin in adenomas and accompanied carcinomas
was 42.9% and 11.4%, respectively (P<0.001); (4)Microsatellite alterations of the
microsatellite loci of TP53, D5S346, TCF4(A)(9), TGFbetaRII(GT)(3) and
TGFbetaRII(A)(10) were associated with the changes of their protein expressions. 
It could be concluded the following: (1)Microsatellite instability existed even
in the early stage (adenomas) of colorectal tumorigenesis. The alterations of
chromosome 1p, APC genes, and the TGFbeta signal transduction pathway could also 
be deduced; (2)In the progression of adenoma to carcinoma, the staining of
beta-catenin would be transferred from membrane to cytoplasm and then nucleus,
and the cytoplasm stain was stronger in carcinoma than that in adenomas. The
abnormality of the signal transduction pathway of APC-beta-catenin-TCF4 could be 
concluded.

PMID: 15626658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 3;24(6):1098-103.

The Wnt antagonist DICKKOPF-1 gene is a downstream target of beta-catenin/TCF and
is downregulated in human colon cancer.

González-Sancho JM(1), Aguilera O, García JM, Pendás-Franco N, Peña C, Cal S,
García de Herreros A, Bonilla F, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4,
E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Wnt glycoproteins regulate homeostasis and development by binding to membrane
Frizzled-LRP5/6 receptor complexes. Wnt signaling includes a canonical pathway
involving cytosolic beta-catenin stabilization, nuclear translocation and gene
regulation, acting as a co-activator of T-cell factor (TCF) proteins, and
noncanonical pathways that activate Rho, Rac, JNK and PKC, or modulate Ca(2+)
levels. DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) encodes a secreted Wnt antagonist that binds to LRP5/6
and induces its endocytosis, leading to inhibition of the canonical pathway. We
show that activation of canonical signaling by Wnt1 or ectopic expression of
active beta-catenin, TCF4 or LRP6 mutants induces transcription of the human
DKK-1 gene. Multiple beta-catenin/TCF4 sites in the DKK-1 gene promoter
contribute to this activation. In contrast, Wnt5a, which signals through
noncanonical pathways, does not activate DKK-1. Northern and Western blot studies
show that activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway by treatment with lithium or
Wnt3a-conditioned medium, or by stable expression of either Wnt1 or beta-catenin,
increases DKK-1 RNA and protein, thus initiating a negative feedback loop.
However, we found that DKK-1 expression decreases in human colon tumors, which
suggests that DKK-1 acts as a tumor suppressor gene in this neoplasia. Our data
indicate that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is downregulated by the induction of
DKK-1 expression, a mechanism that is lost in colon cancer.

PMID: 15592505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):7107-17. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Systematic peptide array-based delineation of the differential beta-catenin
interaction with Tcf4, E-cadherin, and adenomatous polyposis coli.

Gail R(1), Frank R, Wittinghofer A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung strukturelle Biologie, Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Nuclear accumulation of the complex between beta-catenin and proteins of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family is a hallmark of many cancers. Targeting this
interaction for drug development is complicated by the fact that E-cadherin and
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) bind to overlapping sites on beta-catenin.
Inhibiting their interactions might actually promote tumor growth. To identify
selective beta-catenin binding hot spots of Tcf4, E-cadherin, and APC, array
technology with peptides of up to 53 amino acids length was used. Interactions
were monitored by a quantitative fluorescent readout, which was shown to
represent a monitor of true equilibrium binding constants. We identified minimal 
binding motifs in the beta-catenin ligands and showed that most of the 15-mer and
20-mer repeats of APC did not interact, at least when non-phosphorylated, and
defined a consensus binding motif also present in APC. We confirmed previously
found hot spots and identified new ones. The method allowed us to locate a
hydrophobic pocket that was relevant for the Tcf, but not the E-cadherin
interaction, and would thus constitute an ideal drug target site.

PMID: 15591320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):279-89. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Epithelial hedgehog signals pattern the intestinal crypt-villus axis.

Madison BB(1), Braunstein K, Kuizon E, Portman K, Qiao XT, Gumucio DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0616, USA.

Morphological development of the small intestinal mucosa involves the stepwise
remodeling of a smooth-surfaced endodermal tube to form finger-like luminal
projections (villi) and flask-shaped invaginations (crypts). These remodeling
processes are orchestrated by instructive signals that pass bidirectionally
between the epithelium and underlying mesenchyme. Sonic (Shh) and Indian (Ihh)
hedgehog are expressed in the epithelium throughout these morphogenic events, and
mice lacking either factor exhibit intestinal abnormalities. To examine the
combined role of Shh and Ihh in intestinal morphogenesis, we generated transgenic
mice expressing the pan-hedgehog inhibitor, Hhip (hedgehog interacting protein)
in the epithelium. We demonstrate that hedgehog (Hh) signaling in the neonatal
intestine is paracrine, from epithelium to Ptch1-expressing subepithelial
myofibroblasts (ISEMFs) and smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Strong inhibition of this
signal compromises epithelial remodeling and villus formation. Surprisingly,
modest attenuation of Hh also perturbs villus patterning. Desmin-positive smooth 
muscle progenitors are expanded, and ISEMFs are mislocalized. This mesenchymal
change secondarily affects the epithelium: Tcf4/beta-catenin target gene activity
is enhanced, proliferation is increased, and ectopic precrypt structures form on 
villus tips. Thus, through a combined Hh signal to underlying ISEMFs, the
epithelium patterns the crypt-villus axis, ensuring the proper size and location 
of the emerging precrypt compartment.

PMID: 15590741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Mar 1;94(4):835-47.

T-cell factor-4-dependent up-regulation of fibronectin is involved in fibroblast 
growth factor-2-induced tube formation by endothelial cells.

Kanda S(1), Miyata Y, Kanetake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Deletion of fibronectin or its receptor, alpha(5) integrin, interferes with the
formation of a functional circulation in mice. We hypothesized that
alpha(5)beta(1) integrin/fibronectin interaction may be involved in
differentiation of endothelial cells during angiogenesis. We examined the effect 
of blocking antibody against alpha(5)beta(1) integrin in fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2)-induced angiogenesis by Matrigel plug assay. Although the
antibody did not inhibit the recruitment of endothelial cells into plugs, it
inhibited organization of lumen-containing capillaries. The antibody also
inhibited FGF-2-induced tube formation by murine brain capillary endothelial
cells (IBE cells) cultured in type I collagen gels. We previously showed that
FGF-2 failed to induce tube formation by IBE cells expressing kinase-dead c-Fyn
(KDFyn cells). Association with beta-catenin enhances the transcriptional
activity of T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4), which up-regulates the expression of
fibronectin. FGF-2 induced association of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and
up-regulation of fibronectin in IBE cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Expression of 
mutant TCF-4, which does not associate with beta-catenin, inhibited FGF-2-induced
tube formation and expression of fibronectin in IBE cells. FGF-2-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of beta-catenin, and association with TCF-4 was increased in IBE 
cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Taken together, interaction of alpha(5)beta(1)
integrin and fibronectin is involved in FGF-2-induced tube formation by
endothelial cells and up-regulation of fibronectin through TCF-4 seemed to be
involved in this process.

PMID: 15578569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):215-25. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4 associate in a molecular complex with the Myc
promoter in dysplastic renal tissue and cooperate to control Myc transcription.

Hu MC(1), Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Renal dysplasia, the major cause of childhood renal failure in humans, arises
from perturbed renal morphogenesis and molecular signaling during embryogenesis. 
Recently, we discovered induction of molecular crosstalk between Smad1 and
beta-catenin in the TgAlk3QD mouse model of renal medullary cystic dysplasia. Our
finding that Myc, a Smad and beta-catenin transcriptional target and effector of 
renal epithelial dedifferentiation, is misexpressed in dedifferentiated
epithelial tubules provided a basis for investigating coordinate transcriptional 
control by Smad1 and beta-catenin in disease. Here, we report enhanced
interactions between a molecular complex consisting of Smad1, beta-catenin and
Tcf4 and adjacent Tcf- and Smad-binding regions located within the Myc promoter
in TgAlk3QD dysplastic renal tissue, and Bmp-dependent cooperative control of Myc
transcription by Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4. Analysis of nuclear extracts
derived from TgAlk3QD and wild-type renal tissue revealed increased levels of
Smad1/beta-catenin molecular complexes, and de novo formation of
chromatin-associated Tcf4/Smad1 molecular complexes in TgAlk3QD tissues. Analysis
of a 476 nucleotide segment of the 1490 nucleotide Myc genomic region upstream of
the transcription start site demonstrated interactions between Tcf4 and the Smad 
consensus binding region and associations of Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4 with
oligo-duplexes that encode the adjacent Tcf- and Smad-binding elements only in
TgAlk3QD tissues. In collecting duct cells that express luciferase under the
control of the 1490 nucleotide Myc genomic region, Bmp2-dependent stimulation of 
Myc transcription was dependent on contributions by each of Tcf4, beta-catenin
and Smad1. These results provide novel insights into mechanisms by which
interacting signaling pathways control transcription during the genesis of renal 
dysplasia.

PMID: 15576399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 20;24(4):597-604.

beta-Catenin activates the growth factor endothelin-1 in colon cancer cells.

Kim TH(1), Xiong H, Zhang Z, Ren B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, UCSD
School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Endothelin-1 (EDN1) is a growth factor that is frequently produced by cancer
cells and plays a critical role in tumorigenesis. However, the molecular
mechanism controlling the expression of EDN1 in cancers is unknown. Constitutive 
activation of beta-catenin pathway is responsible for the initiation of the vast 
majority of colon cancers. Here we show that the EDN1 gene is directly regulated 
by beta-catenin in colon cancer cells. A specific DNA element within the EDN1
promoter is required for activation, and is associated with beta-catenin's
cognate DNA binding partner, TCF4, in vivo. Inhibition of beta-catenin signaling 
results in lowered expression of EDN1, while enhancement of beta-catenin
signaling leads to further activation of the gene. Significantly elevated EDN1
expression occurs in 80% of primary human colon cancers, consistent with it being
a direct target of beta-catenin. Furthermore, EDN1 is able to rescue colon cancer
cells from growth arrest and apoptosis resulting from inhibition of beta-catenin 
signaling, implicating a key role of EDN1 in promoting the oncogenic function of 
beta-catenin. These results indicate EDN1 overexpression as a major cause in
colon cancers and reveal further details of the genetic programs responsible for 
tumorigenesis of colon cancers.

PMID: 15558022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Int J Oncol. 2004 Dec;25(6):1685-92.

Differential expression and splicing isoform analysis of human Tcf-4
transcription factor in brain tumors.

Howng SL(1), Huang FH, Hwang SL, Lieu AS, Sy WD, Wang C, Hong YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
ROC.

Tcf family transcription factors are the downstream effectors of the Wnt signal
transduction pathway that regulates developmental and oncogenetic processes among
species. The alternative splicing of consecutive exons in the 3' part of the
Tcf-4 gene and an error-prone A9 repeat in exon 17 have recently been examined in
several tumors. To further understand the roles played by differential expression
and splicing isoforms of human Tcf-4 in brain tumorigenesis, the expression of
the 3' part of the Tcf-4 gene (exons 10-17) was analyzed by RT-PCR, nested RT-PCR
and DNA sequencing. The results showed that at least 13 of the Tcf-4 alternative 
splicing isoforms were found and most of them were overexpressed in various brain
tumors. L3 isoform was particularly dominant in metastasis. Several novel
splicing isoforms were identified. One that contains different combinations of
exon 16 (10-11-12-16-17, S5) was found in normal brain and pituitary adenoma but 
not in astrocytoma, meningioma or metastasis, whereas the other that contains
part of intron 16, designated exon-16', was found in metastasis. Overall 23% of
sequencing analysis in brain tumors exhibited frameshift mutations in an A9
repeat region of exon 17. These mutants exhibited 2-base or 1-base deletion (A7, 
A8) and 1-base insertion (A10). Nonetheless, in vitro functional assay showed
that these mutants did not affect the transactivity of Tcf-4 comparing to
wild-type Tcf-4. Collectively, our data suggest that a large number of
alternative splicing isoforms may together with variable mutations of A9 repeat
region maintain balanced pools of Tcf-4 isoforms during brain tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15547706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1457-64. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

TCF-4 mediates cell type-specific regulation of proglucagon gene expression by
beta-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.

Yi F(1), Brubaker PL, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell & Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 2M1,
Canada.

The proglucagon gene (glu) encodes glucagon, expressed in pancreatic islets, and 
the insulinotropic hormone GLP-1, expressed in the intestines. These two hormones
exert critical and opposite effects on blood glucose homeostasis. An intriguing
question that remains to be answered is whether and how glu gene expression is
regulated in a cell type-specific manner. We reported previously that the glu
gene promoter in gut endocrine cell lines was stimulated by beta-catenin, the
major effector of the Wnt signaling pathway, whereas glu mRNA expression and
GLP-1 synthesis were activated via inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, 
the major negative modulator of the Wnt pathway (Ni, Z., Anini, Y., Fang, X.,
Mills, G. B., Brubaker, P. L., & Jin, T. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 1380-1387).
We now show that beta-catenin and the glycogen synthase kinase-3beta inhibitor
lithium do not activate glu mRNA or glu promoter expression in pancreatic cell
lines. In the intestinal GLUTag cell line, but not in the pancreatic InR1-G9 cell
line, the glu promoter G2 enhancer-element was activated by lithium treatment via
a TCF-binding motif. TCF-4 is abundantly expressed in the gut but not in
pancreatic islets. Furthermore, both TCF-4 and beta-catenin bind to the glu gene 
promoter, as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Finally, stable
introduction of dominant-negative TCF-4 into the GLUTag cell line repressed basal
glu mRNA expression and abolished the effect of lithium on glu mRNA expression
and GLP-1 synthesis. We have therefore identified a unique mechanism that
regulates glu expression in gut endocrine cells only. Tissue-specific expression 
of TCF factors thus may play a role in the diversity of the Wnt pathway.

PMID: 15525634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Int J Cancer. 2005 Mar 1;113(6):891-8.

Overexpression of human pituitary tumor transforming gene (hPTTG), is regulated
by beta-catenin /TCF pathway in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhou C(1), Liu S, Zhou X, Xue L, Quan L, Lu N, Zhang G, Bai J, Wang Y, Liu Z,
Zhan Q, Zhu H, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, PR China.

Overexpression of human pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) is wildly
detected in many tumors, including esophageal cancer. Besides overexpression of
PTTG in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) tissues and cells, we detected 
accumulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin in ESCC. In our study, a putative
TCF4-binding element (TBE) was identified in PTTG promoter region. The activity
of PTTG promoter containing the TBE was activated by S37Abeta-catenin and
inhibited by dominant-negative TCF. Furthermore, the activation by
S37Abeta-catenin was mostly abrogated among PTTG promoter region without the TBE 
or with a mutant one. By using biotin-streptavidin pull-down assay, we also found
that the TBE among PTTG promoter bound to TCF-4 protein. Moreover, levels of PTTG
mRNA and protein were increased by S37Abeta-catenin. Finally, it is noticeable
that we detected a correlation between beta-catenin localization and PTTG
expression in 69 primary ESCC (p<0.01). In brief, our study shows that
overexpression of PTTG in ESCC is likely due to the activation of
beta-catenin/WNT signaling. As a target gene of beta-catenin/TCF pathway, PTTG
may play an important role in tumorigenesis of human ESCC.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15514942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 26;324(4):1333-9.

A regulatory role of Wnt signaling pathway in the hematopoietic differentiation
of murine embryonic stem cells.

Feng Z(1), Srivastava AS, Mishra R, Carrier E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, University of California-San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

One of the most important issues in stem cell research is to understand the
regulatory mechanisms responsible for their differentiation. An extensive
understanding of mechanism underlying the process of differentiation is crucial
in order to prompt stem cells to perform a particular function after
differentiation. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
hematopoietic differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we investigated
murine ES cells for the presence of hematopoietic lineage markers as well as Wnt 
signaling pathway during treatments with different cytokines alone or in
combination with another. Here we report that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is
down-regulated in hematopoietic differentiation of murine ES cells. We also found
that differentiation induced by the interleukin-3, interleukin-6, and
erythropoietin combinations resulted in high expression of CD3e, CD11b,
CD45R/B220, Ly-6G, and TER-119 in differentiated ES cells. A high expression of
beta-catenin was observed in two undifferentiated ES cell lines. Gene and protein
expression analysis revealed that the members downstream of Wnt in this signaling
pathway including beta-catenin, GSK-3beta, Axin, and TCF4 were significantly
down-regulated as ES cells differentiated into hematopoietic progenitors. Our
results show that the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway plays a role in the
hematopoietic differentiation of murine ESCs and also may support beta-catenin as
a crucial factor in the maintenance of ES cells in their undifferentiated state.

PMID: 15504360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Oncol Rep. 2004 Nov;12(5):1099-103.

Infrequent somatic mutations of the ICAT gene in various human cancers with
frequent 1p-LOH and/or abnormal nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin.

Imai M(1), Nakamura T, Akiyama T, Horii A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 2-1
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Abnormal nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin (CTNNB1) plays one of the key roles
in the upregulation of the Wnt signalling pathway that can cause acceleration of 
cell proliferation. ICAT, inhibitor of beta-catenin and
TCF4/beta-catenin-interacting protein, was isolated and mapped to 1p36, a
frequent target for LOH in many human cancers. We have previously observed that a
number of tumors showing abnormal accumulation of the CTNNB1 protein do not
harbor a mutation of the CTNNB1 gene. We studied the precise localization and
genomic structure of the ICAT gene and analyzed its mutations in 178 human tumors
developed in organs with frequent nuclear accumulation of the CTNNB1 protein
and/or frequent LOHs of 1p36, but no genetic alterations were observed. Our
results imply that i) genetic alteration of the ICAT gene does not play an
important role in abnormal accumulation of CTNNB1 that would cause up-regulation 
of the Wnt signalling pathway, ii) mechanisms other than genetic alteration may
have inactivated ICAT function, or iii) gene(s) on 1p36 other than ICAT may be
the responsible tumor suppressor gene for tumors that show frequent 1p36-LOH.

PMID: 15492799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7237-40.

Cleavage of beta-catenin by calpain in prostate and mammary tumor cells.

Rios-Doria J(1), Kuefer R, Ethier SP, Day ML.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Department of Urology,
Michigan Urology Center, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Mutations in the NH(2)-terminal regulatory domain of the beta-catenin gene lead
to aberrant stabilization and accumulation of the protein and increased
TCF/LEF-dependent transcription. Although these mutations are common in some
cancers, they are infrequent in prostate and breast cancer. We have found that
metastatic prostate cancer specimens, obtained through a rapid autopsy tissue
procurement program, expressed a novel M(r) 75,000 proteolytic fragment of
beta-catenin (beta-cat(75)). beta-Cat(75) was also expressed in multiple prostate
and breast cancer cell lines and was closely associated with the activity of the 
calcium-dependent protease, calpain. In a prostate cancer cDNA microarray,
m-calpain RNA levels were found to be significantly increased in metastatic
disease compared with normal prostate. We showed calpain-dependent generation of 
beta-cat(75) in cell culture and in vitro. Molecular mapping revealed that
calpain cleavage removed the NH(2)-terminal regulatory domain of the beta-catenin
protein. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with ionomycin led to increased accumulation of
beta-cat(75) in the nucleus and TCF-dependent transcriptional activity.
Overexpression of a similar beta-catenin fragment that lacks the NH(2)-terminal
132 amino acids and has transforming potential activated TCF-dependent
transcription. Given the low frequency of mutation-induced activation of
beta-catenin in prostate and breast cancers, proteolytic cleavage of beta-catenin
by calpain may represent a novel mechanism by which the protein is activated
during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15492240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 28;23(50):8260-71.

Cross-talk between Rac1 GTPase and dysregulated Wnt signaling pathway leads to
cellular redistribution of beta-catenin and TCF/LEF-mediated transcriptional
activation.

Esufali S(1), Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway is observed in numerous cancers, and is
particularly important in colon cancer. We demonstrate that Rac1 GTPase can
significantly increase the signaling activity of beta-catenin in cells with
inherent dysregulation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Expression of
dominant-negative (N17)Rac1 mutant in colon cancer cells caused a marked
inhibition of Wnt signaling, as determined by the TCF/LEF-responsive (TOPFLASH)
transcription assay. Expression of a constitutively active (V12)Rac1 mutant
caused up to 40-fold induction from the TOPFLASH promoter, and this was dependent
on the presence of stabilized beta-catenin. This induction was completely blocked
by the expression of dominant-negative TCF-4, suggesting that beta-catenin and
TCF-4 complex formation is required for Rac1-mediated transcription. Furthermore,
we show that Cyclin D1, an important biological Wnt target gene, is regulated by 
Rac1 in a beta-catenin/TCF-dependent manner. We observed that Rac1
co-immunoprecipitates with beta-catenin and TCF-4 only in its active GTP-bound
form. Both cell fractionation studies and fluorescence microscopy indicate that
overexpression of V12Rac1 results in increased cytosolic and nuclear expression
of beta-catenin. Interestingly, mutation of the polybasic region of Rac1, which
prevents its nuclear localization, also caused an appreciable decrease in nuclear
localization of beta-catenin, and effectively abolished its
beta-catenin-dependent transcription co-activator function. Taken together, our
data demonstrate a novel mechanism of Wnt pathway regulation whereby activation
of Rac1 amplifies the signaling activity of stabilized/mutated beta-catenin by
promoting its accumulation in the nucleus, and synergizing with beta-catenin to
augment TCF/LEF-dependent gene transcription.

PMID: 15377999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6390-3.

p73 isoforms can induce T-cell factor-dependent transcription in gastrointestinal
cells.

Tomkova K(1), Belkhiri A, El-Rifai W, Zaika AI.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Health Center of Excellence, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

A new p53 family member, p73, and its isoform DeltaNp73 are increasingly
recognized in cancer research as important players in tumorigenesis, as well as
in chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity. Despite substantial structural similarities
to p53, accumulating evidence suggests that p53 and p73 may play different roles 
in human tumorigenesis. In this study, we have investigated the role of p73 and
DeltaNp73 in upper gastrointestinal tumorigenesis. Our results indicate that p73 
and DeltaNp73 are frequently overexpressed in >60% of primary adenocarcinomas of 
the stomach and esophagus. We have demonstrated that this overexpression can lead
to the suppression of p73 transcriptional and apoptotic activity in
gastrointestinal cells. Moreover, it induces beta-catenin up-regulation and
T-cell factor/lymphocyte enhancement factor-dependent transcription. Wild-type
p53, but not mutant p53, can inhibit this effect. Our results demonstrate a novel
mechanism for activation of beta-catenin in gastrointestinal tumors and support
the concept that overexpression of p73 isoforms can play an important role in
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15374945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6363-7.

Galectin-3, a novel binding partner of beta-catenin.

Shimura T(1), Takenaka Y, Tsutsumi S, Hogan V, Kikuchi A, Raz A.

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University Medical School, Detroit,
Michigan 48201, USA.

Galectin-3 (gal-3), a pleiotrophic protein, is an important regulator of tumor
metastasis, which like beta-catenin shuttles between the nucleus and the cytosol 
in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. We report herein that beta-catenin
stimulation of cyclin D1 and c-myc expression is gal-3 dependent. Gal-3 binds to 
beta-catenin/Tcf complex, colocalizes with beta-catenin in the nucleus, and
induces the transcriptional activity of Tcf-4 as determined by the TOP/FOPFLASH
reporter system. We have identified the beta-catenin-gal-3-binding sequences,
which are in the NH2 and COOH termini of the proteins encompassing amino acid
residues 1 to 131 and 143 to 250, respectively. These data indicate that gal-3 is
a novel binding partner for beta-catenin involved in the regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 15374939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 8;323(1):168-74.

Differential cooperation between dHAND and three different E-proteins.

Murakami M(1), Kataoka K, Tominaga J, Nakagawa O, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

dHAND is a transcription factor belonging to the class B basic helix-loop-helix
protein family and is expressed during embryogenesis in the heart, branchial
arches, limb buds, and neural crest derivatives. Despite much study, the
molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of dHAND activity are not well
understood. We therefore carried out yeast two-hybrid screening using full-length
dHAND as bait, which led to identification of several dHAND-binding proteins,
including three E-proteins: E2A, ME2, and ALF1. Subsequent analysis revealed that
although their heterodimerization and transcriptional activities were similar,
dHAND/E-protein heterodimers bind to an E-box element with differing affinities, 
suggesting they have distinct DNA binding specificities. Moreover, in situ
hybridization showed that E-protein genes are expressed fairly ubiquitously among
embryonic tissues, including the branchial arches and limb buds. By contrast,
little signal was detected in the heart, suggesting that dHAND complexes with
partners other than E-proteins in cardiac tissue.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15351717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Science. 2004 Aug 27;305(5688):1286-9.

E protein silencing by the leukemogenic AML1-ETO fusion protein.

Zhang J(1), Kalkum M, Yamamura S, Chait BT, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The AML1-ETO fusion protein, generated by the t(8;21) chromosomal translocation, 
is causally involved in nearly 15% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases. This
study shows that AML1-ETO, as well as ETO, inhibits transcriptional activation by
E proteins through stable interactions that preclude recruitment of
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivators. These interactions are mediated by 
a conserved ETO TAF4 homology domain and a 17-amino acid p300/CBP and ETO target 
motif within AD1 activation domains of E proteins. In t(8;21) leukemic cells,
very stable interactions between AML1-ETO and E proteins underlie a t(8;21)
translocation-specific silencing of E protein function through an aberrant
cofactor exchange mechanism. These studies identify E proteins as AML1-ETO
targets whose dysregulation may be important for t(8;21) leukemogenesis, as well 
as an E protein silencing mechanism that is distinct from that associated with
differentiation-inhibitory proteins.

PMID: 15333839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):45669-75. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Activator protein 2alpha associates with adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin 
and Inhibits beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity in colorectal
cancer cells.

Li Q(1), Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute and Department of Environmental and Molecular
Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6512, USA.

In most human colorectal cancers, mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli
gene (APC) or CTNNB1 constitutively activate the beta-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) signaling pathway. Here, we show that the
transcription factor activator protein (AP)-2alpha inhibited a
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter in human embryonic kidney 293 cells and in
two human colorectal cancer lines, despite the fact that beta-catenin and TCF-4
protein levels were unchanged in the nucleus. Co-immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that AP-2alpha formed a complex with APC and beta-catenin and that
AP-2alpha disrupted beta-catenin/TCF-4 interactions in the nucleus. Thus,
AP-2alpha.APC.beta-catenin complex formation appears to suppress beta-catenin
transactivation by shifting the pool of nuclear beta-catenin toward an inactive
form, having reduced binding to TCF/LEF transcription factors. Glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays showed that AP-2alpha physically associated with
APC rather than with beta-catenin, and the AP-2alpha binding site was identified 
in the N terminus of APC, involving both the heptad and armadillo repeat domains,
whereas the APC binding site in AP-2alpha was in the basic region of the
C-terminal DNA binding domain. These findings provide the first evidence for a
specific interaction between the tumor suppressor protein APC and the
transcription factor AP-2alpha, and they suggest a link between the Wnt signaling
pathway and various other pathways of development and differentiation associated 
with AP-2alpha.

PMCID: PMC2276578
PMID: 15331612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):390-401.

Autoregulation of canonical Wnt signaling controls midbrain development.

Kunz M(1), Herrmann M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (TH), 76131 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

After the primary anterior-posterior patterning of the neural plate, a subset of 
wnt signaling molecules including Xwnt-1, Xwnt-2b, Xwnt-3A, Xwnt-8b are still
expressed in the developing brain in a region spanning from the posterior part of
the diencephalon to the mesencephalon/metencephalon boundary. In this expression 
field, they are colocalized with the HMG-box transcription factor XTcf-4. Using
antisense morpholino loss-of-function strategies, we demonstrate that the
expression of this transcription factor depends on Xwnt-2b, which itself is under
the control of XTcf-4. Marker gene analyses reveal that this autoregulatory loop 
is important for proper development of the midbrain and the isthmus. Staining for
NCAM reveals a lack of dorsal neural tissue in this area. This reduction is
caused by a reduced proliferation rate as shown by staining for PhosphoH3
positive nuclei. In rescue experiments, we demonstrate that individual isoforms
of XTcf-4 control the development of different parts of the brain. XTcf-4A
restored the expression of the mesencephalon marker genes pax-6 and wnt-2b but
not the isthmus marker gene en-2. XTcf-4C, in contrast, restored en-2, but had
only weak effects on pax-6 and wnt-2b. Thus, autoregulation of canonical Wnt
signaling and alternative expression of different isoforms of XTcf-4 is essential
for specifying the developing CNS.

PMID: 15328021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Cell. 2004 Aug 27;15(4):499-509.

Synergy between LRH-1 and beta-catenin induces G1 cyclin-mediated cell
proliferation.

Botrugno OA(1), Fayard E, Annicotte JS, Haby C, Brennan T, Wendling O, Tanaka T, 
Kodama T, Thomas W, Auwerx J, Schoonjans K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch, France.

LRH-1 is an orphan nuclear receptor predominantly expressed in tissues of
endodermal origin, where it controls development and cholesterol homeostasis. We 
show here that LRH-1 induces cell proliferation through the concomitant induction
of cyclin D1 and E1, an effect that is potentiated by its interaction with
beta-catenin. Whereas beta-catenin coactivates LRH-1 on the cyclin E1 promoter,
LRH-1 acts as a potent tissue-restricted coactivator of beta-catenin on the
cyclin D1 promoter. The implication of LRH-1 in cell proliferation highlights an 
unanticipated crosstalk between LRH-1 and the beta-catenin/Tcf4 signaling
pathway, which is relevant for the renewal of intestinal crypt cells.

PMID: 15327767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5767-74.

A novel mechanism of chemoprotection by sulforaphane: inhibition of histone
deacetylase.

Myzak MC(1), Karplus PA, Chung FL, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331,
USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a compound found at high levels in broccoli and broccoli
sprouts, is a potent inducer of phase 2 detoxification enzymes and inhibits
tumorigenesis in animal models. SFN also has a marked effect on cell cycle
checkpoint controls and cell survival and/or apoptosis in various cancer cells,
through mechanisms that are poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that SFN 
acts as an inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In human embryonic kidney 293
cells, SFN dose-dependently increased the activity of a beta-catenin-responsive
reporter (TOPflash), without altering beta-catenin or HDAC protein levels.
Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts from these cells had diminished HDAC activity,
and both global and localized histone acetylation was increased, compared with
untreated controls. Studies with SFN and with media from SFN-treated cells
indicated that the parent compound was not responsible for the inhibition of
HDAC, and this was confirmed using an inhibitor of glutathione S-transferase,
which blocked the first step in the metabolism of SFN, via the mercapturic acid
pathway. Whereas SFN and its glutathione conjugate (SFN-GSH) had little or no
effect, the two major metabolites SFN-cysteine and SFN-N-acetylcysteine were
effective HDAC inhibitors in vitro. Finally, several of these findings were
recapitulated in HCT116 human colorectal cancer cells: SFN dose-dependently
increased TOPflash reporter activity and inhibited HDAC activity, there was an
increase in acetylated histones and in p21(Cip1/Waf1), and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed an increase in acetylated histones bound to
the P21 promoter. Collectively, these findings suggest that SFN may be effective 
as a tumor-suppressing agent and as a chemotherapeutic agent, alone or in
combination with other HDAC inhibitors currently undergoing clinical trials.

PMID: 15313918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):42492-502. Epub 2004 Jul 28.

The murine gastrin promoter is synergistically activated by transforming growth
factor-beta/Smad and Wnt signaling pathways.

Lei S(1), Dubeykovskiy A, Chakladar A, Wojtukiewicz L, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and Wnt/wingless pathways play
critical roles in the specification of cell fate during development and also
contribute to cancer formation and progression. Whereas Wnt signaling is clearly 
pro-oncogenic, TGF-beta signaling is cell- and context-dependent, manifesting
both inhibitory and proliferative effects. The growth factor, gastrin, has
previously been shown to be a downstream target of the Wnt pathway and a promoter
of gastrointestinal cancer. In this study, we show that the mouse gastrin
promoter is regulated synergistically by TGF-beta/Smads and beta-catenin/T-cell
factor (TCF). Co-transfection of Smad3/Smad4 and beta-catenin expression
constructs synergistically activated mouse gastrin promoter activity 30-60-fold
in AGS cells with minimal effect seen with either construct alone. This
activation was further potentiated by TGF-beta1 treatment. Mutating either the
TCF binding site or the Smad-binding element (SBE) diminished the activation of
gastrin expression by Smad3/Smad4 and beta-catenin and led to a loss of gastrin
promoter responsiveness to TGF-beta1 treatment. Wnt and TGF-beta regulated
endogenous gastrin mRNA levels in AGS cells in a similar fashion, as revealed by 
small interference RNA studies or overexpression of Smads and TCF4/beta-catenin. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNA affinity precipitation assays
showed that the putative SBE and T-cell factor (TCF) sites were able to bind a
complex containing Smads and beta-catenin/TCF4. In addition, the synergy between 
Smads and beta-catenin/TCF4 was dependent on CREB-binding protein (CBP)/P300, as 
demonstrated by overexpression of CBP or E1A. Moreover, by using a heterogeneous 
promoter reporter system, we showed that this complex containing
Smads/TCF4/beta-catenin complex was able to up-regulate transcription at isolated
SBE or TCF sites. Thus, the Wnt signaling pathway is able to activate some target
genes through its actions as a co-activator at non-TCF sites and has the
potential to profoundly alter transcriptional responses to TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 15292219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):41004-11. Epub 2004 Jul 26.

Calcium/calmodulin inhibition of transcriptional activity of E-proteins by
prevention of their binding to DNA.

Saarikettu J(1), Sveshnikova N, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

The Ca2+ sensor protein calmodulin can interact with the DNA binding basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain of E12, E47, and SEF2-1 (E2-2), which belong to
the E-protein subclass of bHLH transcription factors. This interaction inhibits
the DNA binding of these bHLH proteins in vitro, and an ionophore that increases 
intracellular Ca2+ can inhibit transcriptional activation by the E-proteins. Here
we have attempted to determine if these phenomena reflect a direct
calmodulin-dependent inhibition of DNA binding by E-proteins in vivo. We show
that calmodulin overexpression inhibits the transcriptional activity of E12, E47,
and SEF2-1. We have compared calmodulin effects on DNA binding in vitro and on
activation of transcription in vivo using a series of E12 mutants harboring
defined alterations within the basic sequence of the bHLH domain that reduce
their ability to bind calmodulin to varying degrees. We find a striking direct
correlation between the ability of calmodulin to inhibit their DNA binding in
vitro and the ability of overexpressed calmodulin or cellular Ca2+ mobilization
to inhibit their transcriptional activity in vivo. Furthermore, E12 and
overexpressed calmodulin were co-localized in the nucleus, and calmodulin
pull-down experiments with cell extracts showed a Ca2+-dependent interaction
between calmodulin and E12 but not with a calmodulin inhibition-deficient E12
mutant. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that calmodulin overexpression leads
to decreased binding of E12 and E47, but not a calmodulin inhibition-deficient
E12 mutant, to the DNA recognition sequence in vivo. The data suggest that Ca2+
signaling can inhibit the transcriptional activities of E-proteins through direct
binding of Ca2+/calmodulin to the basic sequence of E-proteins, resulting in
inhibition of their DNA binding.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15280352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Jul 30;222(1-2):83-91.

Id2 is a primary partner for the E2-2 basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
in the human placenta.

Liu YP(1), Burleigh D, Durning M, Hudson L, Chiu IM, Golos TG.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center and the Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI 53715, USA.

We screened a term placental cDNA library by the yeast two-hybrid approach with
Id2, a negative regulator of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors. Of the clones
obtained, approximately one-third were the E2-2 bHLH transcription factor. Id2
and E2-2 were shown to interact in direct two-hybrid assays in yeast cells, as
well as immunoprecipitation assays in mammalian cells. Immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated co-localization of both Id2 and E2-2 in placental
trophoblasts. Co-transfection of JEG-3 cells with E2-2 and Id2, and a luciferase 
reporter construct under the control of the human chorionic gonadotropin
alpha-subunit promoter revealed that E2-2 had a negative effect on
CGalpha-subunit transcription, which could be relieved by overexpression of Id2. 
The library was in turn rescreened with E2-2, and Id2 and Id1 were essentially
the only clones obtained. We conclude that Id2 is a primary binding partner for
the bHLH transcription factor E2-2 in the human placenta.

PMID: 15249128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Ai Zheng. 2004 Jul;23(7):737-41.

[Indomethacin induces apoptosis through inhibition of survivin regulated by
beta-catenin/TCF4 in human colorectal cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu HX(1), Zhang G, Wang YH, Zhou CQ, Bai JF, Xu NZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021, P.R.China. xningzhi@public.bta.net.cn

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Although Wnt pathway plays important role in colorectal
carcinogenesis, but the mechanism of this pathway in anti-apoptosis is not clear.
This study is to investigate the molecular mechanism of Wnt pathway in
anti-apoptosis.
METHODS: Survivin promoter region was constructed into luciferase reporter system
(pGL3-sur1.8kb). The recombinants pGL3-sur1.8kb were cotransfected with pRL-SV40 
into HCT116 cells and the activities were detected with Dual-luciferase reporter 
assay system. Cell apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry. Protein level of
survivin and beta-catenin was detected by Western Blot.
RESULTS: Survivin could be up-regulated by beta-catenin and down-regulated by
TCF4DeltaN in transcriptional level. beta-catenin/TCF4 dependent apoptosis
induced by indomethacin could suppress survivin transcription. Overexpression of 
survivin could partially recover the beta-catenin/TCF4 dependent apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of survivin affected by beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway
plays an important role in apoptosis induced by NSAIDs indomethacin in HCT116
cells. The beta-catenin/TCF4-survivin pathway may be a potential target in
treatment of colon cancer.

PMID: 15248904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jul 5;166(1):37-47.

SOX9 is an intestine crypt transcription factor, is regulated by the Wnt pathway,
and represses the CDX2 and MUC2 genes.

Blache P(1), van de Wetering M, Duluc I, Domon C, Berta P, Freund JN, Clevers H, 
Jay P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Humaine, CNRS UPR1142, 141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France.

TCF and SOX proteins belong to the high mobility group box transcription factor
family. Whereas TCFs, the transcriptional effectors of the Wnt pathway, have been
widely implicated in the development, homeostasis and disease of the intestine
epithelium, little is known about the function of the SOX proteins in this
tissue. Here, we identified SOX9 in a SOX expression screening in the mouse fetal
intestine. We report that the SOX9 protein is expressed in the intestinal
epithelium in a pattern characteristic of Wnt targets. We provide in vitro and in
vivo evidence that a bipartite beta-catenin/TCF4 transcription factor, the
effector of the Wnt signaling pathway, is required for SOX9 expression in
epithelial cells. Finally, in colon epithelium-derived cells, SOX9
transcriptionally represses the CDX2 and MUC2 genes, normally expressed in the
mature villus cells of the intestinal epithelium, and may therefore contribute to
the Wnt-dependent maintenance of a progenitor cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2172132
PMID: 15240568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Hepatology. 2004 Jul;40(1):167-76.

Identification of the leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 2 as a direct target gene
of beta-catenin in the liver.

Ovejero C(1), Cavard C, Périanin A, Hakvoort T, Vermeulen J, Godard C, Fabre M,
Chafey P, Suzuki K, Romagnolo B, Yamagoe S, Perret C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département GDPM, Paris, France.

To clarify molecular mechanisms underlying liver carcinogenesis induced by
aberrant activation of Wnt pathway, we isolated the target genes of beta-catenin 
from mice exhibiting constitutive activated beta-catenin in the liver.
Adenovirus-mediated expression of oncogenic beta-catenin was used to isolate
early targets of beta-catenin in the liver. Suppression subtractive hybridization
was used to identify the leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 2 (LECT2) gene as a
direct target of beta-catenin. Northern blot and immunohistochemical analyses
demonstrated that LECT2 expression is specifically induced in different mouse
models that express activated beta-catenin in the liver. LECT2 expression was not
activated in livers in which hepatocyte proliferation was induced by a
beta-catenin-independent signal. We characterized by mutagenesis the LEF/TCF
site, which is crucial for LECT2 activation by beta-catenin. We further
characterized the chemotactic property of LECT2 for human neutrophils. Finally,
we have shown an up-regulation of LECT2 in human liver tumors that expressed
aberrant activation of beta-catenin signaling; these tumors constituted a subset 
of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and most of the hepatoblastomas that were
studied. In conclusion, our results show that LECT2, which encodes a protein with
chemotactic properties for human neutrophils, is a direct target gene of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the liver. Since HCC develops mainly in patients
with chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis induced by viral or inflammatory factors,
understanding the role of LECT2 in liver carcinogenesis is of interest and may
lead to new therapeutic perspectives.

PMID: 15239100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Ther. 2004 Jul;10(1):150-61.

Optimization of a synthetic beta-catenin-dependent promoter for tumor-specific
cancer gene therapy.

Lipinski KS(1), Djeha HA, Gawn J, Cliffe S, Maitland NJ, Palmer DH, Mountain A,
Irvine AS, Wrighton CJ.

Author information: 
(1)ML Research, Keele University Science Park, Keele, Staffordshire ST5 5SP, UK. 
kai.lipinski@mlresearch.co.uk

We recently published the construction and evaluation of a
beta-catenin-dependent, highly active promoter, CTP1, and its possible
application for the treatment of colorectal cancer using gene-directed enzyme
prodrug therapy with adenoviral (Ad) vectors. Alternative Ad-based approaches
such as tumor-specific, replication-competent vectors and/or exploiting
therapeutic gene products with intrinsic toxic activity, such as gibbon ape
leukemia virus fusogenic membrane glycoprotein, diphtheria toxin A (DTA), and
ricin, would demand a very tightly regulated promoter to avoid breakthrough
replication and toxicity in nontumor tissue and Ad producer cell lines. In this
study we optimized the activity/specificity profile of the synthetic
beta-catenin-dependent promoter by varying its basal promoter, the number of Tcf 
binding sites, and the distance between these and the basal promoter. The optimal
promoter, CTP4, showed virtually undetectable expression in cells with normal
beta-catenin regulation but high level expression in cells deregulated for
beta-catenin. Using CTP4 we were able to generate, for the first time to our
knowledge, an Ad vector expressing fully active wild-type DTA without the need
for time-consuming and cumbersome production systems. CTP4 should be the promoter
of choice for Ad-based gene therapies of tumors deregulated for beta-catenin. We 
provide preliminary evidence that these may include prostate and ovarian as well 
as colorectal cancer.

PMID: 15233950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 11;32(8):2660-74. Print 2004.

Pharmacological and genetic modulation of Wnt-targeted Cre-Lox-mediated gene
expression in colorectal cancer cells.

Bordonaro M(1), Lazarova DL, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Section, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
michaelbordonaro@yahoo.com

Wnt-targeted gene therapy has been proposed as a treatment for human colorectal
cancer (CRC). The Cre-Lox system consists of methodology for enhancing targeted
expression from tissue-specific or cancer-specific promoters. We analyzed the
efficiency of Wnt-specific promoters as drivers of the Cre-mediated activity of a
luciferase reporter gene or cell death effector gene in CRC cell lines in the
presence and absence of two modulators of Wnt activity, sodium butyrate and
lithium chloride. Butyrate is present in the colonic lumen after digestion of
fiber-rich foods, whereas the colonic lumen is readily accessible to lithium
chloride. In both SW620 and HCT-116 CRC cells, a physiologically relevant
concentration of butyrate upregulated reporter and effector activity and altered 
the Wnt-specific expression pattern. Lithium chloride markedly enhanced
Cre-Lox-mediated Wnt-specific reporter expression only in APC wild-type CRC
cells. Possibilities for genetic modulation of the proposed CRC therapy included 
Wnt-specific expression of a floxed Lef1-VP16 fusion that enhanced Wnt-specific
cell death and of a floxed dominant-negative Tcf4 that specifically downregulated
endogenous Wnt activity. These findings demonstrated that the Cre-Lox system, in 
combination with pharmacological and genetic modulators, represents effective
methodology for enhancing Wnt-targeted gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC419474
PMID: 15141037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Res. 2004 May 1;64(9):3046-51.

HOXB13 homeodomain protein suppresses the growth of prostate cancer cells by the 
negative regulation of T-cell factor 4.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Lee SJ, Wang C, Jeng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. chjung@iupui.edu

In prostate gland, HOXB13 is highly expressed from the embryonic stages to
adulthood. However, the function of HOXB13 in normal cell growth and
tumorigenesis is not yet known. We investigated the role of HOXB13 and mechanism 
by which it functions in HOXB13-negative cells. Expression of HOXB13 was forced
in HOXB13-negative PC3 prostate cancer cells using a liposome-mediated gene
transfer approach. Compared with the control clones, HOXB13-expressing PC3 cells 
exhibited significant inhibition of in vitro and in vivo cell growth with G1 cell
cycle arrest mediated by the suppression of cyclin D1 expression. Because cyclin 
D1 is mainly regulated by beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF), TCF-4 response
element was used in a reporter gene transcription assay, demonstrating that
HOXB13 significantly inhibits TCF-4-mediated transcriptional activity in both
prostate and nonprostate cells. This inhibition occurred in a dose-responsive
manner and was specific to TCF-4 response element. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that HOXB13 down-regulates the expression of TCF-4 and its
responsive genes, c-myc and cyclin D1. HOXB13 also suppressed the activity of
natural c-myc promoter. This study suggests that HOXB13, a transcription factor, 
functions as a cell growth suppressor by negatively regulating the expression of 
TCF-4, which eventually provides negative signals for cell proliferation. This
observation will provide valuable insight into the molecular basis of prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15126340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int J Cancer. 2004 Jul 1;110(4):523-31.

Linear relationship between Wnt activity levels and apoptosis in colorectal
carcinoma cells exposed to butyrate.

Lazarova DL(1), Bordonaro M, Carbone R, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

We have reported that butyrate, a fatty acid produced by dietary fiber that
induces cell cycle arrest, differentiation and/or apoptosis in colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) cells in vitro, modulates Wnt activity in 2 CRC cell lines
(Bordonaro et al., Int. J. Cancer, 2002; 97:42-51). Our study determines how
changes in the levels of Wnt activity induced by butyrate relate to the effects
of butyrate on apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and differentiation of CRC cells. In 
10 human CRC cell lines a direct relationship was shown between apoptosis and
butyrate-induced increase in Wnt activity, as well as between suppressed clonal
growth and increased Wnt activity. No correlation existed between
butyrate-induced increase in Wnt activity and differentiation. The direct
relationship between apoptosis and Wnt activity was supported by analyses of
DLD-1 and HCT-116 cells expressing a dominant negative form of Tcf4, and
therefore, with repressed Wnt activity, as well as by measuring the ratio of
apoptotic to live cells in flow cytometry-sorted cell fractions with high and low
Wnt activity. Novel flow cytometric methodology was utilized to show that
butyrate differentially increases the number of cells with Wnt activity in
different CRC cell lines. Thus, CRC cell lines in which butyrate upregulated Wnt 
activity to relatively high levels were most susceptible to the apoptotic effects
of butyrate, whereas cell lines in which butyrate modestly modulated Wnt activity
were less affected.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15122584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 29;23(20):3689-99.

Gastrin-mediated activation of cyclin D1 transcription involves beta-catenin and 
CREB pathways in gastric cancer cells.

Pradeep A(1), Sharma C, Sathyanarayana P, Albanese C, Fleming JV, Wang TC, Wolfe 
MM, Baker KM, Pestell RG, Rana B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiology, The Texas A and M University System Health
Science Center, College of Medicine, Temple, TX 76504, USA.

Gastrin and its precursors promote proliferation in different gastrointestinal
cells. Since mature, amidated gastrin (G-17) can induce cyclin D1, we determined 
whether G-17-mediated induction of cyclin D1 transcription involved Wnt signaling
and CRE-binding protein (CREB) pathways. Our studies indicate that G-17 induces
protein, mRNA expression and transcription of the G(1)-specific marker cyclin D1,
in the gastric adenocarcinoma cell line AGSE (expressing the
gastrin/cholecystokinin B receptor). This was associated with an increase in
steady-state levels of total and nonphospho beta-catenin and its nuclear
translocation, indicating the activation of the Wnt-signaling pathway. In
addition, G-17-mediated increase in cyclin D1 transcription was significantly
attenuated by axin or dominant-negative (dn) T-cell factor 4(TCF4), suggesting
crosstalk of G-17 with the Wnt-signaling pathway. Mutational analysis indicated
that this effect was mediated through the cyclic AMP response element (CRE)
(predominantly) and the TCF sites in the cyclin D1 promoter, which was also
inhibited by dnCREB. Furthermore, G-17 stimulation resulted in increased
CRE-responsive reporter activity and CREB phosphorylation, indicating an
activation of CREB. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies revealed a
G-17-mediated increase in the interaction of beta-catenin with cyclin D1 CRE,
which was attenuated by dnTCF4 and dnCREB. These results indicate that G-17
induces cyclin D1 transcription, via the activation of beta-catenin and CREB
pathways.

PMID: 15116100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Nutr. 2004 May;134(5):1157-61.

Dietary soy sphingolipids suppress tumorigenesis and gene expression in
1,2-dimethylhydrazine-treated CF1 mice and ApcMin/+ mice.

Symolon H(1), Schmelz EM, Dillehay DL, Merrill AH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Nutrition and Health Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, 
USA.

Dietary supplementation with milk sphingolipids inhibits colon tumorigenesis in
CF1 mice treated with a colon carcinogen [1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)] and in
multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min) mice, which develop intestinal tumors
spontaneously. Plant sphingolipids differ structurally from those of mammals [soy
glucosylceramide (GlcCer) consists predominantly of a 4,8-sphingadiene backbone
and alpha-hydroxy-palmitic acid], which might affect their bioactivity. Soy
GlcCer was added to the AIN-76A diet (which contains <0.005% sphingolipid) to
investigate whether it would also suppress tumorigenesis in these mouse models.
Soy GlcCer reduced colonic cell proliferation in the upper half of the crypts in 
mice treated with DMH by 50 and 56% (P < 0.05) at 0.025 and 0.1% of the diet
(wt/wt), respectively, and reduced the number of aberrant colonic crypt foci (an 
early marker of colon carcinogenesis) by 38 and 52% (P < 0.05). Min mice fed
diets containing 0.025 and 0.1% (wt/wt) soy GlcCer developed 22 and 37% fewer
adenomas (P < 0.05), respectively. The effects of dietary sphingolipids on gene
expression in the intestinal mucosal cells of Min mice were analyzed using
Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays. Soy GlcCer affected the expression of 96 genes
by > or = 2-fold in a dose-dependent manner, increasing 32 and decreasing 64.
Decreases in the mRNA expression of two transcription factors associated with
cancer, hypoxia-induced factor 1 alpha (HIF1 alpha) and transcription factor 4
(TCF4), were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. In conclusion, soy GlcCer
suppressed colon tumorigenesis in two mouse models; hence, plant sphingolipids
warrant further investigation as inhibitors of colon cancer. Because soy contains
relatively high amounts of GlcCer, sphingolipids may partially account for the
anticancer benefits attributed to soy-based foods.

PMID: 15113963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Am J Pathol. 2004 May;164(5):1739-49.

Beta-catenin simultaneously induces activation of the p53-p21WAF1 pathway and
overexpression of cyclin D1 during squamous differentiation of endometrial
carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The functional consequences of up-regulation of beta-catenin as a transcription
factor are complex in different tumors. To clarify roles during squamous
differentiation (SqD) of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells, we investigated
expression of beta-catenin, as well as cyclin D1, p53, p21WAF1, and PML
(promyelocytic leukemia) in 80 cases of Em Ca with SqD areas, in comparison with 
cell proliferation determined with reference to Ki-67 antigen positivity. The
impact of beta-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated transcription was also
examined using Em Ca cells. In clinical cases, nuclear beta-catenin accumulation 
was more frequent in SqD areas, being positively linked with expression of cyclin
D1, p53, and p21WAF1, and inversely with Ki-67 and PML immunoreactivity.
Significant correlations of nuclear beta-catenin, cyclin D1, p53, and p21WAF1
were noted between SqD and the surrounding carcinoma lesions. The Ishikawa cell
line, with stable or tetracycline-regulated expression of mutant beta-catenin,
showed an increase in expression levels of cyclin D1, p14ARF, p53, and p21WAF1
but not PML, and activation of beta-catenin-TCF4-mediated transcription
determined with TOP/FOP constructs. The cell morphology was senescence-like
rather than squamoid in appearance. Moreover, overexpressed beta-catenin could
activate transcription from p14ARF and cyclin D1 promoters, in a TCF4-dependent
manner. These findings indicate that in Em Cas, nuclear beta-catenin can
simultaneously induce activation of the p53-p21WAF1 pathway and overexpression of
cyclin D1, leading to suppression of cell proliferation or induction of cell
senescence. However, overexpression of beta-catenin alone is not sufficient for
development of a squamoid phenotype in Em Ca cells, suggesting that nuclear
accumulation is an initial signal for trans-differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1615666
PMID: 15111320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Exp Cell Res. 2004 May 1;295(2):469-87.

Human neuroblastoma cells exposed to hypoxia: induction of genes associated with 
growth, survival, and aggressive behavior.

Jögi A(1), Vallon-Christersson J, Holmquist L, Axelson H, Borg A, Påhlman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, University 
Hospital MAS, Lund University, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

We have recently found that cells derived from human neuroblastoma, a sympathetic
nervous system (SNS) tumor, dedifferentiate and acquire a neural crest-like
phenotype when exposed to hypoxia. In the present study, global analysis of gene 
expression and quantitative PCR of relevant genes showed that hypoxia provokes a 
general adaptive response in neuroblastoma cells and confirm loss of the neuronal
phenotype and gain of stem-cell characteristics. Of the approximately 17,000
genes and ESTs analyzed, 199 were consistently upregulated and 36 were
downregulated more than 2-fold by hypoxia. As anticipated, several genes involved
in glucose and iron metabolism and neovascularization were upregulated, the
latter group we here show to include the gene encoding chromogranin C and its
cleavage product, secretoneurin, a vascular smooth muscle cell mitogen. We also
observed upregulation of genes implicated in cell survival and growth, such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), neuropilin 1, adrenomedullin, and
IGF-2. Several metallothioneins, which are linked to tumor drug resistance, were 
upregulated, whereas the expression of MDR1 decreased. In hypoxic neuroblastoma
cells, proneuronal lineage specifying transcription factors, and their
dimerization partner E2-2, were downregulated, whereas their inhibitors Id2 and
HES-1 were induced, providing a molecular mechanism for the hypoxia-provoked
dedifferentiation of neuroblastoma cells.

PMID: 15093745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 17;23(28):4847-55.

Cyr61 suppresses the growth of non-small-cell lung cancer cells via the
beta-catenin-c-myc-p53 pathway.

Tong X(1), O'Kelly J, Xie D, Mori A, Lemp N, McKenna R, Miller CW, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Cysteine-rich protein 61 (Cyr61) is a growth factor-inducible, immediate-early
gene that has multifaceted activities in various cancers. In a previous study, we
found that Cyr61 inhibited the growth of the H520 and H460 non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. In further studies, we now report that p53 plays a
pivotal role in Cyr61-dependent cellular growth arrest. Blocking Cyr61 with a
Cyr61 antibody resulted in the downregulation of expression of p53 and p21, as
well as partially reversing the growth suppression of H520-Cyr61 cells.
Proliferation of NSCLC cell lines (NCI-H157, H125, H1299), having a mutant p53,
were not suppressed by Cyr61. Inhibition of wild-type p53, by either human
papilloma virus type 16 E6 or a dominant-negative p53, resulted in the rescue of 
the growth suppression mediated by Cyr61 in the H520-Cyr61 cells. The enhanced
levels of p21WAF1 and p130/RB2, in the Cyr61-expressing H520-Cyr61 cells, were
also inhibited by blocking p53 showing that p21 and p130 were induced by p53 in
these cells. In addition, levels of both c-myc and beta-catenin increased in
Cyr61 stably transfected H520 cells. Moreover, beta-catenin was translocated into
the nucleus in these cells. Inhibition of c-myc expression in the H520-Cyr61
cells with antisense c-myc resulted in their decreased levels of p53.
Transfecting cells with a dominant-negative T-cell factor (TCF4), the specific
inhibitor of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex, downregulated the expression of
c-myc. Taken together, the data suggest that Cyr61 suppressed the growth of NSCLC
cells by triggering a signal transduction pathway through beta-catenin. In this
pathway, Cyr61 activated the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex, which promoted the
expression of c-myc and the latter induced expression of p53, and p53 upregulated
p21WAF1 and p130/RB2, resulting in growth arrest.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15077166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2004 Mar;33(2):108-14.

[Alterations of p53 gene and microsatellite instability in ulcerative colitis and
ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Lai MD, Huang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Center for Environmental
Genomics, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of p53 protein, incidence of p53 gene mutation
and microsatellite instability in ulcerative colitis, dysplasia of colonic mucosa
and ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer.
METHODS: P53 protein expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in 70
specimens from 21 cases of ulcerative colitis and 25 colonic mucosa specimens
from normal subjects. The specimens of ulcerative colitis were examined for the
mutation in exon 5, 6, 7, 8 of p53 gene with
microdissection-PCR-SSCP/HA-clone-sequencing technique and the alterations in 10 
microsatellite loci with microdissection-PCR-SSLP-clone- sequencing technique.
RESULT: None of 25 normal specimens was p53-positive immunohistochemically, while
4/21 of ulcerative colitis specimens were p53-positive. P53- positive rate in
inflammatory mucosa of ulcerative colitis specimens was 0/5, while that was 1/7, 
2/7 and 1/2 in low-grade displasia (LGD), high-grade displasia (HGD) and
carcinoma, respectively. The abnormal exons were detected by SSCP and confirmed
by sequencing in 2 out of 21 cases: one was exon 6 in a case with carcinoma and
the other was exon 8 in a HGD case; both had positive P53 expression. Two cases
showed positive in Bat26 locus by SSLP: one was a LGD case, the other was a case 
of carcinoma, who also had abnormal exon 6 of p53 gene. Other 9 microsatellite
loci, (TGF beta RII(A)(10), IGFIIR(G)(8), IGFIIR(CT)(5), TGF beta RII(GT)(3),
BAX(G)(8), hMSH3(A)8, hMSH6(C)(8), TCF4(A)(9) and DPC4 (CA)(17)) were showed
negative in all cases.
CONCLUSION: P53 gene mutations and microsatellite instability may be one of the
mechanisms for higher risk of carcinogenesis in ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 15067728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3404-14.

Acetylation of beta-catenin by p300 regulates beta-catenin-Tcf4 interaction.

Lévy L(1), Wei Y, Labalette C, Wu Y, Renard CA, Buendia MA, Neuveut C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncogenèse et Virologie Moléculaire (INSERM U579), Institut Pasteur,
75015 Paris, France.

Lysine acetylation modulates the activities of nonhistone regulatory proteins and
plays a critical role in the regulation of cellular gene transcription. In this
study, we showed that the transcriptional coactivator p300 acetylated
beta-catenin at lysine 345, located in arm repeat 6, in vitro and in vivo.
Acetylation of this residue increased the affinity of beta-catenin for Tcf4, and 
the cellular Tcf4-bound pool of beta-catenin was significantly enriched in
acetylated form. We demonstrated that the acetyltransferase activity of p300 was 
required for efficient activation of transcription mediated by beta-catenin/Tcf4 
and that the cooperation between p300 and beta-catenin was severely reduced by
the K345R mutation, implying that acetylation of beta-catenin plays a part in the
coactivation of beta-catenin by p300. Interestingly, acetylation of beta-catenin 
had opposite, negative effects on the binding of beta-catenin to the androgen
receptor. Our data suggest that acetylation of beta-catenin in the arm 6 domain
regulates beta-catenin transcriptional activity by differentially modulating its 
affinity for Tcf4 and the androgen receptor. Thus, our results describe a new
mechanism by which p300 might regulate beta-catenin transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC381622
PMID: 15060161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 21;23(8):1825-33. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Hindgut defects and transformation of the gastro-intestinal tract in
Tcf4(-/-)/Tcf1(-/-) embryos.

Gregorieff A(1), Grosschedl R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Center for Biomedical
Genetics, Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signalling plays a critical role in both initiating and patterning of the
anterior-posterior axis during development. Wnts exert their biological effects, 
in part, by activating specific target genes through members of the TCF/LEF
family of transcription factors. To gain new insight into the role of T-cell
factors (or Tcf's) during development, we analysed Tcf4 and Tcf1 compound null
embryos. These mutants showed severe caudal truncations, as well as duplications 
of the neural tube. Unlike other mutations affecting Wnt signalling, paraxial
mesoderm formation was not impaired and early caudal markers, such as T, were
unaffected. Analysis of endodermal markers uncovered early and specific defects
in hindgut expansion, and later an anterior transformation of the
gastro-intestinal tract. Our results reveal a novel role for Wnt signalling in
early gut morphogenesis and suggest that specific Wnt-driven patterning events
are determined by the unique tissue distribution of Tcf/Lef family members.

PMCID: PMC394245
PMID: 15057272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell Cycle. 2004 May;3(5):554-7. Epub 2004 May 15.

Wnts as essential growth factors for the adult small intestine and colon.

Hoffman J(1), Kuhnert F, Davis CR, Kuo CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Division, Stanford University School of
Medicine, California 94305, USA.

The study of physiologic functions of Wnt proteins has been complicated by the
redundant nature of the families encoding the Wnt factors and their Frizzled
receptors. Adenoviral expression of the secreted Wnt antagonist Dickkopf-1 (Dkk1)
was used to achieve fully conditional inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling in
adult mice. Systemic expression of Dkk1 resulted in rapid inhibition of Wnt
target gene expression and of proliferation of the small intestine and colon,
loss of proliferative crypts, and eventual inflammation and architectural
degeneration. These studies indicate an essential requirement for extracellular
Wnt signaling in the maintenance of adult small intestine and colon
proliferation. The essential role of Wnt signaling in ongoing proliferation in
the colon suggests potential clinical applications in mucosal repair for
inflammatory bowel diseases and underscores the utility of adenoviral strategies 
for conditional ablation of gene function in adult organisms.

PMID: 15044853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cell Res. 2004 Feb;14(1):74-80.

Aberrant expression and function of TCF4 in the proliferation of hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line BEL-7402.

Zhao DH(1), Hong JJ, Guo SY, Yang RL, Yuan J, Wen CY, Zhou KY, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Biotechnology, College of Life
Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097, Jiangsu, China.

Wnt signaling pathway is essential for development and tumorigenesis, however,
this signaling pathway in the progress of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains 
unclear. In this paper, we studied the function of human T-cell transcription
factor-4 (TCF4), a key factor of Wnt signaling pathway, on the proliferation of
HCC cell line. We showed that the expression of TCF4 mRNA in HCC cell line
BEL-7402 was higher than that in immortalized normal liver cell line L02.
Blockage of Wnt pathway by Delta-NTCF4, a dominant negative TCF4, could suppress 
BEL-7402 cells growth and decrease the expression of cyclin D1 and c-myc, two of 
target genes of Wnt pathway. On the other hand, stimulating Wnt pathway by
introducing a degradation-resistant -catenin S37A could increase BEL-7402 cells
proliferation. But all the treatments had no effect on L02 cells. Our data
indicated that TCF4 might be another key factor in Wnt pathway involved in HCC
cells proliferation and TCF4 could be an effective therapeutic target for
suppressing the growth of hepatocellular cancers.

PMID: 15040893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23517-24. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Epidermal growth factor-mediated T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor
transcriptional activity is essential but not sufficient for cell cycle
progression in nontransformed mammary epithelial cells.

Graham NA(1), Asthagiri AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

Because beta-catenin target genes such as cyclin D1 are involved in cell cycle
progression, we examined whether beta-catenin has a more pervasive role in normal
cell proliferation, even upon stimulation by non-Wnt ligands. Here, we
demonstrate that epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulates T-cell factor/lymphoid 
enhancer factor (Tcf/Lef) transcriptional activity in nontransformed mammary
epithelial cells (MCF-10A) and that its transcriptional activity is essential for
EGF-mediated progression through G1/S phase. Thus, expression of
dominant-negative Tcf4 blocks EGF-mediated Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity and
bromodeoxyuridine uptake. In fact, the importance of EGF-mediated Tcf/Lef
transcriptional activity for cell cycle progression may lie further upstream at
the G1/S phase transition. We demonstrate that dominant-negative Tcf4 inhibits a 
reporter of cyclin D1 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. Importantly, 
dominant-negative Tcf4 suppresses EGF-mediated cell cycle activity specifically
by thwarting EGF-mediated Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity, not by broader
effects on EGF signaling. Thus, although expression of dominant-negative Tcf4
blocks EGF-mediated TOPFLASH activation, it has no effect on either EGF receptor 
or ERK phosphorylation, further underscoring the fact that Tcf/Lef-mediated
transcription is essential for cell cycle progression, even when other
pro-mitogenic signals are at normal levels. Yet, despite its essential role,
Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity alone is not sufficient for cell cycle
progression. Serum also stimulates Tcf/Lef transcriptional activation in MCF-10A 
cells but is unable to promote DNA synthesis. Taken together, our data support a 
model wherein EGF promotes Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity, and this signal is
essential but not sufficient for cell cycle activity.

PMID: 15026412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 22;23(19):3376-84.

Identification of Tcf-4 as a transcriptional target of p53 signalling.

Rother K(1), Johne C, Spiesbach K, Haugwitz U, Tschöp K, Wasner M, Klein-Hitpass 
L, Möröy T, Mössner J, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Max-Bürger-Forschungszentrum,
Universität Leipzig, Johannisallee 30, Leipzig D-04103, Germany.

T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 is a main transcription factor to pass on Wnt/beta-catenin 
signalling. The tumour suppressor protein p53 contributes as a transcription
factor to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis induction. Mutations of components in
p53 and Wnt/beta-catenin signalling networks play a part in tumour formation.
Here, we identify the Tcf-4 gene as a downstream effector of p53. Induction of
wild-type p53 in a tet-off regulated human colon cell system leads to the
reduction of Tcf-4 mRNA and protein levels. Also, mRNA of the Tcf-4 target gene
uPAR is downregulated after p53 induction. Expression of a luciferase reporter
controlled by the Tcf-4 promoter is repressed by wild-type p53, but not by a p53 
mutant deficient in DNA binding. Such a regulation is seen in cell lines of
different origin. These findings directly link Wnt/beta-catenin signalling and
p53 tumour suppressor function and may provide a mechanism by which loss of p53
function contributes to progression in the adenoma/carcinoma sequence in colon
tumours. Furthermore, since Tcf-4 is expressed in many tissues and downregulation
of Tcf-4 by p53 is seen in several different cell types, this regulation likely
plays a role in proliferation control of all tissues that can express p53 and
Tcf-4.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 14990988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nat Genet. 2004 Mar;36(3):277-82. Epub 2004 Feb 8.

Indian Hedgehog is an antagonist of Wnt signaling in colonic epithelial cell
differentiation.

van den Brink GR(1), Bleuming SA, Hardwick JC, Schepman BL, Offerhaus GJ, Keller 
JJ, Nielsen C, Gaffield W, van Deventer SJ, Roberts DJ, Peppelenbosch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. g.r.vandenbrink@amc.uva.nl

Wnt signaling defines the colonic epithelial progenitor cell phenotype, and
mutations in the gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) that activate the Wnt
pathway cause the familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP) syndrome and most
sporadic colon cancers. The mechanisms that regulate the transition of epithelial
precursor cells into their differentiated derivatives are poorly characterized.
We report that Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is expressed by mature colonocytes and
regulates their differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
restricts the expression of Wnt targets to the base of the colonic crypt in vivo,
and transfection of Ihh into colon cancer cells leads to a downregulation of both
components of the nuclear TCF4-beta-catenin complex and abrogates endogenous Wnt 
signaling in vitro. In turn, expression of Ihh is downregulated in polyps of
individuals with FAP and expression of doxycycline-inducible dominant negative
TCF4 (dnTCF4) restores Ihh expression in APC mutant DLD-1 colon cancer cells.
These data identify a new Wnt-Hh axis in colonic epithelial renewal.

PMID: 14770182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):91-102.

Small-molecule antagonists of the oncogenic Tcf/beta-catenin protein complex.

Lepourcelet M(1), Chen YN, France DS, Wang H, Crews P, Petersen F, Bruseo C, Wood
AW, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):5-6.

Key molecular lesions in colorectal and other cancers cause
beta-catenin-dependent transactivation of T cell factor (Tcf)-dependent genes.
Disruption of this signal represents an opportunity for rational cancer therapy. 
To identify compounds that inhibit association between Tcf4 and beta-catenin, we 
screened libraries of natural compounds in a high-throughput assay for
immunoenzymatic detection of the protein-protein interaction. Selected compounds 
disrupt Tcf/beta-catenin complexes in several independent in vitro assays and
potently antagonize cellular effects of beta-catenin-dependent activities,
including reporter gene activation, c-myc or cyclin D1 expression, cell
proliferation, and duplication of the Xenopus embryonic dorsal axis. These
compounds thus meet predicted criteria for disrupting Tcf/beta-catenin complexes 
and define a general standard to establish mechanism-based activity of small
molecule inhibitors of this pathogenic protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 14749129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):5-6.

Wnt breakers in colon cancer.

Clevers H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands. clevers@niob.knaw.nl

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):91-102.

Beta-catenin and Tcf4 are the downstream effectors of the Wnt signaling cascade. 
In colorectal cancer, mutations in Wnt cascade genes such as APC lead to the
inappropriate formation of beta-catenin/Tcf4 complexes. Earlier work has
predicted that disruption of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 protein-protein interaction
could revert the proliferative phenotype of colorectal cancer cells. In this
issue of Cancer Cell, Shivdasani and colleagues have explored high-throughput
screening of compound libraries in a search for small molecule inhibitors of the 
Wnt cascade. Ultimately, such inhibitors could become a novel class of smart
anticancer drugs.

PMID: 14749120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14879-88. Epub 2004 Jan 27.

The human Frizzled 6 (HFz6) acts as a negative regulator of the canonical Wnt.
beta-catenin signaling cascade.

Golan T(1), Yaniv A, Bafico A, Liu G, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Previously we have cloned the human Frizzled 1 (HFz1) and shown that it transmits
the Wnt-3a-induced canonical pathway. We also cloned the human Frizzled 6 (HFz6) 
and show in the present study that, as opposed to HFz1, HFz6 did not activate the
canonical Wnt pathway following exposure to various Wnts, whether belonging to
the Wnt-1 or to the Wnt-5a group. Moreover we show that HFz6 repressed
Wnt-3a-induced canonical signaling when co-expressed with HFz1. HFz6 repressed
the canonical Wnt cascade activated also by various Wnt signaling intracellular
mediators such as Dishevelled-1, a stabilized beta-catenin(S33Y) mutant, and
LiCl-mediated repression of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta activity. Removal of
HFz6 N'- or C'-terminal sequences abolished HFz6 repressive activity. As the HFz6
repressive effect was not associated with a decrease in the level of
beta-catenin, it is suggested that HFz6 does not affect beta-catenin
stabilization, implying that HFz6 transmits a repressive signaling that
cross-talks with and inhibits the canonical Wnt pathway downstream of
beta-catenin destruction complex. HFz6 did not affect the level of nuclear T-cell
factor 4 (TCF4) nor did it affect beta-catenin.TCF4 complex formation. However,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that HFz6 repressed the binding
of TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor transcription factors to target DNA. Moreover we 
present data suggesting that HFz6 activates the transforming growth
factor-beta-activated kinase-NEMO-like kinase pathway that blocks TCF/lymphoid
enhancer factor binding to target promoters, thereby inhibiting the ability of
beta-catenin to activate transcription of Wnt target genes.

PMID: 14747478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 23;313(4):1023-9.

Targeted degradation of beta-catenin by chimeric F-box fusion proteins.

Liu J(1), Stevens J, Matsunami N, White RL.

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University of California San
Francisco, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein, together with Axin and
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta), forms a Wnt-regulated signaling
complex that mediates phosphorylation-dependent degradation of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin by ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Degradation of phosphorylated
beta-catenin is initiated by interaction through the WD40-repeat of a F-box
protein beta-TrCP, a component of SCF ubiquitin ligase complex. Mutations in APC,
Axin, and beta-catenin that prevent down-regulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin
are found in various types of cancers. In the search for efficient treatment and 
prevention of malignancies associated with increased levels of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin, we created chimeric F-box fusion proteins by replacing the
WD40-repeat of beta-TrCP with the beta-catenin-binding domains of Tcf4 and
E-cadherin. Expression of chimeric F-box fusion proteins successfully promotes
degradation of beta-catenin independently of GSK-3beta-mediated phosphorylation. 
More importantly, this degradation does not require intact APC protein (pAPC).

PMID: 14706645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):8726-34.

TIP49 regulates beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic transformation and T-cell factor
target gene induction via effects on chromatin remodeling.

Feng Y(1), Lee N, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Beta-catenin has a key role in Wnt signaling via effects on T-cell factor
(TCF)-mediated transcription. Mutational defects in beta-catenin regulation are
seen in many cancers, leading to elevated beta-catenin levels, enhanced binding
of beta-catenin to TCFs, and increased expression of TCF-regulated genes. Factors
cooperating with beta-catenin in transcription of TCF-regulated genes are not
well defined. TIP49, an ATPase previously implicated as a cofactor for oncogenic 
transformation by c-Myc, has been shown to bind to beta-catenin. We found that
expression of an ATPase-deficient mutant form of TIP49 (TIP49D302N) substantially
inhibited beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic transformation of immortalized rat
epithelial cells and anchorage-independent growth of human colon cancer cells
with deregulated beta-catenin. The TIP49D302N mutant inhibited
beta-catenin-mediated activation of TCF-dependent cellular genes. Similar
inhibition of the expression of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent genes was seen with
small interfering RNA approaches against endogenous TIP49. TIP49 was found in
complexes with chromatin remodeling and histone-modifying factors and cofactors, 
including the TIP60 histone acetylase-associated proteins
transactivation/transformation-domain associated protein (TRRAP) and BAF53. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation methods, the TIP49, TIP60, and TRRAP proteins were 
found to interact with sequences in the regulatory region of the gene for ITF-2, 
a TCF-dependent cellular gene. The ability of TIP49D302N to inhibit ITF-2 gene
expression was linked to decreased acetylation of histones in the vicinity of the
TCF-binding sites in the ITF-2 promoter region. We suggest that TIP49 is an
important cofactor in beta-catenin/TCF gene regulation in normal and neoplastic
cells, likely functioning in chromatin remodeling.

PMID: 14695187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Chin Med J (Engl). 2003 Dec;116(12):1885-92.

Alterations of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 instead of GSK-3beta contribute to
activation of Wnt pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cui J(1), Zhou X, Liu Y, Tang Z, Romeih M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Medical Center of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. jian.cui@mail.jci.tju.edu

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study is to investigate the inappropriate activation 
of Wnt pathway in the hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: We analyzed the alterations of three key components of Wnt pathway,
beta-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) and T cell factor 4
(Tcf-4), in 34 samples of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and paracancerous normal
liver by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction-single strand
conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP), direct sequencing, semi-quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: We found 61.8% (21/34) of all the HCCs examined showed an abnormal
beta-catenin protein accumulation in the cytoplasm or nuclei. RT-PCR-SSCP and
direct sequencing showed that beta-catenin exon 3 mutations existed in 44.1%
(15/34) of the HCCs. No mutations of GSK-3beta or Tcf-4 were detected in HCCs.
Moreover, mRNA of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 but not GSK-3beta was found to be over
expressed in HCCs. On analyzing the relationship between alterations of
beta-catenin or Tcf-4 and C-myc or Cyclin D1 expression, we found that the
mutations of beta-catenin as well as over expression of beta-catenin or Tcf-4
gene were independently correlated with C-myc gene over expression in HCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present findings strongly suggest mutations of beta-catenin as
well as over expression of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 gene activate the Wnt pathway
in HCC independently with the target gene most likely to be C-myc.

PMID: 14687479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Cell. 2003 Dec;5(6):937-44.

A Tcf4-positive mesodermal population provides a prepattern for vertebrate limb
muscle patterning.

Kardon G(1), Harfe BD, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Nai;ve myogenic cells migrate from the somites into the developing vertebrate
limb, where they simultaneously differentiate into myotubes and form distinct
anatomical muscles. Limb signals have been hypothesized to direct the pattern of 
muscles formed, but the molecular nature of these signals and the identity of the
cells that produce them have remained unclear. We have identified a population of
lateral plate-derived limb mesodermal cells in both chick and mouse that
expresses the transcription factor Tcf4 in a muscle-specific pattern
independently of the muscle cells themselves. Functional experiments in the chick
demonstrate that TCF4 and the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway in these limb mesodermal
cells are critical for muscle patterning. We propose that Tcf4-expressing cells
establish a prepattern in the limb mesoderm that determines the sites of myogenic
differentiation and thus establishes the basic pattern of limb muscles.

PMID: 14667415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2201-9.

Reconstructed beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling in yeast applicable to functional
evaluation of APC mutations.

Yamada H(1), Furuuchi K, Aoyama T, Kataoka A, Hamada J, Tada M, Okushiba S, Kondo
S, Moriuchi T, Katoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In human genetics and molecular oncology, mutation research is necessary not only
to identify mutations in nucleic acid sequences, but also to analyze the loss of 
function caused by mutant proteins. We reconstructed a protein-protein network
system of human beta-catenin and TCF4, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. beta-Catenin 
and TCF4 proteins form a complex and transactivate reporter genes. Co-expressed
wild-type APC with beta-catenin and TCF4 inhibit the transcriptional activity of 
the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in yeast, as well as in mammals. This unique method
in which the beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling pathway is reconstructed in vivo may
prove useful for the functional evaluation of APC mutants, including a type of
APC truncated and missense mutants influenced to the ability of binding to
beta-catenin.

PMCID: PMC1892379
PMID: 14633595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12584-9. Epub 2003 Oct 17.

Nitric oxide-donating aspirin inhibits beta-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) signaling
in SW480 colon cancer cells by disrupting the nuclear beta-catenin-TCF
association.

Nath N(1), Kashfi K, Chen J, Rigas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical
School, New York, NY 10031.

Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway and altered Beta-catenin expression are central 
early events in colorectal carcinogenesis. We studied the ortho, meta, and para
(o-, m-, and p-) positional isomers of NO-donating aspirin (NO-ASA), a
chemopreventive agent against colon cancer, for their effect on Beta-catenin/T
cell factor (TCF) signaling. In human SW480 colon carcinoma cells, cell-growth
inhibition by NO-ASA [IC50 values for p-, o-, and m- were 48.1 +/- 4.3 (mean
+/-SEM), 60.4 +/- 2.1, and 900 +/-50 microM, respectively] was accompanied by
significant inhibition of Beta-catenin signaling. We determined
Beta-catenin-dependent TCF-4 transcriptional activity by measuring the activity
of the luciferase gene placed under the control of TCF-4 regulatory sequences.
The IC50 values for Beta-catenin/TCF-4-signaling inhibition by NO-ASA were: o-,
2.6 +/- 0.4; m-, 15 +/- 5; p-, 1.1 +/- 0.1 microM; and for ASA, >5,000 microM.
Total or nuclear levels of Beta-catenin and its distribution in the cell were not
altered by NO-ASA, as judged by protein expression levels and semiquantitative
immunofluorescence analysis. NO-ASA disrupted the association of Beta-catenin and
TCF-4 in the nucleus, whereas ASA did not affect it. NO-ASA reduced the
expression of cyclin D1, a downstream target gene that plays an important role in
colon carcinogenesis. In contrast, a structural analog of NO-ASA lacking the -NO2
moiety did not affect TCF-4 transcriptional activity. Thus, NO-ASA inhibits
Beta-catenin-mediated TCF activity by preventing the formation of the
Beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. This effect, occurring at NO-ASA concentrations far
below those required to inhibit cell growth, may be a critical early event in the
chemopreventive activity of NO-ASA against colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC240661
PMID: 14566053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6116-20.

Involvement of the FGF18 gene in colorectal carcinogenesis, as a novel downstream
target of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor complex.

Shimokawa T(1), Furukawa Y, Sakai M, Li M, Miwa N, Lin YM, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan.

To search for potential molecular targets for development of novel anticancer
drugs, we have been analyzing expression profiles of clinical samples from cancer
patients, using a genome-wide cDNA microarray. In experiments with colon cancer
cells, the gene encoding fibroblast growth factor 18 (FGF18) was among those that
showed elevated expression. The promoter region of this gene was found to contain
putative Tcf4-binding motifs; moreover a reporter-gene assay using luciferase
activity as a marker and an electromobility shift assay indicated that FGF18 is a
downstream transcription target in the beta-catenin/Tcf4 pathway. We showed that 
exogenous FGF18 promoted growth of NIH3T3 cells in an autocrine manner and that
transfection of FGF18 short interfering RNAs suppressed growth of colon cancer
cells in culture. Our results indicate that FGF18 is activated in colon cancers
as a direct downstream target of the Wnt signaling pathway and that it might
represent a marker for early diagnosis and a molecular target for treatment of
this life-threatening tumor.

PMID: 14559787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Jan;25(1):47-59. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

A functional genomics approach for the identification of putative tumor
suppressor genes: Dickkopf-1 as suppressor of HeLa cell transformation.

Mikheev AM(1), Mikheeva SA, Liu B, Cohen P, Zarbl H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Biology, Division of Public Health, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98104-2092, USA.

We described previously the isolation and characterization of two non-tumorigenic
revertants from the HeLa cervical carcinoma cell line, and demonstrated that loss
of the transformed phenotype in these cells was the result of dominant somatic
mutations. The goal of the present study was to use cDNA microarrays to identify 
candidate tumor suppressors among the set of genes whose increased expression
correlated with loss of tumorigenicity in both revertants. Among the genes with
significantly increased expression levels in both HA and HF revertants we
identified Insulin Growth Factor Binding Protein-3 (IGFBP-3) and the Dickkopf-1
(DKK-1) genes. Both of these genes encode secreted proteins implicated in the
modulation cell growth and differentiation, and IGFBP-3 was shown previously to
have tumor suppressing activity. To test the hypothesis that increased expression
of IGFBP-3 or the DKK-1 genes could have contributed to the suppression of
tumorigenicity in the revertants, we expressed IGFBP-3 or DKK-1 in HeLa cells,
and assessed their effects on anchorage dependent and independent growth, and
tumor formation in athymic nude mice. Ectopic expression of IGFBP-3 or DKK-1
resulted in significantly decreased growth in soft agar. HeLa cells expressing
ectopic IGFBP-3 or DKK-1 showed statistically significant differences in the
kinetics of tumor formation. In any tumors that arose in animals injected with
the IGFBP-3 expressing cells, there was a complete loss of IGFBP-3 activity, as
measured by binding to IGF-1 and IGF-2 proteins. All tumors that arose after
injection of cells expressing DKK-1, invariably showed almost a complete loss of 
ectopic DKK-1 expression. The observations that loss of DKK-1 expression or
IGFBP-3 activity was required for tumorigenicity suggested that both proteins
encode putative tumor suppressor genes. We also show that while DKK-1 expression 
does not affect cell growth in vitro, the protein does sensitize cells to
apoptosis. We also demonstrated that effect of DKK-1 was not due to inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF4-regulated transcription. Taken together, our results indicate
that somatic cell genetics combining with gene expression profiling may be a
useful approach for the identification of functional suppressors of malignant
cell growth.

PMID: 14555616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Langenbecks Arch Chir Suppl Kongressbd. 1998;115(Suppl I):303-6.

[beta-catenin overexpression in metastasized colorectal carcinoma--an important
mechanism in progression of the disease?].

[Article in German]

Mann B(1), Gratchev A, Riede E, Schmidt-Wolf I, Trojanek B, Moyer P, Hanski C,
Buhr HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chirurgische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität
Berlin, 12200 Berlin. mann@ukbf.fu-berlin.de

The protein beta-catenin can not be degraded in CRC due to different reasons.
This leads to an increased formation of beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex, which has a
strong transcription factor activity. We investigated the mRNA expression of
beta-catenin and Tcf4 in N, T and M in 12 cell lines and in tissues samples of 14
patients. We found a significant increase of beta-catenin mRNA expression in the 
primary tumors and in the metastases. These data show for the first time that
apart from the known mechanisms the overexpression of beta-catenin mRNA can be an
additional factor contributing to the increase of beta-catenin amount in cells of
CRC. The resulting increased transcription of hitherto unknown target genes might
be involved in the progression and the metastatic process of CRC.

PMID: 14518265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Pathol. 2003 Oct;201(2):204-12.

WIF1, a component of the Wnt pathway, is down-regulated in prostate, breast,
lung, and bladder cancer.

Wissmann C(1), Wild PJ, Kaiser S, Roepcke S, Stoehr R, Woenckhaus M, Kristiansen 
G, Hsieh JC, Hofstaedter F, Hartmann A, Knuechel R, Rosenthal A, Pilarsky C.

Author information: 
(1)metaGen Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Oudenarder Strasse 16, 13347 Berlin, Germany.

To detect novel Wnt-pathway genes involved in tumourigenesis, this study analysed
the RNA expression levels of 40 genes of the Wnt pathway by chip hybridization of
microdissected matched pairs of 54 primary prostate carcinomas. Eleven genes
showed greater than two-fold differential expression in at least 10% of prostate 
cancers. Three of these genes encode extracellular components of the Wnt pathway 
(WNT2, WIF1, SFRP4); two are receptors (FZD4, FZD6); two belong to the
intracellular signal cascade (DVL1, PPP2CB); one regulates transcription (TCF4); 
and three represent genes regulated by this pathway (CCND2, CD44, MYC). While
SFRP4, FZD4, FZD6, DVL1, TCF4, and MYC are up-regulated, WIF1, WNT2, PPP2CB,
CCND2, and CD44 are down-regulated in certain prostate cancer patients. Wnt
inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) and secreted frizzled related protein (SFRP4) showed
the most significant aberrant expression at the RNA level. WIF1 was
down-regulated in 64% of primary prostate cancers, while SFRP4 was up-regulated
in 81% of the patients. Immunohistochemical analysis using a polyclonal antibody 
revealed strong cytoplasmic perinuclear WIF1 expression in normal epithelial
cells of the prostate, breast, lung, and urinary bladder. Strong reduction of
WIF1 protein expression was found in 23% of prostate carcinomas, but also in 60% 
of breast, 75% of non-small cell lung (NSCLC), and 26% of bladder cancers
analysed. No significant association between WIF1 down-regulation and tumour
stage or grade was observed for prostate, breast or non-small cell lung
carcinomas, indicating that loss of WIF1 expression may be an early event in
tumourigenesis in these tissues. However, down-regulation of WIF1 correlated with
higher tumour stage in urinary bladder tumours (pTa versus pT1-pT4; p = 0.038).

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14517837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 3;309(4):830-5.

APC 3 x 15 beta-catenin-binding domain potentiates beta-catenin association to
TBP and upregulates TCF-4 transcriptional activity.

Roura S(1), Martínez D, Piedra J, Miravet S, García de Herreros A, Duñach M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cel.lular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003, Barcelona, Spain. sroura@hsp.santpau.es

Beta-catenin plays a dual role as a regulatory component of adherens junctions
and as a transcriptional cofactor. The nuclear activity of this protein is
controlled by adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein. We have analyzed the
effect on beta-catenin-dependent transcription of a beta-catenin binding domain
present in APC, consisting in three 15-amino acid repeats (APC 3 x 15).
Association of this fragment prevents the interaction of beta-catenin with
E-cadherin but not with TCF-4. Transfection of this fragment to several cell
lines increases the transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex
and promotes the translocation of beta-catenin to the nucleus. Moreover, previous
binding of APC 3 x 15 facilitates the association of beta-catenin to the TATA
box-associated protein. Therefore, APC 3 x 15 domain plays a positive role in the
control of transcriptional activity of beta-catenin-TCF-4 and can contribute to
explain the role of the truncated forms of APC in colon tumorigenesis.

PMID: 13679048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Int J Cancer. 2003 Nov 1;107(2):229-37.

Overexpression of the beta-catenin binding domain of cadherin selectively kills
colorectal cancer cells.

Pierce M(1), Wang C, Stump M, Kamb A.

Author information: 
(1)Deltagen Proteomics, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

The beta-catenin pathway is involved in growth, differentiation and tumor
formation. Suppression of pathway activity by expressed inhibitors can cause
growth arrest or apoptosis in certain colon carcinoma lines. We compare the
effects of 2 pathway inhibitors, a VE-cadherin cytoplasmic domain fragment
(Cad5CD) and a truncated, dominant-negative Tcf4 (TcfDN), using a microplate
assay for cell death and microarray gene expression analysis. The cell-lethal
assay shows that Cad5CD, when expressed in HT29 human colon tumor cells and 3
non-colon lines, selectively kills the HT29 cells. Cad5CD overexpression inhibits
beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity, as determined by results from
microarray experiments. Our results support the view that beta-catenin is an
attractive anti-cancer target, especially if the Cad5CD binding site or Cad5CD
itself can be exploited for drug development. In addition, therapeutically
relevant phenotypes such as drug selectivity may be difficult to predict from
gene expression analysis alone. Other more specialized phenotypic tests such as
cell-lethal assays may be required.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12949799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5602-13.

Functional localization and competition between the androgen receptor and T-cell 
factor for nuclear beta-catenin: a means for inhibition of the Tcf signaling
axis.

Mulholland DJ(1), Read JT, Rennie PS, Cox ME, Nelson CC.

Author information: 
(1)The Prostate Centre, Jack Bell Research, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3Z6.
djm@interchange.ubc.ca

Recent reports suggest that the beta-catenin-T-cell factor (Tcf) (BCT) signaling 
pathway is important in the progression of prostate cancer. Evidence suggests
that the androgen receptor (AR) can repress BCT-mediated transcription both in
prostate cancer and colon cancer cells (Chesire and Isaacs, 2002). In this study,
we validate such findings and show that repression of BCT signaling is
facilitated by competition between the AR and Tcf. Measurements of the Tcf
transcriptional reporter (TOPFLASH) indicated that AR+DHT-mediated repression can
inhibit BCT transcription in the presence of WT and exogenous activating
beta-catenin (Delta1-130 bp). Transient transfections in SW480 cells
(APC(mut/mut)) showed that this mode of repression is functionally independent of
APC-mediated beta-catenin ubiquitination. Using a recently developed red
flourescent protein (HcRed), we demonstrate novel observations about the nuclear 
distribution of Tcf. Furthermore, with the use of red (HcRed-AR and HcRed-Tcf)
and green fusion proteins (beta-catenin-EGFP), we provide morphological evidence 
of a reciprocal balance of nuclear beta-catenin-EGFP (BC-EGFP). By cotransfecting
in LNCaP prostate tumor cells and using quantitative imaging software, we
demonstrated a 62.0% colocalization of HcRed-AR and BC-EGFP in the presence of
DHT and 63.3% colocalization of HcRed-Tcf/BC-EGFP in the absence of DHT.
Costaining for activated RNA Pol II (phosphoserine 2) and HcRed-Tcf suggested
that Tcf foci contain transcriptional 'hotspots' validating that these sites have
the capacity for transcriptional activity. Given this apparent androgen-dependent
competition for nuclear BC-EGFP, we chose to assess our hypothesis by in vivo and
in vitro binding assays. SW480 cells transiently transfected with an AR
expression construct, treated with DHT and immunoprecipitated for Tcf showed less
associated beta-catenin when compared to Tcf precipitates from untreated cells.
Furthermore, by treating cells with DHT+Casodex, we were able to abrogate the
androgen-sensitive AR/beta-catenin interaction, in addition to relieving
transcriptional repression of the TOPFLASH reporter. In vitro binding assays,
with increasing amounts of AR(S35), resulted in decreased Tcf(S35) association
with immunoprecipitated recombinant beta-catenin-HIS. These data suggest that in 
steady-state conditions, AR has the ability to compete out Tcf binding for
beta-catenin. Finally, using SW480 cells, we show that AR-mediated repression of 
the BCT pathway has implications for cell cycle progression and in vitro growth. 
Using FACs analysis, we observed a 26.1% increase in accumulation of cells in the
G1 phase of the cell cycle, while in vitro growth assays showed a 35% reduction
in viable cells transfected with AR+DHT treatment. Together, our data strongly
suggest that a reciprocal balance of nuclear beta-catenin facilitates AR-mediated
repression of BCT-driven transcription and cell growth.

PMID: 12944908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 15;63(16):4792-5.

BP75, bromodomain-containing M(r) 75,000 protein, binds dishevelled-1 and
enhances Wnt signaling by inactivating glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta.

Kim S(1), Lee J, Park J, Chung J.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Cell Growth Regulation and
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Yusong, Taejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

To identify novel regulators of Wnt signaling, we performed yeast two-hybrid
analyses with Dvl-1 and identified BP75 as a candidate. Here, we demonstrated
that BP75 directly interacts with Dvl-1 in mammalian cells and enhances
TCF-dependent gene expression induced by Dvl-1. In support of these results, BP75
in cooperation with Dvl-1 was found to facilitate dephosphorylation at Tyr216 of 
glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and consequently inhibit its kinase activity.
Furthermore, the nuclear translocation and formation of vesicular structures of
beta-catenin were induced by BP75 and Dvl-1 in a synergistic manner.
Collectively, these results provided us a novel mechanism in Wnt signaling where 
BP75 plays important regulatory roles between glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and 
Dvl.

PMID: 12941796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Oct;38(2):149-56.

There is no increase in frequency of somatic mutations in metastases compared
with primary colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability.

Barnetson R(1), Eckstein R, Robinson B, Schnitzler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Kolling Institute, Royal North Shore Hospital, 
St. Leonards, NSW and University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

This study investigates the molecular features of metastasis in sporadic colon
carcinomas with high-level microsatellite instability (MSI-H). DNA from 51
regions from 10 MSI-H metastatic carcinomas and 26 corresponding metastases was
analyzed for mutations in TGFBRII, IGFIIR, BAX, MSH3, MSH6, and TCF4, which are
associated with MSI-H carcinomas. In addition, 10 metastatic and 10
non-metastatic MSI-H carcinomas and 10 metastatic microsatellite-stable (MSS)
carcinomas were examined for expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and mutant TP53. The frequency of microsatellite instability and somatic
mutations was not significantly increased in the metastases compared with the
that of primary carcinomas. Although significantly fewer MSI-H carcinomas
expressed VEGF (P < 0.01) and mutant TP53 (P < 0.005) than MSS carcinomas, there 
was no difference in VEGF and mutant TP53 expression in metastatic and
non-metastatic MSI-H carcinomas. In conclusion, metastasis does not appear to be 
associated with an increase in somatic mutation rate in any of the genes examined
in MSI-H colon carcinomas. Furthermore, VEGF and TP53 expression did not appear
to be involved in metastasis in MSI-H colon carcinomas.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12939742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Jul 25;83(14):1270-3.

[Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway in renal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong K(1), Lin GT, Zhang ZW, Chang ZJ, Na YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urology, Department of Urology, First Hospital of Peking
University. Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the transduction of Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway,
especially the function of T cell factor 4 (TCF(4)), in renal carcinoma.
METHODS: A renal carcinoma yeast two hybrid library and a human TCF(4) yeast two 
hybrid expression vector were constructed. Proteins interacting with the bait
protein human TCF(4) were obtained from the renal carcinoma yeast two hybrid
library by reverse yeast two hybrid system.
RESULTS: 67 positive clones interacting with the bait protein TCF(4) were
obtained by reverse yeast two hybrid system, including 18 beta-catenin clones, 24
TCF(4) clones and 25 unknown clones.
CONCLUSION: Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway exists in renal carcinoma. TCF(4), its
important signal factor, interacts with beta-catenin and forms homodimer or
homocopolymer by itself, thus displaying its constitutive transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 12930646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;17(11):2152-61. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

TCF and Groucho-related genes influence pituitary growth and development.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Potok MA, Cha KB, Gridley T, Stifani S, Meeldijk J, Clevers H, 
Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, 4301
MSRBIII, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

Mutations in the prophet of PIT1 gene (PROP1) are the most common cause of
multiple pituitary hormone deficiency in humans; however, the mechanism of PROP1 
action is not well understood. We report that Prop1 is essential for dorsally
restricted expression of a Groucho-related gene, transducin-like enhancer of
split 3 (Tle3), which encodes a transcriptional corepressor. Deficiency of a
related gene, amino terminal enhancer of split (Aes), causes pituitary anomalies 
and growth insufficiency. TLE3 and AES have been shown to interact with TCF/LEF
(transcripiton factors of the T cell-specific and lymphoid enhancer specific
group) family members in cell culture systems. In the absence of TCF4 (Tcf7L2),
Prop1 levels are elevated, pituitary hyperplasia ensues and palate closure is
abnormal. Thus, we demonstrate that Tcf4 and Aes influence pituitary growth and
development, and place Tcf4 and Tle3 in the genetic hierarchy with Prop1.

PMID: 12907761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 15;259(2):258-71.

Wnt signaling during development of the gastrointestinal tract.

Theodosiou NA(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Warren Alpert Bldg., Rm. 425, 
200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Wnt signaling pathways have been demonstrated to play important roles in
controlling tissue patterning and cell proliferation. In the gastrointestinal
tract, mutations that lead to activation of the canonical Wnt pathway through
beta-catenin result in familial and sporadic colon cancers. The downstream
transcription factor Tcf4 is required to maintain the proliferative stem cell
compartment in the crypts of the small intestine. Activation of TCF-dependent
transcription is a good correlate to neoplastic transformation. Despite its
association with cancer in the colon, little is known of the role for Wnt
signaling during development and patterning of the gut tube. We conducted a
comprehensive expression screen for Wnt signaling components during different
stages of gut development in the chick. Conserved expression patterns of these
genes indicate that they likely play essential roles in gut morphogenesis. Based 
on the expression profiles of putative components of each pathway, we are able to
postulate specific roles for the various pathways during gut development.
Predictions of roles for canonical signaling in the developing gizzard, duodenum,
and large intestine in chick were tested by viral misexpression of
dominant-negative (DN) forms of the downstream cofactors Tcf4 and Lef1. In the
chick, Tcf4 is expressed in the posterior gizzard mesoderm. Misexpression of
DN-Tcf4 in the splanchnic mesoderm resulted in the failure of the gizzard
epithelium to form microvilli. Lef1 is expressed in the chick duodenum and large 
intestine mesoderm. Viral misexpression of DN-Lef1 resulted in diminished
mesoderm and overproliferation of the large intestine endoderm, leading to
stenosis of the lumen. The results from these misexpression studies in the chick,
together with evidence from colorectal lesions, indicate that the canonical Wnt
pathway plays critical roles in balancing cell proliferation versus cell
differentiation during gut development. The expression profiles of the Wnt
signaling components presented in this paper should prove valuable in deciphering
additional roles of the Wnt pathways during patterning of the vertebrate gut
tube.

PMID: 12871700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5366-75.

T-cell factor 4N (TCF-4N), a novel isoform of mouse TCF-4, synergizes with
beta-catenin to coactivate C/EBPalpha and steroidogenic factor 1 transcription
factors.

Kennell JA(1), O'Leary EE, Gummow BM, Hammer GD, MacDougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 E. Catherine Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

We have cloned T-cell factor 4N (TCF-4N), an alternative isoform of TCF-4, from
developing pituitary and 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. This protein contains the
N-terminal interaction domain for beta-catenin but lacks the DNA binding domain. 
While TCF-4N inhibited coactivation by beta-catenin of a TCF/lymphoid-enhancing
factor (LEF)-dependent promoter, TCF-4N potentiated coactivation by beta-catenin 
of several non-TCF/LEF-dependent promoters. For example, TCF-4N synergized with
beta-catenin to activate the alpha-inhibin promoter through functional and
physical interactions with the orphan nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1
(SF-1). In addition, TCF-4N and beta-catenin synergized with the adipogenic
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) to induce 
leptin promoter activity. The mechanism by which beta-catenin and TCF-4N
coactivated C/EBPalpha appeared to involve p300, based upon synergy between these
important transcriptional regulators. Consistent with TCF-4N's redirecting the
actions of beta-catenin in cells, ectopic expression of TCF-4N in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes partially relieved the block of adipogenesis caused by
beta-catenin. Thus, we propose that TCF-4N inhibits coactivation by beta-catenin 
of TCF/LEF transcription factors and potentiates the coactivation by beta-catenin
of other transcription factors, such as SF-1 and C/EBPalpha.

PMCID: PMC165725
PMID: 12861022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 17;547(1-3):1-6.

Lef/Tcf-dependent Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during Xenopus axis specification.

Geng X(1), Xiao L, Lin GF, Hu R, Wang JH, Rupp RA, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yue-yang Road 320, 200031, Shanghai, PR
China

Though the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is known to play key roles during
Xenopus axis specification, whether it signals exclusively through Lef/Tcf
transcription factors in this process remains unclear. To investigate this issue,
we generated transgenic frog embryos expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)
driven by a Lef/Tcf-dependent and Wnt/beta-catenin-responsive promoter. This
promoter is highly sensitive and even detects maternal beta-catenin activity
prior to the large-scale transcription of zygotic genes. Unexpectedly, GFP
expression was observed only in some, but not all, known
Wnt/beta-catenin-positive territories in Xenopus early development. Furthermore, 
ubiquitous expression of dominant Lef-1 protein variants from transgenes revealed
that zygotic Lef/Tcf activity is required for the ventroposterior development of 
Xenopus embryos. In summary, our results suggest that endogenous Wnt/beta-catenin
activity does not result in obligatory Lef/Tcf-dependent gene activation, and
that the ventroposteriorizing activity of zygotic Wnt-8 signaling is mediated by 
Lef/Tcf proteins.

PMID: 12860376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30828-34. Epub 2003 Jun 10.

A direct beta-catenin-independent interaction between androgen receptor and T
cell factor 4.

Amir AL(1), Barua M, McKnight NC, Cheng S, Yuan X, Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Hematology-Oncology Division, the Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

T cell factor (Tcf) proteins bind beta-catenin and are downstream effectors of
Wnt/beta-catenin signals. A recently demonstrated interaction between
beta-catenin and the androgen receptor (AR) ligand binding domain has suggested
that AR may be a Tcf-independent Wnt/beta-catenin effector. This study
demonstrates that there is a direct interaction between the AR DNA binding domain
(DBD) and Tcf4. Tcf4 bound specifically to a glutathione S-transferase-ARDBD
fusion protein and could be coimmunoprecipitated with beta-catenin and
transfected AR or endogenous AR in prostate cancer cells. Transfected Tcf4
repressed the transcriptional activity of full-length AR and a VP16-ARDBD fusion 
protein, and this repression was only partially reversed by transfected
beta-catenin. AR activation by cyproterone acetate, a partial agonist that did
not support beta-catenin binding to the AR, was also repressed by Tcf4, further
indicating that repression was not due to beta-catenin sequestration. Tcf4 could 
recruit beta-catenin to the AR DBD in vitro and to the cyproterone
acetate-liganded AR in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells showed that endogenous AR was bound to a Tcf4-responsive
element in the c-myc promoter. These findings indicate that AR and Tcf4 can
interact directly and that this interaction may occur on the promoters or
enhancers of particular genes. The direct AR-Tcf4 interaction, in conjunction AR-
and Tcf4-beta-catenin binding, provides a mechanism for cooperative and selective
gene regulation by AR and the Wnt/beta-catenin-Tcf pathway that may contribute to
normal and neoplastic prostate growth.

PMID: 12799378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2121-32.

The human T-cell factor-4 gene splicing isoforms, Wnt signal pathway, and
apoptosis in renal cell carcinoma.

Shiina H(1), Igawa M, Breault J, Ribeiro-Filho L, Pookot D, Urakami S, Terashima 
M, Deguchi M, Yamanaka M, Shirai M, Kaneuchi M, Kane CJ, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Biochemistry, Shimane Medical University, Izumo
693-0085, Japan.

beta-Catenin and transcriptional factor TCF-4 (human T-cell factor-4) genes
comprise the Wnt signal. The Wnt signal pathway plays an important role in
malignant transformation. We hypothesize that the beta-catenin and TCF-4 gene and
Wnt signal are important in the progression of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). To
test this hypothesis, we investigated TCF-4 splicing isoforms, beta-catenin, and 
Wnt signal pathway (cyclin D1, c-myc, c-jun, and MMP7) in three RCC cell lines
(A498, Caki-1, and Caki-2), 38 primary RCCs, and 29 normal kidney samples. We
also analyzed the relationship between TCF-4 gene splicing isoforms,
proliferation (proliferating cell nuclear antigen labeling index), and apoptosis 
[antiapoptotic factors (Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L)), proapoptotic factors (Bak and Bax), 
and caspase-3] in RCC samples. In 38 RCC samples, four splicing isoforms of the
TCF-4 gene were present in the region between exon 12 and exon 17. Thirty (79%)
of 38 RCCs and all (100%) of the normal kidney samples showed mixed isoforms with
both long and short reading frames in the COOH-terminal region, whereas the
remaining 8 RCC samples showed only the long-form reading frame. Two
COOH-terminal-binding protein sites were present only in the long-form reading
frame. The eight RCCs that demonstrated only the long reading frame isoform
showed early disease progression and poor prognosis. In these 8 RCC samples,
down-regulation of cyclin D1, c-myc, c-jun, and MMP7 expression was observed at
the mRNA level. In addition, a marked reduction of caspase-3 expression was also 
found at both the mRNA and the protein level. However, the beta-catenin gene was 
not overexpressed at the mRNA level and protein level, and mutation and deletion 
were not observed in exon 3. In these three renal cell lines, there was no
significant difference in TCF-4 mRNA expression before and after
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, and there appeared to be no splicing isoforms
in the region between exon 1 and exon 11. These findings suggest that alteration 
in beta-catenin is an infrequent event in RCC. In samples in which beta-catenin
was not overexpressed, the target genes of Wnt signal were regulated through
TCF-4 splicing isoforms. The imbalance between TCF-4 gene splicing isoforms with 
long and short reading frames is associated with RCC progression through the
inhibition of the apoptotic pathway. We demonstrate for the first time that TCF-4
gene splicing isoforms and the Wnt signal pathway can induce progression of RCC
by the inhibition of apoptosis and not by the induction of cell proliferation.

PMID: 12796377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. EMBO Rep. 2003 Jun;4(6):609-15.

Specific inhibition of gene expression using a stably integrated, inducible
small-interfering-RNA vector.

van de Wetering M(1), Oving I, Muncan V, Pon Fong MT, Brantjes H, van Leenen D,
Holstege FC, Brummelkamp TR, Agami R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Centre for Biomedical Genetics, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We have designed a doxycycline-regulated form of the H1 promoter of RNA
polymerase III that allows the inducible knockdown of gene expression by small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs). As a proof-of-principle, we have targeted beta-catenin
in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. T-cell factor (TCF) target-gene expression is
induced by accumulated beta-catenin, and is the main transforming event in these 
cells. We have shown previously that the disruption of beta-catenin/TCF4 activity
in CRC cells by the overexpression of dominant-negative TCF induces rapid G1
arrest and differentiation. Stable integration of our inducible siRNA vector
allowed the rapid production of siRNAs on doxycycline induction, followed by
specific downregulation of beta-catenin. In these CRC cells, TCF reporter-gene
activity was inhibited, and G1 arrest and differentiation occurred. The
inhibition of two other genes using this vector system shows that it should be
useful for the inducible knockdown of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1319205
PMID: 12776180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Res. 2003 May 15;63(10):2658-64.

Transactivation of vimentin by beta-catenin in human breast cancer cells.

Gilles C(1), Polette M, Mestdagt M, Nawrocki-Raby B, Ruggeri P, Birembaut P,
Foidart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental Biology, University of Liège, CHU
Sart-Tilman, B23, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. cgilles@ulg.ac.be

The cytoplasmic and nuclear redistribution of beta-catenin and the de novo
expression of vimentin are frequently involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition associated with increased invasive/migratory properties of epithelial 
cells. Because beta-catenin can act as a coactivator of transcription through its
binding to the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor 1 transcription
factor family, we have explored the possibility that beta-catenin/TCF could
directly transactivate vimentin. We first compared vimentin expression in
relation with the localization of beta-catenin in eight breast cancer cell lines 
displaying various degrees of invasiveness and in a model of cell migration using
human mammary MCF10A cells. We could thus show a cytoplasmic and/or nuclear
distribution of beta-catenin in invasive/migratory cells expressing vimentin, but
not in noninvasive/stationary vimentin-negative cell lines. In addition, the
human vimentin promoter was found to be up-regulated by beta-catenin and TCF-4
cotransfection. Varying with the cellular background, a diminution of this
up-regulation was observed when the putative beta-catenin/TCF binding site of the
vimentin promoter was mutated. Our results therefore demonstrate that the
vimentin promoter is a target of the beta-catenin/TCF pathway and strongly
suggest an implication of this regulation in epithelial cell migration/invasion.

PMID: 12750294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2047-59.

Sumoylation is involved in beta-catenin-dependent activation of Tcf-4.

Yamamoto H(1), Ihara M, Matsuura Y, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Sumoylation is involved in mediating protein-protein interactions, subcellular
compartmentalization and protein stability. Our analysis of various Wnt signaling
molecules revealed that one of them, Tcf-4, is sumoylated at the endogenous
level. At least one sumoylation site, Lys297, of Tcf-4 was identified. The
sumoylation of Tcf-4 was enhanced by PIASy, a SUMO E3 enzyme, and inhibited by
Axam, a desumoylation enzyme. Although PIASy did not affect the interaction of
Tcf-4 with beta-catenin or DNA, Tcf-4, SUMO-1 and PIASy were co-localized in the 
nucleus and present in a complex in the PML body. PIASy enhanced
beta-catenin-dependent transcriptional activity of Tcf-4, whereas Axam inhibited 
it. Reduction of the protein level of Axam by RNA interference led to an increase
in sumoylation of Tcf-4 and activation of Tcf-4. Furthermore, beta-catenin and
PIASy activated Tcf-4(K297R), in which Lys297 was changed to arginine, less than 
wild-type Tcf-4. These results suggest that sumoylation of Tcf-4 is involved in
beta-catenin-dependent and Tcf-4-mediated gene expression in the Wnt signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC156076
PMID: 12727872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26511-6. Epub 2003 Apr 30.

Synergistic cooperation between the beta-catenin signaling pathway and
steroidogenic factor 1 in the activation of the Mullerian inhibiting substance
type II receptor.

Hossain A(1), Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030.

Mullerian inhibiting substance type II receptor (MISRII) is a member of the
transforming growth factor-beta superfamily. Mutations in mullerian inhibiting
substance (MIS) or MISRII cause male sexual abnormalities, persistent mullerian
duct syndrome, and pseudohermaphroditism. The spatial and temporal regulation of 
MIS and MISRII is important for its biological action. Male Wnt7a mutant mice do 
not undergo regression of mullerian ducts. Here we showed that the canonical Wnt 
signaling pathway regulated MISRII. The promoter MISRII was activated by
beta-catenin expression, and this activation was dependent on TCF4-binding sites.
The nuclear receptor superfamily member steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1)
synergistically activated the MISRII promoter with beta-catenin. APC, a negative 
regulator of Wnt signaling, decreased SF1-mediated activation of the MISRII
promoter in the colon carcinoma cell line SW480. We also showed a direct physical
interaction between beta-catenin and SF1 by co-immunoprecipitation. Thus, our
findings suggest that MISRII is a developmental target of Wnt7a signaling for
mullerian duct regression during sexual differentiation.

PMID: 12724325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2369-80.

HMG box transcription factor TCF-4's interaction with CtBP1 controls the
expression of the Wnt target Axin2/Conductin in human embryonic kidney cells.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Members of the Tcf/Lef family of the HMG box transcription factors are nuclear
effectors of the Wnt signal transduction pathway. Upon Wnt signaling, TCF/LEF
proteins interact with beta-catenin and activate transcription of target genes,
while, in the absence of the Wnt signal, TCFs function as transcriptional
repressors. All vertebrate Tcf/Lef transcription factors associate with
TLE/Groucho-related co-repressors, and here we provide evidence for an
interaction between the C-terminus of the TCF-4 HMG box protein and the
C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) transcriptional co-repressor. Using
Wnt-1-stimulated human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that CtBP1 represses
the transcriptional activity of a Tcf/beta-catenin-dependent synthetic promoter
and, furthermore, decreases the expression of the endogenous Wnt target,
Axin2/Conductin. The CtBP1-mediated repression was alleviated by trichostatin A
treatment, indicating that the CtBP inhibitory mechanism is dependent on the
activity of histone deacetylases.

PMCID: PMC154232
PMID: 12711682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2003 Jun;5(2):145-54.

Anticipation and CAG*CTG repeat expansion in schizophrenia and bipolar affective 
disorder.

Fortune MT(1), Kennedy JL, Vincent JB.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Clarke
Division, 250 College Street, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada.

The genetic contribution to the etiologies of schizophrenia and bipolar affective
disorder (BPAD) has been considered for many decades, with twin, family, and
adoption studies indicating consistently that the familial clustering of affected
individuals is accounted for mainly by genetic factors. Despite the strong
evidence for a genetic component, very little is understood about the underlying 
genetic and molecular mechanisms for schizophrenia and BPAD. In the early 1990s, 
after the discovery of "dynamic mutation" or "unstable DNA" as a molecular basis 
for the genetic anticipation observed in Huntington's disease, myotonic
dystrophy, and many others, and the recently rediscovered, albeit still
controversial, evidence for genetic anticipation in major psychoses, the genetic 
epidemiology of schizophrenia and BPAD was re-evaluated to demonstrate strong
endorsement for the unstable DNA model. Many of the non-Mendelian genetic
features of schizophrenia and BPAD could be explained by the behaviour of
unstable DNA, and several molecular genetic approaches became available for
testing the unstable DNA hypothesis. However, despite promising findings in the
mid-1990s, no trinucleotide repeat expansion has yet been identified as a cause
of idiopathic schizophrenia or BPAD.

PMID: 12685994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Mar;24(3):435-42.

Cyclin D1 over-expression correlates with beta-catenin activation, but not with
H-ras mutations, and phosphorylation of Akt, GSK3 beta and ERK1/2 in mouse
hepatic carcinogenesis.

Gotoh J(1), Obata M, Yoshie M, Kasai S, Ogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Department of Surgery, Asahikawa Medical College, 
2-1-1-1 East, Midorigaoka, Asahikawa 078-8510, Japan.

Mutational activation of beta-catenin and cyclin D1 over-expression are a
frequent change in mouse hepatic tumors. Although activated beta-catenin may bind
to T cell factor (TCF) family members and transcriptionally activate the cyclin
D1 gene, either beta-catenin or cyclin D1 may be activated by various pathways
independently of beta-catenin mutations. In this study, we investigated
beta-catenin activation and mutations, cyclin D1 expression, H-ras mutations and 
phosphorylation of extracellular signal regulated protein kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2),
Akt and glycogen synthetase kinase 3beta (GSK3 beta) in mouse hepatic
carcinogenesis. Nuclear/cytoplasmic staining of beta-catenin, a sign of
beta-catenin activation, was frequently observed in association with the high
nuclear cyclin D1 labeling index in the hepatic tumors at the late stage of
carcinogenesis. The beta-catenin activation was further suggested by the fact
that all hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines examined showed the nuclear
beta-catenin/TCF4 complex together with cyclin D1 over-expression. However, the
fact that only 31.8% (7/22) of the lesions with the nuclear/cytoplasmic
beta-catenin staining showed beta-catenin mutations indicated that beta-catenin
was activated not only by its own mutations but also by other reason(s). On the
other hand, there was no correlation between the beta-catenin/cyclin D1
activation and the H-ras mutations or phosphorylation of Akt, GSK3 beta and
ERK1/2, although GSK3 beta was frequently over-expressed in the tumors. These
results indicate that, although beta-catenin and cyclin D1 activation are well
correlated, the Akt/GSK3 beta and ras/ERK1/2 pathways may not play a major role
in the beta-catenin/cyclin D1 activation.

PMID: 12663502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):21092-8. Epub 2003 Mar 25.

Hot spots in Tcf4 for the interaction with beta-catenin.

Fasolini M(1), Wu X, Flocco M, Trosset JY, Oppermann U, Knapp S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacia Corporation Discovery Research Oncology, Department of Chemistry,
Viale Pasteur 10, 20014 Nerviano, Italy.

The interaction of beta-catenin with T-cell factor (Tcf) 4 plays a central role
in the Wnt signaling pathway and has been discussed as a possible site of
intervention for the development of anti-cancer drugs. In this study, we
performed Ala-scanning mutagenesis of all Tcf4 residues in the Tcf-beta-catenin
interface and studied the binding energetics of these mutants using isothermal
titration calorimetry. Binding of Tcf4 was found to be highly cooperative. Single
site mutations of most Tcf4 residues resulted in a significant reduction in
binding enthalpies but in similar binding constants as compared with wild type
Tcf4. Interestingly, this was also true for residues that are disordered in the
reported crystal structures. The mutation D16A caused the largest reduction in
binding constant (50-fold) accompanied by a large unfavorable enthalpy change
(DeltaDeltaHobs) of +8 kcal/mol at 25 degrees C. In contrast, the mutation of the
Tcf residues Glu24 and Glu28, which have been proposed as an interaction hot spot
due to their location in a field of strong positive electrostatic potential on
the beta-catenin surface (charge button), resulted only in a significant
reduction of binding enthalpies, which were largely compensated for by
unfavorable entropic contributions to the binding. Other mutations that
significantly reduced Tcf binding constants were D11A and alanine mutations of
the hydrophobic residues Leu41, Val44, and Leu48. The measured thermodynamic data
are discussed with the available structural information of Tcf-beta-catenin
crystal structures and allow us to propose possible sites for development of Tcf 
antagonists.

PMID: 12657632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Gen Virol. 2003 Apr;84(Pt 4):959-64.

The BZLF1 promoter of Epstein-Barr virus is controlled by E box-/HI-motif-binding
factors during virus latency.

Thomas C(1), Dankesreiter A, Wolf H, Schwarzmann F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Landshuter Strae 22, D-93047 Regensburg, Germany.

The BZLF1 open reading frame of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encodes an important
transactivator of replication. During latency, transcription of this gene is
switched off. HI motifs have been shown to cause negative regulation of the
promoter. Using yeast one-hybrid assays, we isolated the E box-binding protein,
E2-2, interacting with these motifs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that E2-2 binds to HI alpha, HI beta and HI gamma, which contain E
box consensus binding sites. Deletion of the HI-associated E boxes and
overexpression of E2-2 in transfection assays revealed that these elements act as
repressors in lymphoid cells. In contrast, in epithelial cells they contribute to
the increased responsiveness of the promoter to transactivation by the BZLF1
protein. The data presented are in accord with an alternative and exclusive
binding of different cell type- and differentiation-specific factors, such as
E2-2, to the HI-associated E boxes in lymphoid and epithelial cells. This implies
a role in cell type-specific virus replication.

PMID: 12655097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):20259-67. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

The cohesin SMC3 is a target the for beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation pathway.

Ghiselli G(1), Coffee N, Munnery CE, Koratkar R, Siracusa LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA. giancarlo.ghiselli@mail.tju.edu

The structural maintenance of chromosome protein SMC3 is a component of the
cohesin complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion and segregation in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is also present extracellularly in the form of a
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan known as bamacan. We have found previously that 
SMC3 expression is elevated in a large fraction of human colon carcinomas. The
additional finding that the protein is significantly increased in the intestinal 
polyps of ApcMin/+ mice has led us to hypothesize that SMC3 expression is linked 
to activation of the APC/beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway. The immunohistochemical
analysis of colon adenocarcinomas from clinical specimens revealed that
beta-catenin and SMC3 antigens co-localize with maximal stain intensity within
the transformed areas. Cloning and sequencing of 1578 bp of the human SMC3
promoter unveiled the presence of seven putative consensus sequences for
beta-catenin/TCF4 binding, two of which are conserved in the mouse Smc3 promoter.
Transient transfection experiments in HCT116 and SW480 human colon carcinoma
cells using deletion and mutated promoter constructs in luciferase reporter
vectors confirmed that the putative sites, the first located at -48 bp and the
second located at -701 bp, are susceptible to beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation. 
Co-transfection with a beta-catenin expression vector enhanced the promoter
activity whereas E-cadherin had the opposite effect. Binding of beta-catenin/TCF4
complexes from SW480 nuclear extracts to these sequences was confirmed by
electrophoretic shift and supershift mobility assays. Altogether these results
are consistent with the idea that the beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation pathway
contributes to SMC3 overexpression in intestinal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12651860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Nov-Dec;1(6):640-5.

Developmental expression of Wnt signaling factors in mouse brain.

Coyle-Rink J(1), Del Valle L, Sweet T, Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway has been implicated in a variety of biological events
inducing neurogenesis. In this study, we aim to investigate the expression
pattern of various components of the Wnt pathway including b-catenin and its
partners LEF-1/TCF-4, GSK-3beta and their nuclear target genes such as c-myc and 
cyclin D1 during mouse brain development. We performed a series of Western blot
and immunohistochemistry of brain cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum which
revealed differential accumulation of these proteins in different types of brain 
cells including neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes at different
developmental stages. Intense cytoplasmic immunolabeling of beta-catenin in 5 day
old neurons throughout the cortex and brainstem significantly decreased as the
brain developed, whereas the level of GSK-3beta, the protein that phosphorylates 
beta-catenin and causes its destabilization, increased during brain maturation.
On the other hand, high level accumulation of LEF-1 and TCF-4 in neurons and
astrocytes at the early stage of brain development diminished at the later
stages. Interestingly, while the majority of LEF-1 and TCF-4 immunoreactivity was
detected in the cytoplasm of neurons, it was evident that both proteins
accumulated in the nuclei of astrocytes. Examination of cyclin D1, a protein that
controls the cell cycle and proliferation, exhibited an intense staining in the
nuclei of astrocytes throughout brain parenchyma during development.
Interestingly, cyclin D was found in the cytoplasm of neurons from cortex,
brainstem, and cerebellum during brain development. These data provide compelling
evidence for the differential expression of the Wnt signaling pathway during
brain development, and suggest that these signaling pathways may function
differently in various brain regions and cell types.

PMID: 12642687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2003 Mar;29(2):107-17.

APC, beta-Catenin and hTCF-4; an unholy trinity in the genesis of colorectal
cancer.

Bright-Thomas RM(1), Hargest R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Royal Free and University College Medical School,
University College London. Rachel@bright-thomas.com

Mutations in APC have been identified in up to 80% of 'classic' sporadic
colorectal cancers. Although the APC gene was first sequenced over a decade ago, 
new functions are still being described and its importance in the genesis of
colorectal cancer continues to increase. The current focus of attention is on the
APC/beta-Catenin/TCF signal transduction pathway as the main effector mechanism, 
and recent work has also implicated this pathway in the aetiology of the minority
of CRCs that develop through mismatch repair. At the same time, new evidence on
the interactions of APC with the cytoskeleton and the demonstration of a nuclear 
export function in the protein have shown that it has multiple additional roles
in colorectal carcinogenesis. Thus this is an area that benefits from further
review of the ever expanding literature.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12633551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003 Mar;18(3):280-7.

Wnt signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of mutation and expression of
beta-catenin, T-cell factor-4 and glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta genes.

Cui J(1), Zhou X, Liu Y, Tang Z, Romeih M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Medical Center of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
cuij@msu.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common killer cancer in 
the world. Recently, abnormal activation of the Wnt pathway has been found to be 
involved in the carcinogenesis of several human cancers including HCC. The goal
of the present study was to investigate the mechanism of inappropriate activation
of the Wnt pathway in hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: We analyzed the alterations of three key components of the Wnt pathway: 
beta-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta and T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 in
34 HCC and paracancerous normal liver by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), direct sequencing,
and quantitative real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: We found that 61.8% (21/34) of all HCC examined showed an abnormal
beta-catenin protein accumulation in the cytoplasm or nuclei. The RT-PCR-SSCP and
direct sequencing showed that beta-catenin exon 3 mutations existed in 44.1%
(15/34) of the HCC. No mutations of GSK-3beta or Tcf-4 were detected in HCC.
Moreover, messenger RNA of beta-catenin and Tcf-4, but not GSK-3beta, was found
to be overexpressed in HCC. On analyzing the relationship between alterations of 
beta-catenin or Tcf-4 and C-myc or Cyclin D1 expression, we found that mutations 
of beta-catenin, as well as overexpression of beta-catenin or the Tcf-4 gene were
independently correlated with C-myc gene overexpression in HCC.
CONCLUSION: Our present findings strongly suggest that mutations of beta-catenin,
as well as overexpression of beta-catenin and the Tcf-4 gene, independently
activate the Wnt pathway in HCC, with the target gene most likely to be C-myc.

PMID: 12603528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 15;63(4):801-6.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 makes cells resistant to transforming growth factor
beta-induced repression of c-myc.

Sasaki T(1), Suzuki H, Yagi K, Furuhashi M, Yao R, Susa S, Noda T, Arai Y,
Miyazono K, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

The activation of lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated
transcription by sustained expression of beta-catenin and the loss of
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling are essential steps in
carcinogenesis, particularly for cancers of the colon, breast, and liver. The
oncogene c-myc is a common target of both of these signaling pathways and a key
regulator of cell cycle progression. Here we have identified a novel
LEF/TCF-responsive element in the promoter of the human c-myc gene. beta-Catenin 
activated the transcriptional activity of the c-myc promoter by binding to this
element in various cell lines. When TCF-4 was bound to this element, TGF-beta
dissociated beta-catenin and repressed the transcriptional activity of the c-myc 
promoter. However, TGF-beta could not dissociate beta-catenin and could not
repress c-myc transcription when LEF-1 was bound to the element instead of TCF-4.
These findings suggest that enhanced expression of LEF-1, which occurs frequently
in colon cancer, may make cells refractory to the down-regulation of c-myc and
the subsequent growth arrest induced by TGF-beta.

PMID: 12591729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mamm Genome. 2003 Feb;14(2):119-29.

Exclusion of Madh2, Madh4, and Madh7 as candidates for the modifier of Min 2
(Mom2) locus.

Silverman KA(1), Koratkar RA, Siracusa LD, Buchberg AM.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, Bluemle Life Science
Building, Room 709, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541,
USA.

We recently identified the Modifier of Min 2 (Mom2) locus. Mom2 is a new modifier
of intestinal tumorigenesis that resulted from a spontaneous mutation in a B6
Apc(Min)/+ mouse. The presence of one resistant Mom2(R) allele results in a
significant reduction in small intestinal polyp number and colon polyp incidence 
in Apc(Min)/+ mice. Through linkage analysis, we previously localized Mom2 to a
14-cM region on mouse Chromosome (Chr) 18, distal to the Apc gene. This region is
syntenic with human Chr 18q, which frequently undergoes loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) in several human cancers, including colorectal cancer. Residing in this
region are the Madh2 and Madh4 genes, which have both been implicated in human
colorectal cancer. Based on meiotic recombinations within the Mom2 region in the 
derivation of our congenic animals, we have narrowed the location of the Mom2
locus and excluded Madh2, Madh4, and Madh7, as well as Mbd1, Mbd2, Dcc, and Tcf4,
as candidates for the Mom2 gene.

PMID: 12584607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):16169-75. Epub 2003 Feb 11.

A new beta-catenin-dependent activation domain in T cell factor.

Atcha FA(1), Munguia JE, Li TW, Hovanes K, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department, School of Medicine, University
of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4025, USA.

Transcription of the lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF1) gene is aberrantly
activated in sporadic colon cancer, whereas this gene is not expressed in the
normal adult colon. We have shown previously that promoter 1 of the LEF1 gene is 
activated by T cell factor (TCF)-beta-catenin complexes in transient transfection
assays, suggesting that LEF1 is a target of the Wnt pathway in colon cancer. To
further explore the link between LEF1 expression and the Wnt pathway, we studied 
two response elements in the promoter. Surprisingly we found that the LEF1
promoter is selectively activated by specific isoforms of the LEF/TCF
transcription factor family that contain an alternative C-terminal "E" tail.
These isoforms, TCF-1E and TCF-4E, activate the promoter in a
beta-catenin-dependent manner. We show that a complete E-tail domain is necessary
for full activity and delimits residues within two highly conserved peptide
motifs within the tail that are required (KKCRARFG; WCXXCRRKKKC). These peptide
motifs are not only conserved among the TCF family members but are also found in 
two newly identified DNA-binding proteins named papillomavirus binding factor and
GLUT4 enhancer factor. This study thus identifies a new and unique set of motifs 
used by the Wnt pathway for target gene regulation.

PMID: 12582159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 1;63(3):728-34.

Regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 expression by the Wnt and ras pathways.

Araki Y(1), Okamura S, Hussain SP, Nagashima M, He P, Shiseki M, Miura K, Harris 
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and K-ras occur in the
majority of human colorectal cancers. Loss of functional APC protein activates
the Wnt signal transduction pathway, allowing the nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin, which then binds to T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4), causing increased
transcriptional activation of downstream target genes. We investigated the
hypothesis that the activation of the WNT pathway regulates cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2). COX-2 was down-regulated after the induction of full-length APC in the
HT29-APC cell line. We identified a Tcf-4-binding element (TBE) in the COX-2
promoter that specifically bound to Tcf-4 in an electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. COX-2 promoter luciferase activity is down-regulated by APC in a promoter 
reporter construct containing the, TBE but not with mutant TBE. Mutant
beta-catenin expression up-regulated the COX-2 promoter activity and the
endogenous COX-2 mRNA expression in HuH7, hepatocellular carcinoma cell line,
which is partially abrogated by cotransfection with a dominant-negative Tcf-4
expression vector. Although beta-catenin alone did not increase COX-2 protein to 
detectable levels in HuH7 cells, coexpression of both mutant beta-catenin and
mutant K-ras increased COX-2 protein expression, which is consistent with the
previous reports that K-ras can stabilize COX-2 mRNA. Taken together, our data
support the hypothesis that COX-2 is down-regulated by APC and up-regulated by
nuclear beta-catenin accumulation, and additionally implicate the Wnt signal
transduction pathway in colon and liver carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12566320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gastroenterology. 2003 Feb;124(2):392-400.

Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin induces c-Myc expression and cellular
proliferation.

Wu S(1), Morin PJ, Maouyo D, Sears CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis that secrete a
zinc-dependent metalloprotease toxin termed the B. fragilis toxin (BFT) have been
associated with acute diarrheal disease. BFT rapidly cleaves the extracellular
domain of E-cadherin, leading to the complete degradation of the E-cadherin
protein. E-cadherin is the primary intercellular adhesion protein of the zonula
adherens, and its cytoplasmic domain associates with the nuclear signaling
protein beta-catenin. The goal of this study was to examine if BFT triggers
beta-catenin nuclear signaling in intestinal epithelial cells.
METHODS: Cell biologic and biochemical techniques were combined to address
beta-catenin nuclear signaling stimulated by BFT.
RESULTS: Loss of membrane-associated E-cadherin after BFT treatment of human
colonic epithelial cells (HT29/C1 clone) triggers beta-catenin nuclear
localization within 3 hours. Subsequently, c-myc transcription and translation
are induced and persistent cellular proliferation ensues, mediated in part by
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-dependent transcriptional activation. Cellular
proliferation is stimulated by as little as 5 x 10(-10) mol/L BFT.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, BFT is the first bacterial toxin reported to
activate T-cell factor-dependent beta-catenin nuclear signaling in intestinal
epithelial cells. These results suggest that genetic evolution of this common
colonic commensal has rendered an organism with the potential to contribute to
oncogenic transformation in the colon.

PMID: 12557145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 18;278(16):14066-73. Epub 2003 Jan 28.

Casein kinase I epsilon enhances the binding of Dvl-1 to Frat-1 and is essential 
for Wnt-3a-induced accumulation of beta-catenin.

Hino S(1), Michiue T, Asashima M, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Japan.

We demonstrate that Dvl-1, casein kinase I epsilon (CKI epsilon), and Frat-1
activate the Wnt signaling pathway cooperatively. The amino acid region 228-250
of Dvl-1 was necessary for its binding to Frat-1, and the interaction of Dvl-1
with Frat-1 was enhanced by CKI epsilon. Coexpression of Dvl-1 and Frat-1 caused 
accumulation of beta-catenin synergistically in L cells. Both proteins also
activated the transcriptional activity of T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) synergistically
in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, but coexpression of Dvl-1-(Delta 228-250),
which lacks the amino acid region 228-250 from Dvl-1, and Frat-1 did not. Dvl-1, 
but not Dvl-1-(Delta 228-250), acted synergistically with CKI epsilon to activate
Tcf-4. Depletion of CKI epsilon by double-stranded RNA interference in HeLa S3
cells led to the inhibition of Wnt-3a-induced phosphorylation of Dvl and the
binding of Dvl-1 to Frat-1. Furthermore, depletion of CKI epsilon reduced the
Wnt-3a-induced accumulation of beta-catenin, although it did not affect the basal
level of beta-catenin. These results indicate that CKI epsilon-dependent
phosphorylation of Dvl enhances the formation of a complex of Dvl-1 with Frat-1
and that this complex leads to the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 12556519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1379-89.

Regulation of lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T-cell factor by mitogen-activated
protein kinase-related Nemo-like kinase-dependent phosphorylation in
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Ishitani T(1), Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway regulates many developmental processes by 
modulating gene expression. Wnt signaling induces the stabilization of cytosolic 
beta-catenin, which then associates with lymphoid enhancer factor and T-cell
factor (LEF-1/TCF) to form a transcription complex that activates Wnt target
genes. Previously, we have shown that a specific mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase pathway involving the MAP kinase kinase kinase TAK1 and MAP kinase-related
Nemo-like kinase (NLK) suppresses Wnt signaling. In this study, we investigated
the relationships among NLK, beta-catenin, and LEF-1/TCF. We found that NLK
interacts directly with LEF-1/TCF and indirectly with beta-catenin via LEF-1/TCF 
to form a complex. NLK phosphorylates LEF-1/TCF on two serine/threonine residues 
located in its central region. Mutation of both residues to alanine enhanced
LEF-1 transcriptional activity and rendered it resistant to inhibition by NLK.
Phosphorylation of TCF-4 by NLK inhibited DNA binding by the beta-catenin-TCF-4
complex. However, this inhibition was abrogated when a mutant form of TCF-4 was
used in which both threonines were replaced with valines. These results suggest
that NLK phosphorylation on these sites contributes to the down-regulation of
LEF-1/TCF transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC141159
PMID: 12556497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 Jan;2(1):113-21.

Identification of the polycomb group protein SU(Z)12 as a potential molecular
target for human cancer therapy.

Kirmizis A(1), Bartley SM, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

We have previously identified SU(Z)12 as an E2F target gene. Because many E2F
target genes encode proteins that are critical for the control of cell
proliferation, we have further characterized the regulation and expression of
SU(Z)12. To understand the molecular mechanisms responsible for expression of
SU(Z)12 mRNA, we have analyzed the promoter region. We found that the SU(Z)12
gene is controlled by dual promoters, one of which functions bidirectionally. In 
addition to the E2F binding site, we have identified two binding sites for T cell
factor (TCF)/beta-catenin complexes. Using gel mobility shift assays, we
demonstrated that both TCF sites can be bound by TCF4. TCF/beta-catenin complexes
have been shown to be a critical regulator of gene expression in tumors of the
colon, breast, and liver. Accordingly, we have used chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays to confirm that TCF4/beta-catenin complexes are bound to the SU(Z)12
promoter in colon cancer cells but not in HeLa cells. We next adapted the
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay for use with primary colon tumor samples,
and, using matched pairs of normal and tumor tissue obtained from several
different colon cancer patients, we demonstrate that levels of beta-catenin bound
to the SU(Z)12 promoter are increased in colon tumors. Finally, we show that the 
SU(Z)12 mRNA is up-regulated in a number of different human tumors, including
tumors of the colon, breast, and liver. Recent studies have found that SU(Z)12 is
a component of the Drosophila ESC-E(Z) and the human EED-EZH2 Polycomb chromatin 
remodeling complexes. Therefore, we suggest that SU(Z)12, which may modulate the 
tumor phenotype by changing gene expression profiles, may be a logical target for
the design of a new antitumor agent

PMID: 12533679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Leuk Res. 2003 Apr;27(4):359-61.

Frameshift mutations in caspase-5 and other target genes in leukemia and lymphoma
cell lines having microsatellite instability.

Takeuchi S(1), Takeuchi N, Fermin AC, Taguchi H, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Okohcho, Nankoku
783-8505, Japan. takeuti@kochi-ms.ac.jp

Microsatellite instability (MSI) was examined in 49 lymphoid leukemia/lymphoma
cell lines. Frameshift mutations within eight MSI target genes were analyzed in
the 12 cell lines and nine childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) samples
with MSI. Six cell lines (50%) showed mutations within the coding repeats of the 
BLM, caspase-5, TCF-4, and PTEN genes. No mutations were identified in the nine
childhood ALL samples with MSI. This is the first report that describes mutations
of these genes in hematological malignancies. Mutations, presumably caused by an 
abnormality of the DNA repair genes, may be selected for during the establishment
of cell lines.

PMID: 12531228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Nutr. 2002 Dec;132(12):3804S-3808S.

Short chain fatty acids and colon cancer.

Augenlicht LH(1), Mariadason JM, Wilson A, Arango D, Yang W, Heerdt BG, Velcich
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. augen@aecom.yu.edu

The development of intestinal cancer involves complex genetic and epigenetic
alterations in the intestinal mucosa. The principal signaling pathway responsible
for the initiation of tumor formation, the APC-beta-catenin-TCF4 pathway,
regulates both cell proliferation and colonic cell differentiation, but many
other intrinsic and extrinsic signals also modulate these cell maturation
pathways. The challenge is to understand how signaling and cell maturation are
also modulated by nutritional agents. Through gene expression profiling, we have 
gained insight into the mechanisms by which short chain fatty acids regulate
these pathways and the differences in response of gene programs, and of the
specific regulation of the c-myc gene, to physiological regulators of intestinal 
cell maturation, such as butyrate, compared with pharmacological regulators such 
as the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug sulindac. Moreover, we used a
combination of gene expression profiling of the response of cells in culture to
sulindac and the response of the human mucosa in subjects treated with sulindac
for 1 month, coupled with a mouse genetic model approach, to identify the cyclin 
dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/Cip1) as an important suppressor of
Apc-initiated intestinal tumor formation and a necessary component for tumor
inhibition by sulindac. Finally, the mucous barrier, secreted by intestinal
goblet cells, is the interface between the luminal contents and the intestinal
mucosa. We generated a mouse genetic model with a targeted inactivation of the
Muc2 gene that encodes the major intestinal mucin. These mice have no
recognizable goblet cells due to the failure of cells to synthesize and store
mucin. This leads to perturbations in intestinal crypt architecture, increased
cellular proliferation and rates of cell migration, decreased apoptosis and
development of adenomas and adenocarcinomas in the small and large intestine and 
the rectum.

PMID: 12468628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncogene. 2002 Dec 5;21(55):8453-69.

Ligand-dependent inhibition of beta-catenin/TCF signaling by androgen receptor.

Chesire DR(1), Isaacs WB.

Author information: 
(1)Brady Urological Institute Research Laboratories, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21287, USA.

Beta-catenin signaling may contribute to prostate cancer (CaP) progression.
Although beta-catenin is known to upregulate T cell factor (TCF) target gene
expression in CaP cells, recent evidence demonstrates its capacity to enhance
ligand-dependent androgen receptor (AR) function. Thus, we wished to further
understand the interaction between these two pathways. We find in both CaP cells 
(CWR22-Rv1, LAPC-4, DU145) and non-CaP cells (HEK-293, TSU, SW480, HCT-116) that 
beta-catenin/TCF-related transcription (CRT), as measured by activation of a
synthetic promoter and that of cyclin D1, is inhibited by androgen treatment.
This inhibition is AR-dependent, as it only occurs in cells expressing AR
endogenously or transiently, and is abrogated by AR antagonists. Additional
analyses convey that the ligand-dependent nature of CRT suppression depends on
transactivation-competent AR in the nucleus, but not on indirect effects stemming
from AR target gene expression. Given the recent work identifying an
AR/beta-catenin interaction, and from our finding that liganded AR does not
prompt gross changes in the constitutive nuclear localization of TCF4 or mutant
beta-catenin, we hypothesized that transcription factor (i.e. AR and TCF)
competition for beta-catenin recruitment may explain, in part, androgen-induced
suppression of CRT. To address this idea, we expressed an AR mutant lacking its
DNA-binding domain (DBD). This receptor could not orchestrate ligand-dependent
CRT repression, thereby providing support for those recent data implicating the
AR DBD/LBD as necessary for beta-catenin interaction. Further supporting this
hypothesis, TCF/LEF over-expression counteracts androgen-induced suppression of
CRT, and requires beta-catenin binding activity to do so. Interestingly, TCF4
over-expression potently antagonizes AR function; however, this inhibition may
occur independently of beta-catenin/TCF4 interaction. These results from TCF4
over-expression analyses, taken together, provide further evidence that
AR-mediated suppression of CRT is a consequence of limiting amounts of
beta-catenin, and not AR target gene expression. Our analyses point to a
reciprocal balance between AR and CRT function that may shape critical processes 
during normal prostate development and tumor progression.

PMID: 12466965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Med. 2002 Dec;8(12):1360-1.

Crowd control in the crypt.

Booth C, Brady G, Potten CS.

PMID: 12457179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 28;21(54):8340-6.

The suppression of colon cancer cell growth in nude mice by targeting
beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

Kwong KY(1), Zou Y, Day CP, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, TX 77030, USA.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) or beta-catenin genes are frequently mutated
in colorectal cancers, leading to activation of downstream genes with
beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf)-responsive promoters. We have developed a gene
therapy approach selectively targeting colorectal cancer cells in which
beta-catenin/Tcf4 pathway is activated by using a recombinant adenovirus
AdTOP-CMV-TK, which carries a herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (HSV TK)
under the control of a beta-catenin/Tcf-response promoter linking to a minimum
CMV promoter. AdTOP-CMV-TK and ganciclovir (GCV) treatment significantly
suppressed the growth of human DLD-1 colon cancer cells in nude mice.
Furthermore, no significant tumor suppression effect was observed in human
hepatoma cell line SK-HEP-1, in which the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway is not
activated, as a control experiment. In summary, we demonstrated the selective
targeting of colorectal cancers with activated beta-catenin by AdTOP-CMV-TK and
GCV treatment in animal models, as well as its therapeutic potential for colon
cancer metastasized to liver.

PMID: 12447697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):3776-85. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Identification of a promoter-specific transcriptional activation domain at the C 
terminus of the Wnt effector protein T-cell factor 4.

Hecht A(1), Stemmler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.
hecht@mm11.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Wnt growth factors control numerous cell fate decisions in development by
altering specific gene expression patterns through the activity of heterodimeric 
transcriptional activators. These consist of beta-catenin and one of the four
members of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding proteins. How can the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway control various sets of target genes in distinct
cellular settings with such a limited number of nuclear effectors? Here we asked 
whether different TCF proteins could perform specific, nonredundant functions at 
natural beta-catenin/TCF-regulated promoters. We found that TCF4E but not LEF1
supported beta-catenin-dependent activation of the Cdx1 promoter, whereas LEF1
specifically activated the Siamois promoter. Deletion of a C-terminal domain of
TCF4E prevented Cdx1 promoter induction. A chimeric protein consisting of LEF1
and the C terminus of TCF4E was fully functional. Therefore, the TCF4E C terminus
harbors a promoter-specific transactivation domain. This domain influences the
DNA binding properties of TCF4 and additionally mediates an interaction with the 
transcriptional coactivator p300. Apparently, the C terminus of TCF4E cooperates 
with beta-catenin and p300 to form a specialized transcription factor complex
that specifically supports the activation of the Cdx1 promoter.

PMID: 12446687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):251-63.

Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning in the intestinal epithelium by
controlling the expression of EphB/ephrinB.

Batlle E(1), Henderson JT, Beghtel H, van den Born MM, Sancho E, Huls G, Meeldijk
J, Robertson J, van de Wetering M, Pawson T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, University
Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In the small intestine, the progeny of stem cells migrate in precise patterns.
Absorptive, enteroendocrine, and goblet cells migrate toward the villus while
Paneth cells occupy the bottom of the crypts. We show here that beta-catenin and 
TCF inversely control the expression of the EphB2/EphB3 receptors and their
ligand ephrin-B1 in colorectal cancer and along the crypt-villus axis. Disruption
of EphB2 and EphB3 genes reveals that their gene products restrict cell
intermingling and allocate cell populations within the intestinal epithelium. In 
EphB2/EphB3 null mice, the proliferative and differentiated populations
intermingle. In adult EphB3(-/-) mice, Paneth cells do not follow their downward 
migratory path, but scatter along crypt and villus. We conclude that in the
intestinal epithelium beta-catenin and TCF couple proliferation and
differentiation to the sorting of cell populations through the EphB/ephrin-B
system.

PMID: 12408869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):241-50.

The beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex imposes a crypt progenitor phenotype on colorectal
cancer cells.

van de Wetering M(1), Sancho E, Verweij C, de Lau W, Oving I, Hurlstone A, van
der Horn K, Batlle E, Coudreuse D, Haramis AP, Tjon-Pon-Fong M, Moerer P, van den
Born M, Soete G, Pals S, Eilers M, Medema R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, University
Medical Center, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The transactivation of TCF target genes induced by Wnt pathway mutations
constitutes the primary transforming event in colorectal cancer (CRC). We show
that disruption of beta-catenin/TCF-4 activity in CRC cells induces a rapid G1
arrest and blocks a genetic program that is physiologically active in the
proliferative compartment of colon crypts. Coincidently, an intestinal
differentiation program is induced. The TCF-4 target gene c-MYC plays a central
role in this switch by direct repression of the p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter.
Following disruption of beta-catenin/TCF-4 activity, the decreased expression of 
c-MYC releases p21(CIP1/WAF1) transcription, which in turn mediates G1 arrest and
differentiation. Thus, the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex constitutes the master
switch that controls proliferation versus differentiation in healthy and
malignant intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 12408868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Res. 2002 Oct 15;62(20):5651-6.

Isolation of a novel human gene, APCDD1, as a direct target of the
beta-Catenin/T-cell factor 4 complex with probable involvement in colorectal
carcinogenesis.

Takahashi M(1), Fujita M, Furukawa Y, Hamamoto R, Shimokawa T, Miwa N, Ogawa M,
Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify the molecular mechanisms of human carcinogenesis associated with
abnormal beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling, we have been using cDNA
microarrays to search for genes whose expression is significantly altered after
introduction of wild-type APC into SW480 colon cancer cells. These experiments
identified a novel human gene, termed APCDD1, that was down-regulated in the
cancer cells by exogenous wild-type APC; its expression was also reduced in
response to transduction of AXIN1. Moreover, we documented elevated expression of
APCDD1 in 18 of 27 primary colon cancer tissues compared with corresponding
noncancerous mucosae. A reporter gene assay using the 5'-flanking region of
APCDD1 indicated that transfection of beta-catenin together with wild-type Tcf4
into HeLa cells increased the reporter activity through two putative Tcf/lymphoid
enhancer factor-binding motifs upstream of the transcription start site,
indicating that APCDD1 is one of the direct targets of this transcription
complex. Exogenous APCDD1 promoted growth of colon cancer cells both in vitro and
in vivo, whereas transfection with antisense S-oligodeoxynucleotides decreased
cell/tumor growth. These data suggest that APCDD1 is directly regulated by the
beta-catenin/Tcf complex and that its elevated expression is likely to contribute
to colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12384519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Immunol. 2002 Nov;3(11):1102-8. Epub 2002 Oct 15.

Wnt glycoproteins regulate the expression of FoxN1, the gene defective in nude
mice.

Balciunaite G(1), Keller MP, Balciunaite E, Piali L, Zuklys S, Mathieu YD, Gill
J, Boyd R, Sussman DJ, Holländer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology, Department of Research and Clinical-biological Sciences,
and the Children's Hospital, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

T cell development and selection require the fully mature and diverse epithelial 
microenvironment of the thymus. Acquisition of these characteristics is dependent
on expression of the forkhead (also known as winged-helix) transcription factor
FoxN1, as a lack of functional FoxN1 results in aberrant epithelial morphogenesis
and an inability to attract lymphoid precursors to the thymus primordium.
However, the transcriptional control of Foxn1 expression has not been elucidated.
Here we report that secreted Wnt glycoproteins, expressed by thymic epithelial
cells and thymocytes, regulate epithelial Foxn1 expression in both autocrine and 
paracrine fashions. Wnt molecules therefore provide regulatory signals critical
for thymic function.

PMID: 12379851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. World J Gastroenterol. 2002 Oct;8(5):804-7.

Association of hTcf-4 gene expression and mutation with clinicopathological
characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jiang Y(1), Zhou XD, Liu YK, Wu X, Huang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhong Shan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

AIM: Hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) is a significant health problem in China. But 
the molecular mechanisms of HCC remains unclear. APC/beta-Catenin/Tcf signaling
pathway, also known as Wnt pathway, plays a critical role in the development and 
oncogenesis. As little is known about the alteration of human T-cell
transcription factor-4 (hTcf-4) gene in HCC, it is of interest to study the
expression and mutation of hTcf-4 gene in HCC and the relationship between hTcf-4
gene and progression of HCC.
METHODS: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method was used
to detect the expression of hTcf-4 mRNA in 32 HCC and para-cancerous tissues and 
5 normal liver tissues. PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP)
method was used to detect the mutation of hTcf-4 exons 1, 4, 9 and 15 in HCC. The
correlation of expression and mutation of the hTcf-4 gene with
clinicopathological characteristics of HCC was also analyzed.
RESULTS: RT-PCR showed that the expression rate of hTcf-4 mRNA in HCC,
para-cancerous tissues and normal liver tissues was 90.6 %, 71.9 % and 80 %,
respectively. The gene expression level in tumor was 0.71+/-0.13, much higher
than that in para-cancerous liver 0.29+/-0.05 and normal liver 0.26+/-0.05
(P<0.001), although there was no significant difference in gene expression level 
between para-cancerous tissues and normal liver (P>0.05). Furthermore, hTcf-4
gene expression was closely associated with tumor capsule status and intrahepatic
metastasis of HCC. On SSCP, 2 of 32 cases of HCC (6.25 %) displayed
characteristic mutational mobility shifts in exon 15 of the hTcf-4 gene. No
abnormal shifting bands were observed in para-cancerous tissues.
CONCLUSION: The high expression level of hTcf-4 in HCC, especially in tumors with
metastasis, suggests that the over-expression of hTcf-4 gene may be closely
associated with development and progression of HCC, but the mutation of this gene
seemed to play less important role in this respect.

PMCID: PMC4656565
PMID: 12378619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):11159-65.

Evidence for regulation of long terminal repeat transcription by Wnt
transcription factor TCF-4 in human astrocytic cells.

Wortman B(1), Darbinian N, Sawaya BE, Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in neural cell development and 
function. The key components of this pathway, beta-catenin and its partner
TCF-4/LEF-1, exert their effects on transcription by entering the nuclei, where
they associate with the TCF-4/LEF-1 DNA motif positioned in the promoters of
several important genes. Here we examined the role of TCF-4 upon transcription of
the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) promoter in human astrocytic
cells. Our results showed that expression of TCF-4 in human astrocytic cells
(U-87MG cells) decreased the basal and Tat-mediated transcription of the HIV-1
long terminal repeat (LTR). Results from promoter deletion studies revealed that 
the promoter sequence of the LTR with no classical binding motif for TCF-4/LEF-1,
which spans positions -80 to +80 of the LTR, remained responsive to
down-regulation by TCF-4. Noticeably, removal of the sequences between positions 
-80 and -68 decreased the negative effect of TCF-4 on viral gene transcription. A
mutant variant of TCF-4 with no binding site for beta-catenin was able to
down-regulate LTR transcription, suggesting that beta-catenin may not be directly
involved in the observed regulatory events. Results from the glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assay as well as the combined immunoprecipitation and
Western blot analysis of protein extract from U-87MG cells revealed an
interaction of Tat with TCF-4. Subcellular examination of TCF-4 and Tat in cells 
expressing either protein alone showed a predominantly nuclear accumulation of
these proteins. However, in cells which coexpressed both TCF-4 and Tat,
significant levels of these proteins were found in the cytoplasm. All together,
these observations provide evidence for the cooperative interaction of TCF-4, the
important transcription factor of the Wnt pathway, with Tat; this interaction may
determine the level of viral gene transcription in human astrocytic cells.

PMCID: PMC136655
PMID: 12368361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4807-19.

A sonic hedgehog-dependent signaling relay regulates growth of diencephalic and
mesencephalic primordia in the early mouse embryo.

Ishibashi M(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
16 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a key signal in the specification of ventral cell
identities along the length of the developing vertebrate neural tube. In the
presumptive hindbrain and spinal cord, dorsal development is largely Shh
independent. By contrast, we show that Shh is required for cyclin D1 expression
and the subsequent growth of both ventral and dorsal regions of the diencephalon 
and midbrain in early somite-stage mouse embryos. We propose that a Shh-dependent
signaling relay regulates proliferation and survival of dorsal cell populations
in the diencephalon and midbrain. We present evidence that Fgf15 shows
Shh-dependent expression in the diencephalon and may participate in this
interaction, at least in part, by regulating the ability of dorsal neural
precursors to respond to dorsally secreted Wnt mitogens.

PMID: 12361972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Cell Biol. 2002 Sep 16;158(6):1067-78. Epub 2002 Sep 16.

A yeast model system for functional analysis of beta-catenin signaling.

Lee MS(1), D'Amour KA, Papkoff J.

Author information: 
(1)Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge Genomics Center, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We have developed a novel Saccharomyces cerevisiae model system to dissect the
molecular events of beta-catenin (beta-cat) signaling. Coexpression of mammalian 
beta-cat with TCF4 or LEF1 results in nuclear accumulation of these proteins and 
a functional complex that activates reporter gene transcription from constructs
containing leukocyte enhancer factor (LEF)/T cell factor (TCF) response elements.
Reporter transcription is constitutive, requires expression of both beta-cat and 
TCF4 or LEF1, and is not supported by mutated LEF/TCF binding elements or by TCF4
or LEF1 mutants. A cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin or a functional fragment of
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein (APC-25) complexes with beta-cat,
reduces beta-cat binding to TCF4, and leads to increased cytoplasmic localization
of beta-cat and a reduction in reporter activation. Systematic mutation of
putative nuclear export signal sequences in APC-25 decreases APC-25 binding to
beta-cat and restores reporter gene transcription. Additional beta-cat signaling 
components, Axin and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, form a multisubunit complex 
similar to that found in mammalian cells. Coexpression of the F-box protein
beta-transducin repeat-containing protein reduces the stability of beta-cat and
decreases reporter activation. Thus, we have reconstituted a functional beta-cat 
signal transduction pathway in yeast and show that beta-cat signaling can be
regulated at multiple levels, including protein subcellular localization, protein
complex formation, and protein stability.

PMCID: PMC2173206
PMID: 12235124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mech Dev. 2002 Sep;117(1-2):269-73.

Expression and splice variant analysis of the zebrafish tcf4 transcription
factor.

Young RM(1), Reyes AE, Allende ML.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Departamento de Biología,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

Wnt signalling has been implicated in antero-posterior patterning of the
vertebrate embryonic body axis and in a number of other developmental processes. 
One of the downstream effectors of Wnt signalling is the beta-catenin protein
which complexes with members of the Lef/tcf transcription factor family. In the
zebrafish, specification of the head has been shown to be dependent on the Tcf3
protein which acts as a repressor of the posteriorizing activity of Wnt (Nature
407 (2000) 913). Here, we report the cloning and expression pattern of the
zebrafish tcf4 gene. In embryos, we find that the tcf4 gene is highly regulated
at the level of RNA splicing such that the variant proteins that are produced
contain or lack domains proposed to be essential in repression or activation of
transcription. Expression of tcf4 mRNA is first detected in a graded fashion in
the anterior brain and subsequently becomes restricted to the dorsal diencephalon
and anterior midbrain. There is also transient expression in the anterior
rhombomeres of the hindbrain and in the developing gut.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12204269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):42386-93. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Transcriptional activation of interleukin-8 by beta-catenin-Tcf4.

Lévy L(1), Neuveut C, Renard CA, Charneau P, Branchereau S, Gauthier F, Van Nhieu
JT, Cherqui D, Petit-Bertron AF, Mathieu D, Buendia MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique (Inserm U163), Département de
Médecine Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

Nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and its association with Tcf/Lef factors
are key steps in transduction of the Wnt signal, which is aberrantly activated in
a variety of human cancers. In a search for new beta-catenin-Tcf target genes, we
analyzed beta-catenin-induced alterations of gene expression in primary human
hepatocytes, after transduction of either dominant stable beta-catenin or its
truncated, transactivation-deficient counterpart by means of a lentiviral vector.
cDNA microarray analysis revealed a limited set of up-regulated genes, including 
known Wnt targets such as matrilysin and keratin-1. In this screen, we identified
the CXC chemokine interleukin 8 (IL-8) as a direct target of beta-catenin-Tcf4.
IL-8 is constitutively expressed in various cancers, and it has been implicated
in tumor progression through its mitogenic, motogenic, and angiogenic activities.
The IL-8 promoter contains a unique consensus Tcf/Lef site that is critical for
IL-8 activation by beta-catenin. We show here that the p300 coactivator was
required for efficient transactivation of beta-catenin on this promoter. Ectopic 
expression of beta-catenin in hepatoma cells promoted IL-8 secretion, which
stimulated endothelial cell migration. These data define IL-8 as a Wnt target and
suggest that IL-8 induction by beta-catenin might be implicated in developmental 
and tumorigenic processes.

PMID: 12200448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 29;21(38):5861-7.

Identification of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase-1 as a target of the
beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex in human colorectal cancers.

Takahashi M(1), Tsunoda T, Seiki M, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Japan.

Genetic alterations of APC and CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) have been identified in a
number of human cancers including tumors arising in the colon and liver.
Mutations in these genes lead to abnormal accumulation of beta-catenin and
constitutive activation of target genes in the Wnt signaling pathway. To clarify 
the precise role of accumulated beta-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, we
searched for genes involved in the beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway by cDNA
microarray. MT1-MMP (membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase) was among 84 genes
that were down-regulated after beta-catenin had been depleted by transduction of 
wild-type APC in SW480 cells. Expression of MT1-MMP was elevated in 22 of 24
colon carcinomas we examined. Reporter assays and an electromobility-shift assay 
revealed a DNA fragment between -1169 bp and -1163 bp in the 5' flanking region
of this gene to be a target of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. Our results
indicate that MT1-MMP is a direct down-stream target in the Wnt signaling
pathway, and that one of the ways accumulated beta-catenin contributes to
colorectal carcinogenesis is by transactivating this gene.

PMID: 12185585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Sep;283(3):C811-21.

Regulation of endothelial barrier function and growth by VE-cadherin,
plakoglobin, and beta-catenin.

Venkiteswaran K(1), Xiao K, Summers S, Calkins CC, Vincent PA, Pumiglia K,
Kowalczyk AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

VE-cadherin is an endothelial-specific cadherin that plays a central role in
vascular barrier function and angiogenesis. The cytoplasmic domain of VE-cadherin
is linked to the cytoskeleton through interactions with the armadillo family
proteins beta-catenin and plakoglobin. Growing evidence indicates that
beta-catenin and plakoglobin play important roles in epithelial growth and
morphogenesis. To test the role of these proteins in vascular cells, a
replication-deficient retroviral system was used to express intercellular
junction proteins and mutants in the human dermal microvascular endothelial cell 
line (HMEC-1). A mutant VE-cadherin lacking an adhesive extracellular domain
disrupted endothelial barrier function and inhibited endothelial growth. In
contrast, expression of exogenous plakoglobin or metabolically stable mutants of 
beta-catenin stimulated HMEC-1 cell growth, which suggests that the beta-catenin 
signaling pathway was active in HMEC-1 cells. This possibility was supported by
the finding that a dominant-negative mutant of the transcription factor TCF-4,
designed to inhibit beta-catenin signaling, also inhibited HMEC-1 cell growth.
These observations suggest that intercellular junction proteins function as
components of an adhesion and signaling system that regulates vascular barrier
function and growth.

PMID: 12176738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 23;296(3):584-8.

Inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf activity by white tea, green tea, and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG): minor contribution of H(2)O(2) at
physiologically relevant EGCG concentrations.

Dashwood WM(1), Orner GA, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-6512,
USA.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the major polyphenol present in white tea
and green tea. Recently, it was reported that the addition of EGCG and other tea 
polyphenols to cell culture media, minus cells, generated significant levels of
H(2)O(2), with the corollary that this might represent an "artifact" in cell
culture studies which seek to examine the chemopreventive mechanisms of tea. We
show here that in cell growth media with and without serum, and in growth media
containing human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells plus serum, physiologically 
relevant concentrations of EGCG (< or =25 microM) generated H(2)O(2) with a peak 
concentration of the order of 10-12 microM. However, addition of 20 microM
H(2)O(2) directly to HEK293 cells transiently transfected with wild-type or
mutant beta-catenin constructs and TCF-4 had no significant effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity or beta-catenin expression levels. In
contrast, 2-25 microM EGCG inhibited beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity in a
concentration-dependent fashion and there was a concomitant reduction in
beta-catenin protein levels in the cell lysates without changes in TCF-4
expression. The inhibition of reporter activity was recapitulated by white tea
and green tea, each tested at a 25 microM EGCG equivalent concentration in the
assay, and this was unaffected by the addition of exogenous catalase. The results
indicate that physiologically relevant concentrations of tea and EGCG inhibit
beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity in HEK293 cells due to reduced expression of
beta-catenin and that this is unlikely to be an artifact of H(2)O(2) generation
under the assay conditions used here. These data are consistent with the findings
from in vivo studies, showing the suppression of intestinal polyps by tea, via an
apparent down-regulation of beta-catenin and Wnt target genes.

PMID: 12176021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncol Rep. 2002 Sep-Oct;9(5):915-28.

Significance of E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex and cyclin D1 in breast cancer.

Lim SC(1), Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Chosun University Hospital,
Dong-ku, Kwangju, Korea. sclim@mail.chosun.ac.kr

E-cadherin and beta-catenin are important epithelial adhesion molecules in normal
epithelium. Loss of E-cadherin - beta-catenin adhesion is an important step in
the progression of many epithelial malignancies. beta-catenin plays also a role
in intracellular signaling and can function as an oncogene when binds to the
T-cell factor 4 (Tcf4)-binding site in the promotor region of cyclin D1 and
transactivates genes after translocation to the nucleus. We evaluated the
immunohistochemical expression pattern of E-cadherin, beta-catenin in
relationship with cyclin D1 overexpression, tumor stage, clinicopathologic
parameters and patient survival in 128 mammary infiltrating duct carcinomas. The 
expression of E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex and beta-catenin/cyclin D1 double
staining with confocal scanning laser microscope was evaluated. There were
aberrant expressions in 78% of E-cadherin, 79% of beta-catenin, and 66% of cyclin
D1 in breast cancer. There was correlation of aberrant expression of E-cadherin
or beta-catenin with lymph node metastasis, survival rate, and survival length.
However, there was no correlation of cyclin D1 overexpression with aberrant
expression of E-cadherin or beta-catenin. No death was found in normal expression
of beta-catenin, however lowest survival (50%) was found in nuclear beta-catenin 
expression. There was correlation of overexpression of cyclin D1 with survival
rate and survival length. The highest survival rate and survival length were
found in membranous normal beta-catenin expression group, however significant
decrement of survival length was found in the groups of aberrant expression one
or both of E-cadherin or/and beta-catenin. These results suggest that aberrant
expression of E-cadherin, beta-catenin, and cyclin D1 may be involved in tumor
metastasis, and analysis of the degree or the pattern of E-cadherin,
beta-catenin, cyclin D1, and E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex may be good
prognostic markers of mammary infiltrating duct carcinoma.

PMID: 12168049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;87(7):3433-40.

Aberrant localization of beta-catenin correlates with overexpression of its
target gene in human papillary thyroid cancer.

Ishigaki K(1), Namba H, Nakashima M, Nakayama T, Mitsutake N, Hayashi T, Maeda S,
Ichinose M, Kanematsu T, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University School of Medicine, 1 -12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Alterations of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway are known to occur in
mutations of the component genes such as APC, Axin, and beta-catenin, and play a 
pathogenetic role in tumorigenesis. Activated Wnt signaling stabilizes
beta-catenin, which associates with T cell factor, resulting in transactivation
of the downstream target genes including c-myc and cyclin D1. To investigate the 
involvement of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in thyroid tumorigenesis, we
analyzed its activation and localization in 5 human thyroid cancer cell lines and
132 thyroid tumor tissue samples. Dislocalization of beta-catenin was observed in
all cell lines. Constitutive activation of T cell factor in two of four thyroid
cancer cell lines was observed using reporter gene assay. Furthermore, high
expression levels of c-Myc and cyclin D1 were observed in cell lines that showed 
cytoplasmic or nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. In 132 paraffin-embedded
thyroid carcinoma tissue samples, cytoplasmic beta-catenin was
immunohistochemically observed in 52 out of 78 (67%) papillary thyroid cancers,
but only in 3 of 34 (9%) follicular adenomas and 5 of 20 (25%) follicular
cancers. Cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin significantly correlated with
overexpression of cyclin D1 in papillary carcinomas. Our results suggest that
aberrant activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is strongly involved in thyroid
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12107263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Cell. 2002 Mar;1(2):145-55.

ITF-2, a downstream target of the Wnt/TCF pathway, is activated in human cancers 
with beta-catenin defects and promotes neoplastic transformation.

Kolligs FT(1), Nieman MT, Winer I, Hu G, Van Mater D, Feng Y, Smith IM, Wu R,
Zhai Y, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics and the Cancer
Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

In many cancers, inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) or Axin
tumor suppressor proteins or activating mutations in beta-catenin lead to
elevated beta-catenin levels, enhanced binding of beta-catenin to T cell factor
(TCF) proteins, and increased expression of TCF-regulated genes. We found that
the gene for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor ITF-2
(immunoglobulin transcription factor-2) was activated in rat E1A-immortalized
RK3E cells following neoplastic transformation by beta-catenin or ligand-induced 
activation of a beta-catenin-estrogen receptor fusion protein. Human cancers with
beta-catenin regulatory defects had elevated ITF-2 expression, and ITF-2 was
repressed by restoring wild-type APC function or inhibiting TCF activity. Of
note, ITF-2 promoted neoplastic transformation of RK3E cells. We propose that
ITF-2 is a TCF-regulated gene, which functions in concert with other TCF target
genes to promote growth and/or survival of cancer cells with defects in
beta-catenin regulation.

PMID: 12086873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30887-91. Epub 2002 Jun 12.

Activation of the beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf pathway is obligate for formation of
primitive endoderm by mouse F9 totipotent teratocarcinoma cells in response to
retinoic acid.

Liu T(1), Lee YN, Malbon CC, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Diabetes & Metabolic Diseases Research Center,
State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651,
USA.

The morphogen retinoic acid promotes the formation of primitive endoderm in mouse
F9 teratocarcinoma cells as does the stimulation of the Frizzled-1 pathway. We
investigated whether the beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcriptional pathway
activated by Frizzled-1 plays a role in the retinoic acid-induced pathway to
primitive endoderm formation. An analysis of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription
reveals increased transcription at 1 and 4 h post-treatment with retinoic acid.
The stimulation of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription as well as the formation of
primitive endoderm was accompanied by the stabilization of beta-catenin as
observed in activation of the Frizzled-1 pathway. Transient transfection of F9
cells with an expression vector harboring a dominant-negative mutant of Tcf4
resulted in the attenuation of both the increase in Lef-Tcf-sensitive
transcription and formation of primitive endoderm in response to the morphogen.
Clones stably transfected to express the dominant-negative Tcf4 displayed a block
in retinoic acid-induced activation of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription and
primitive endoderm formation. These data reveal the obligate role of the
beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf transcriptional pathway in the action of the morphogen
retinoic acid.

PMID: 12063257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Res. 2002 Jun 1;62(11):3009-13.

T-cell factor-4 frameshift mutations occur frequently in human microsatellite
instability-high colorectal carcinomas but do not contribute to carcinogenesis.

Ruckert S(1), Hiendlmeyer E, Brueckl WM, Oswald U, Beyser K, Dietmaier W, Haynl
A, Koch C, Rüschoff J, Brabletz T, Kirchner T, Jung A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, der Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstrasse 8-10, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability accumulate errors in short 
repetitive DNA repeats, especially mono and dinucleotide repeats. One such
error-prone A(9) monorepeat is found in exon 17 of the TCF-4 gene. TCF-4 and
beta-catenin form a transcription complex, which is important for both
maintenance of normal epithelium and development of colorectal tumors. To
elucidate the relevance of frameshift mutations in the TCF-4 in colorectal
carcinogenesis, a variety of investigations in human tumors and cell lines was
performed. It was found that mutations in the TCF-4 A(9) repeat do not contribute
to tumorigenesis and seem to be passenger mutations.

PMID: 12036905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 8;518(1-3):83-7.

Stimulation of Cdx1 by oncogenic beta-catenin/Tcf4 in colon cancer cells;
opposite effect of the CDX2 homeoprotein.

Domon-Dell C(1), Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 3 avenue
Molière, 67200, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is a regulator of intestinal epithelial cell proliferation
and differentiation. Using a transfection approach, we showed here that the
oncogenic activation of the beta-catenin pathway stimulates the endogenous
expression of the Cdx1 mRNA as well as the activity of the Cdx1 promoter in
cancer cells of the human colon. Reciprocally, the paralogue homeobox gene Cdx2
exerts an inhibitory effect on the basal and on the beta-catenin-stimulated
activity of the Cdx1 promoter. The inhibitory effect of CDX2 requires the intact 
homeodomain. It is not dependent on canonical CDX binding sites in the Cdx1
promoter nor on the cis-elements specifically targeted by the beta-catenin/Tcf
complex. We conclude that the oncogenically activated beta-catenin and CDX2 have 
opposite and independent effects on the Cdx1 homeobox gene.

PMID: 11997022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Apr 1;134(1):46-54.

Cytogenetic aberrations and heterogeneity of mutations in repeat-containing genes
in a colon carcinoma from a patient with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer.

Planck M(1), Halvarsson B, Pålsson E, Hallén M, Ekelund M, Pålsson B, Baldetorp
B, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
maria.planck@onk.lu.se

The majority of tumors from patients affected by hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC) exhibit a mutator phenotype characterized by widespread
microsatellite instability (MSI) and somatic mutations in repeated sequences in
several cancer-associated genes. An inverse relationship between MSI and
chromosomal instability (CIN) has been demonstrated and HNPCC-associated tumors
are generally characterized by diploid or near-diploid cells with few or no
chromosomal rearrangements. We have studied MSI, somatic mutations in
repeat-containing genes, DNA-ploidy, and cytogenetic aberrations in a colon
carcinoma from a patient with a germline MLH1 mutation. Mutations in coding
repeats were assessed in 10 macroscopically separate areas of the primary tumor
and in two lymph nodes. Some of the genes studied (E2F4, MSH3, MSH6, TCF4, and
TGFBRII) showed a consistent lack of mutations, whereas others (BAX, Caspase-5
and IGFIIR) displayed alterations in some tumor regions but not in others. The
tumor had DNA-index 1.1-1.2 and a stable, aberrant karyotype with extra copies of
chromosomes 7 and 12 and the structural aberrations i(1q), der(20)t(8;20), and
der(22)t(1;22). The finding of CIN, MSI, and somatic mutations in coding repeats 
in this tumor suggests that these phenomena may act together in HNPCC
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the observed intratumoral heterogeneity of mutations 
in coding repeats implies these changes occur late in tumorigenesis and, thus,
probably play a role in tumor progression rather than initiation.

PMID: 11996796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26031-5. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

Synergistic coactivator function by coactivator-associated arginine
methyltransferase (CARM) 1 and beta-catenin with two different classes of
DNA-binding transcriptional activators.

Koh SS(1), Li H, Lee YH, Widelitz RB, Chuong CM, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90089, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) binds to and activates transcription of specific genes
in response to its cognate steroid hormone, dihydrotestosterone. Transcriptional 
activation by the DNA-bound AR is accomplished with the help of a variety of
coactivator proteins. For example, the p160 coactivators bind directly to AR and 
recruit additional coactivators such as the histone acetyltransferase p300 and
the histone methyltransferase CARM1. The current study tested whether CARM1 can
cooperate with other types of coactivator proteins. Recently it was shown that
beta-catenin can also bind directly to and serve as a coactivator for AR. Here it
is shown that CARM1 binds to beta-catenin and can function in synergy with
beta-catenin and p300 as coactivators for AR. The methyltransferase activity of
CARM1 is important for its synergistic coactivator function with beta-catenin.
The synergistic coactivator function of beta-catenin and CARM1 is not restricted 
to steroid receptors because these two coactivators can also act synergistically 
with another type of DNA binding transcriptional activator, LEF-1/TCF-4.

PMCID: PMC4386649
PMID: 11983685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2002;7(1):92-5.

Functional MDR1 polymorphisms (G2677T and C3435T) and TCF4 mutations in
colorectal tumors with high microsatellite instability.

Potocnik U(1), Ravnik-Glavac M, Glavac D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The multidrug resistance 1 (MDRI) gene and transcription factor 4(TCF4) gene are 
suggested to be involved in the WNT signalling pathway, the most important
pathway altered in colorectal cancer. Mutations in both genes have been
identified and associated with colorectal tumors exhibiting high microsatellite
instability (MSI-H). In this study, we report on the distribution of functional
polymorphisms in the MDR] gene and somatic frameshift mutations in the TCF4 gene 
coding mononucleotide repetition in 62 MSI-H colorectal tumors. Somatic
frameshift mutations in(of) the TCF4 gene were identified in 24/62 (39%) of the
studied MSI-H tumors. The estimated allele frequencies of functional
polymorphisms in(of) exon 21 (2677 G>T, Ala893Ser) and exon 26(3435 C>T, Ilel
142I1e) of the MDR] gene were 0.42 and 0.46 in the controls and 0.54 (p=0.035)
and 0.60 (p=0.017) in the MSI-H tumors. However, the allele frequency of both
functional MDR] polymorphisms did not significantly differ between MSI-H tumors
with TCF4 mutations and those without. These results support the involvement of
the MDRI gene in the tumorgenesis of MSI-H tumors and also suggest that
functional polymorphisms in the MDRI gene and mutations in the TCF4 gene are
likely to occur independently in MSI-H tumors.

PMID: 11980438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Death Differ. 2002 May;9(5):513-26.

Ligand activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma induces
apoptosis of leukemia cells by down-regulating the c-myc gene expression via
blockade of the Tcf-4 activity.

Yamakawa-Karakida N(1), Sugita K, Inukai T, Goi K, Nakamura M, Uno K, Sato H,
Kagami K, Barker N, Nakazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamanashi Medical University, Yamanashi, Japan.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma), a member of
the nuclear receptor superfamily, is expressed at highest levels in adipose
tissue and functions as a central regulator in the process of adipocyte
differentiation. In the present study, we showed that human leukemic cell lines, 
not only myeloid but also lymphoid, express PPAR gamma and its activation by
natural ligand (15-deoxy-Delta(12,14) - prostaglandin J(2)) and synthetic ligand 
(troglitazone) profoundly inhibited their proliferation by induction of apoptosis
preferentially in the serum-free culture. We pursued its mechanism using the
representative cell lines, and found that induction of apoptosis was accompanied 
by caspase-3 activation and specifically blocked by its inhibitor. While status
of several apoptosis-related molecules remained unchanged, the c-Myc expression
was markedly down-regulated within 24 h after troglitazone treatment. The c-myc
mRNA levels were dramatically reduced at 1 h and became undetectable at 12 h
after troglitazone treatment, which proved to be accompanied by complete blockade
of the Tcf-4 activity in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We succeeded
in establishing HL-60 cell lines growing well in the presence of troglitazone in 
the long-term serum-free culture. They showed neither induction of apoptosis nor 
down-regulation of the c-Myc expression via blockade of the Tcf-4 activity after 
troglitazone treatment. This is the first identification of the linkage between
PPAR gamma-mediated apoptosis and down-regulation of the c-myc gene expression.

PMID: 11973610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 18;21(17):2679-94.

In vitro evidence for complex modes of nuclear beta-catenin signaling during
prostate growth and tumorigenesis.

Chesire DR(1), Ewing CM, Gage WR, Isaacs WB.

Author information: 
(1)Brady Urological Institute Research Laboratories, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21287, USA.

Understanding the molecular etiology of prostate cancer (CaP) progression is
paramount for broadening current diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Current
interest in the role of wnt pathway signaling in prostate tumorigenesis was
generated with the finding of beta-catenin mutation and corresponding nuclear
localization in primary lesions. The recent finding of beta-catenin-induced
enhancement of androgen receptor (AR) function potentially ties beta-catenin to
key regulatory steps of prostate cell growth, differentiation, and
transformation. By immunohistological analysis of metastatic tumors, we detected 
nuclear beta-catenin in 20% of lethal CaP cases, suggesting a more common role
for beta-catenin in advanced disease than would be predicted by its mutation
rate. Interestingly, beta-catenin nuclear localization was found to occur
concomitantly with androgen-induced regrowth of normal rat prostate. These in
vivo observations likely implicate beta-catenin involvement in both normal and
neoplastic prostate physiology, thus prompting our interest in further
characterizing modes of beta-catenin signaling in prostate cells. Extending our
previous findings, we demonstrate that transient beta-catenin over-expression
stimulates T cell factor (TCF) signaling in most CaP cell lines. Further, this
activity is not subject to cross-regulation by phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3-K)/Akt signaling, a stimulatory pathway often upregulated in CaP upon PTEN
inactivation. Consistent with a previous report, we observed that transient
beta-catenin over-expression enhances AR-mediated transcription off two natural
target gene promoters. However, we were unable to recapitulate
beta-catenin-induced stimulation of ectopically expressed AR in AR-negative
cells, suggesting that other AR-associated factors are required for this
activity. Although LNCaP cells are capable of this mode of AR co-stimulation,
stable expression of mutant beta-catenin did not alter their proliferative
response to androgen. In total, our characterization of beta-catenin signaling in
CaP reveals the complex nature of its activity in prostate tissue, indicating
that beta-catenin potentially contributes to multiple stimulatory inputs required
for disease progression.

PMID: 11965541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2087-98.

A mitogen gradient of dorsal midline Wnts organizes growth in the CNS.

Megason SG(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Cell cycle progression and exit must be precisely patterned during development to
generate tissues of the correct size, shape and symmetry. Here we present
evidence that dorsal-ventral growth of the developing spinal cord is regulated by
a Wnt mitogen gradient. Wnt signaling through the beta-catenin/TCF pathway
positively regulates cell cycle progression and negatively regulates cell cycle
exit of spinal neural precursors in part through transcriptional regulation of
cyclin D1 and cyclin D2. Wnts expressed at the dorsal midline of the spinal cord,
Wnt1 and Wnt3a, have mitogenic activity while more broadly expressed Wnts do not.
We present several lines of evidence suggesting that dorsal midline Wnts form a
dorsal to ventral concentration gradient. A growth gradient that correlates with 
the predicted gradient of mitogenic Wnts emerges as the neural tube grows with
the proliferation rate highest dorsally and the differentiation rate highest
ventrally. These data are rationalized in a 'mitogen gradient model' that
explains how proliferation and differentiation can be patterned across a growing 
field of cells. Computer modeling demonstrates this model is a robust and
self-regulating mechanism for patterning cell cycle regulation in a growing
tissue. Supplemental data available on-line

PMID: 11959819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21657-65. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Activation of AXIN2 expression by beta-catenin-T cell factor. A feedback
repressor pathway regulating Wnt signaling.

Leung JY(1), Kolligs FT, Wu R, Zhai Y, Kuick R, Hanash S, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

The Wnt pathway regulates cell fate, proliferation, and apoptosis, and defects in
the pathway play a key role in many cancers. Although Wnts act to stabilize
beta-catenin levels in the cytosol and nucleus, a multiprotein complex containing
adenomatous polyposis coli, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, and Axin1 or its
homolog Axin2/Axil/conductin promotes beta-catenin phosphorylation and subsequent
proteasomal degradation. We found that the rat Axil gene was strongly induced
upon neoplastic transformation of RK3E cells by mutant beta-catenin or
gamma-catenin or after ligand-induced activation of a beta-catenin-estrogen
receptor fusion protein. Expression of Wnt1 in murine breast epithelial cells
activated the conductin gene, and human cancers with defective beta-catenin
regulation had elevated AXIN2 gene and protein expression. Expression of
AXIN2/Axil was strongly repressed in cancer cells by restoration of wild type
adenomatous polyposis coli function or expression of a dominant negative form of 
T cell factor (TCF)-4. TCF binding sites in the AXIN2 promoter played a key role 
in the ability of beta-catenin to activate AXIN2 transcription. In contrast to
AXIN2/Axil, expression of human or rat Axin1 homologs was nominally affected by
beta-catenin-TCF. Because Axin2 can inhibit beta-catenin abundance and function, 
the data implicate AXIN2 in a negative feedback pathway regulating Wnt signaling.
Additionally, although Axin1 and Axin2 have been thought to have comparable
functions, the observation that Wnt pathway activation elevates AXIN2 but not
AXIN1 expression suggests that there may be potentially significant functional
differences between the two proteins.

PMID: 11940574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncol Res. 2001;12(11-12):469-76.

Involvement of claudin-1 in the beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway and its
frequent upregulation in human colorectal cancers.

Miwa N(1), Furuse M, Tsukita S, Niikawa N, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical Science, The University
of Tokyo, Japan.

Accumulation of beta-catenin in cytoplasm and nuclei is frequently observed in a 
wide variety of tumors arising, for example, in the colon, liver, uterus, or
brain. In association with Tcf/LEF transcription factors, beta-catenin regulates 
expression of genes involved in the Wnt/wingless signaling pathway, but the
precise mechanisms are unclear. Here we report evidence that the claudin-1
(CLDNI) gene is one of the genes regulated by beta-catenin. Not only did
expression of CLDN1 decrease significantly in response to reduction of
intracellular beta-catenin by adenovirus-mediated transfer of wild-type APC into 
the APC-deficient colon cancer cells, but also two putative Tcf4 binding elements
in the 5' flanking region of CLDN1 were confirmed to be responsible for
activating its transcription. We documented increased expression of CLDN1 in all 
16 primary colorectal cancers we examined, compared with adjacent noncancerous
mucosae. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that claudin-1
was weakly stained at apical boarder of lateral membrane of noncancerous
epithelial cells and that it was strongly stained at all cell-cell boundaries and
in the cytoplasms of cancer cells. Our results imply that claudin-1 is involved
in the beta-catenin-Tcf/LEF signaling pathway, and that increased expression of
claudin-1 may have some role in colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11939410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochem J. 2002 Apr 15;363(Pt 2):253-62.

Promoter characterization of the novel human matrix metalloproteinase-26 gene:
regulation by the T-cell factor-4 implies specific expression of the gene in
cancer cells of epithelial origin.

Marchenko GN(1), Marchenko ND, Leng J, Strongin AY.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
U.S.A.

A novel matrix metalloproteinase-26 (MMP-26) is known to be specifically
expressed in epithelial carcinomas. To facilitate studies of MMP-26
transcriptional regulation, we have cloned and characterized a 1 kb 5'-flanking
region of the human MMP-26 gene. Altogether, our findings indicate that the
MMP-26 promoter has distinctive structural and functional features among MMP
genes. An unusual polyadenylation site proximal to the
transcription-factor-binding sites protects transcription of the MMP-26 gene from
the upstream promoters and represents a part of the stringent transcriptional
regulation of the gene. The MMP-26 gene has a consensus TATA-box and one
transcriptional start site located 60 and 35 nucleotides upstream of the
translational start site, respectively. The MMP-26 promoter was able to drive
luciferase expression in human A549 lung carcinoma, HT1080 fibrosarcoma and
HEK293 embryonic kidney cells. The basal transcription efficiency of the MMP-26
promoter is relatively low, thereby explaining the minute expression of the gene 
in most cells and tissues. When compared with other MMP genes, the MMP-26
promoter contains binding sites for a few transcription factors. Sequential
deletion and mutation analysis, and electrophoretic mobility-shift assay have
identified the T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) motif and the activator protein-1 site as 
the major regulatory elements of the MMP-26 promoter. Since previous studies have
established that the Tcf-4 transcription factor is subjected exclusively to
regulation through the beta-catenin/E(epithelial)-cadherin pathway, this implies 
the specific expression of MMP-26 in cancer cells of epithelial origin.

PMCID: PMC1222473
PMID: 11931652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Dec;20(4):553-9.

Frequent alterations of the beta-catenin and TCF-4 genes, but not of the APC
gene, in colon cancers with high-frequency microsatellite instability.

Fukushima H(1), Yamamoto H, Itoh F, Horiuchi S, Min Y, Iku S, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Dept. of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, Japan.

High-frequency microsatellite instability (MSI-H) due to defective DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) is a characteristic of the majority of tumors from kindreds with
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and a subset of sporadic
cancers. To better understand the molecular characteristics of colon cancers with
MSI-H, we analyzed these cancers for alterations of genes, such as APC,
beta-catenin, and TCF-4 genes, involved in the Wnt signaling pathway. Following
the National Cancer Institute (NCI) criteria, 385 unselected colon cancers were
classified as follows: 50 (13%) MSI-H tumors, 36 (9%) low-frequency MSI (MSI-L)
tumors, and 299 (78%) microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors. The frequency of APC
mutations was significantly lower in MSI-H tumors (9 out of 50) than in MSI-L (12
out of 20) and MSS (66 out of 100) tumors (P = 0.0005 and P < 0.0001,
respectively). In contrast, the frequency of exon 3 mutations in the beta-catenin
gene was higher in MSI-H tumors (10 out of 50) than in MSI-L tumors (0 out of 30;
P = 0.0110) and MSS tumors (3 out of 100; P = 0.0010). Frameshift mutations in a 
(A)9 tract of the TCF-4 gene were detected in 44% (22 out of 50) of MSI-H tumors,
but not in any of the 20 MSI-L tumors or 40 MSS tumors. In total, 78% of MSI-H
tumors and 84% of the remaining tumors had at least one alteration in APC,
beta-catenin, or the TCF-4 genes. Although further analysis is needed to
functionally characterize the consequences of each of these alterations on
beta-catenin/TCF target gene expression, our results suggest that the activation 
of the Wnt signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in colon tumorigenesis,
irrespective of MSI status.

PMID: 11876551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:301-22. Epub 2001 Oct 4.

E protein function in lymphocyte development.

Quong MW(1), Romanow WJ, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
MC 0366, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA. quong@biomail.ucsd.edu

Lymphocytes arise from hematopoietic stem cells through the coordinated action of
transcription factors. The E proteins (E12, E47, HEB and E2-2) have emerged as
key regulators of both B and T lymphocyte differentiation. This review summarizes
the current data and examines the various functions of E proteins and their
antagonists, Id2 and Id3, throughout lymphoid maturation. Beyond an established
role in B and T lineage commitment, E proteins continue to be essential at
subsequent stages of development. E protein activity regulates the expression of 
surrogate and antigen receptor genes, promotes Ig and TCR rearrangements, and
coordinates cell survival and proliferation with developmental progression in
response to TCR signaling. Finally, this review also discusses the role of E47 as
a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 11861605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Circ Res. 2002 Feb 22;90(3):340-7.

A role for the beta-catenin/T-cell factor signaling cascade in vascular
remodeling.

Wang X(1), Xiao Y, Mou Y, Zhao Y, Blankesteijn WM, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Ga, 
USA.

Beta-catenin and T cell factor (Tcf) are distal components of the highly
conserved Wnt pathway that govern cell fate and proliferation in lower organisms.
Thus, we hypothesized that the regulation of beta-catenin and Tcf played a
critical role in vascular remodeling. The first objective was to define
beta-catenin expression in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) after balloon
injury. Indeed, beta-catenin mRNA and protein were significantly elevated 7 days 
after balloon injury in the rat carotid artery. We hypothesized that beta-catenin
accumulation in response to vascular injury inhibited VSMC apoptosis. In line
with our hypothesis, transfection of a degradation-resistant beta-catenin
transgene into rat VSMCs significantly inhibited apoptosis. Accumulation of
beta-catenin also resulted in a 10-fold increase in the activation of Tcf. To
test if Tcf was necessary to confer beta-catenin-induced survival, loss of
function studies were carried out with a dominant negative Tcf-4 transgene
lacking the beta-catenin binding domain, Tcf4(N31). Indeed, loss of Tcf-4
activity abolished beta-catenin-induced survival. We further postulated that
beta-catenin and Tcf promoted cell cycle progression by activating cyclin D1, a
target gene of Tcf-4. Beta-catenin activated cyclin D1, and this activation was
partially blocked with loss of Tcf-4. In parallel, blockade of Tcf-4 resulted in 
inhibition of [3H]thymidine incorporation and partial blockade of the G1-S phase 
transition. In conclusion, beta-catenin and Tcf-4 play a dual role in vascular
remodeling by inhibiting VSMC apoptosis and promoting proliferation.

PMID: 11861424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mamm Genome. 2001 Nov;12(11):843-51.

Identification of members of the Wnt signaling pathway in the embryonic pituitary
gland.

Douglas KR(1), Brinkmeier ML, Kennell JA, Eswara P, Harrison TA, Patrianakos AI, 
Sprecher BS, Potok MA, Lyons RH Jr, MacDougald OA, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, 4301
MSRBIII, 1500 W. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

Prop1 is one of several transcription factors important for the development of
the pituitary gland. Downstream targets of PROP1 and other critical pituitary
transcription factors remain largely unknown. We have generated a partial
expression profile of the developing pituitary gland containing over 350
transcripts, using cDNA subtractive hybridization between Prop1(df/df) and
wild-type embryonic pituitary gland primordia. Numerous classes of genes
including transcription factors, membrane associated molecules, and cell cycle
regulators were identified in this study. Of the transcripts, 34% do not have
sequence similarity to known genes, but are similar to ESTs, and 4% represent
novel sequences. Pituitary gland expression of a number of clones was verified
using in situ hybridization. Several members of the Wnt signaling pathway were
identified in the developing pituitary gland. The frizzled2 receptor, Apc,
beta-catenin, groucho, and a novel isoform of TCF4 (officially named Tcf7l2) were
identified in developing pituitary libraries. Three N-terminal alternatively
spliced Tcf7l2 isoforms are reported here, each of which lacks a DNA-binding
domain. Functional studies indicate that these isoforms can act as endogenous
inhibitors of Wnt signaling in some contexts. This is the first report of Tcf7l2 
and Fzd2 expression in the developing pituitary. These molecules may be important
in mediating Wnt signaling during pituitary ontogeny. We expect other transcripts
from these libraries to be involved in pituitary gland development.

PMID: 11845287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2000 Jun;38(6):460-1.

[Expression of T cell factor 4 in renal cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin G(1), Zang T, Zhang Z, Xing D, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Hospital, Beijing Medical University, Beijing
100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate of the transduction of Wnt/Frizzled pathway in nuclei
and the function of TCF4 (T Cell Factor) in renal cell carcinoma.
METHODS: TCF4 mRNA are tested through RT-PCR and Northern Blot in renal cancer
tissue and renal cancer cell strain (GRC-I).
RESULTS: It has been certificated that TCF4 are expressed in renal cell
carcinoma, at the same time, there are some different splice of TCF4 in renal
cancer. A new 300bp mutant gene are found.
CONCLUSION: TCF4, an important molecular of Wnt/Frizzled pathway, takes part in
the formation and progression of renal cell carcinoma, different splice of TCF4
is one of the mechanism.

PMID: 11832085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Res. 2002 Jan 1;62(1):277-82.

Wnt-1 but not epidermal growth factor induces beta-catenin/T-cell
factor-dependent transcription in esophageal cancer cells.

Mizushima T(1), Nakagawa H, Kamberov YG, Wilder EL, Klein PS, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

beta-Catenin plays an important role in signal transduction pathways that
regulate cellular differentiation and proliferation. The increased concentration 
of this protein in the cytoplasm favors its binding to the T-cell factor (TCF)
family of DNA-binding proteins, and it subsequently translocates to the nucleus, 
where it induces transcription of specific genes. We explored mechanisms that
lead to activation of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) independent of adenomatous polyposis coli and
beta-catenin mutation. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay demonstrated that
TCF4 and beta-catenin form a complex and have DNA binding activity. However,
there was no constitutive activation of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription.
Coculture experiments demonstrated that Wnt-1, but not Wnt-5A and Wnt-7A,
activated the TCF reporter gene. Additionally, when cultured with
Wnt-1-conditioned media, ESCC cell lines showed an accumulation of beta-catenin
in the cytoplasm. Although both Wnt and epidermal growth factor inactivate
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, activation of epidermal growth factor receptor
did not stabilize beta-catenin. A comparison of extracellular stimuli suggests
that specific Wnt family members stabilize beta-catenin with resulting activation
of TCF-dependent transcription in ESCC.

PMID: 11782388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Cancer. 2002 Jan 1;97(1):42-51.

Cell type- and promoter-dependent modulation of the Wnt signaling pathway by
sodium butyrate.

Bordonaro M(1), Lazarova DL, Augenlicht LH, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Section, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
michaelbordonaro@yahoo.com

The Wnt signaling pathway modulates the transcription of genes linked to
proliferation, differentiation and tumor progression. beta-Catenin-Tcf
(BCT)-dependent Wnt signaling is influenced by the short-chain fatty acid sodium 
butyrate, which induces growth arrest and/or maturation of colonic carcinoma
cells. We have compared the effects of sodium butyrate on BCT-dependent signaling
in 2 colon carcinoma cell lines that differ in their physiologic response to
butyrate, with SW620 cells responding to butyrate by undergoing terminal
differentiation and apoptosis, and HCT-116 cells undergoing reversible growth
arrest, but no significant apoptotic cell death. Furthermore, these colon
carcinoma cell lines differ in their mechanism of Wnt pathway activation, with
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutant SW620 cells having high levels of BCT
complexes and APC wild-type HCT-116 cells having mutant beta-catenin, low levels 
of BCT complexes and correspondingly higher levels of free Tcf. We have
demonstrated that in SW620 cells, butyrate downregulates BCT-dependent expression
of the Tcf-TK, matrilysin and cyclin D1 promoters, whereas in HCT-116 cells,
butyrate upregulates expression of these promoters. Cotransfection with
expression vectors that interfere with the Wnt pathway suggests that butyrate
enhances BCT complex-DNA binding. Butyrate reduces the expression of Tcf4 in
HCT-116 cells, consistent with the induction by butyrate of Tcf-repressible
promoters in these cells. These findings indicate that sodium butyrate modulates 
the Wnt pathway in SW620 and HCT-116 cells in a different manner and that these
differences have consequences for promoter activity that may influence the
physiologic response to butyrate.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11774242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 15;15(24):3342-54.

Chromatin-specific regulation of LEF-1-beta-catenin transcription activation and 
inhibition in vitro.

Tutter AV(1), Fryer CJ, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Transcriptional activation of Wnt/Wg-responsive genes requires the stabilization 
and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, a dedicated coactivator of LEF/TCF
enhancer-binding proteins. Here we report that recombinant beta-catenin strongly 
enhances binding and transactivation by LEF-1 on chromatin templates in vitro.
Interestingly, different LEF-1 isoforms vary in their ability to bind nucleosomal
templates in the absence of beta-catenin, owing to N-terminal residues that
repress binding to chromatin, but not nonchromatin, templates. Transcriptional
activation in vitro requires both the armadillo (ARM) repeats and the C terminus 
of beta-catenin, whereas the phosphorylated N terminus is inhibitory to
transcription. A fragment spanning the C terminus (CT) and ARM repeats 11 and 12 
(CT-ARM), but not the CT alone, functions as a dominant negative inhibitor of
LEF-1-beta-cat activity in vitro and can block ATP-dependent binding of the
complex to chromatin. LEF-1-beta-cat transactivation in vitro was also repressed 
by inhibitor of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 (ICAT), a physiological inhibitor of
Wnt/Wg signaling that interacts with ARM repeats 11 and 12, and by the
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory compound, sulindac. None of these transcription
inhibitors (CT-ARM, ICAT, or sulindac) could disrupt the LEF-1-beta-cat complex
after it was stably bound to chromatin. We conclude that the CT-ARM region of
beta-catenin functions as a chromatin-specific activation domain, and that
several inhibitors of the Wnt/Wg pathway directly modulate LEF-1-beta-cat
activity on chromatin.

PMCID: PMC312851
PMID: 11751639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8664-7.

Evidence that APC regulates survivin expression: a possible mechanism
contributing to the stem cell origin of colon cancer.

Zhang T(1), Otevrel T, Gao Z, Gao Z, Ehrlich SM, Fields JZ, Boman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic and Preventive Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res 2002 Dec 15;62(24):7379.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):776-7; author reply 777-9.

Because colorectal cancers (CRCs) frequently display APC mutation, inhibition of 
apoptosis, and increased expression of the antiapoptotic protein survivin, we
hypothesized that APC mutation inhibits apoptosis by allowing constitutive
survivin expression. Using HT-29 CRC cell lines having inducible wild-type APC
(wt-APC) or transfected dominant-negative TCF-4, we show that wt-APC
down-regulates survivin expression via APC/beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling. Using
normal colonic epithelium, we found survivin by immunostaining/reverse
transcription-PCR to be preferentially expressed in the lower crypt (which
inversely correlates with wt-APC's expression pattern). Thus, wt-APC, by
progressively decreasing survivin and increasing apoptosis from crypt bottom to
top, may limit the population size of stem cells and other proliferative cells in
the lower crypt; mutant APC may allow expansion of these populations, thereby
initiating tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11751382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Jan;33(1):73-81.

Frequent alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway in colorectal cancer with
microsatellite instability.

Shimizu Y(1), Ikeda S, Fujimori M, Kodama S, Nakahara M, Okajima M, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Hiroshima University Faculty of Medicine, 1-2-3 
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

It is generally accepted that both dysfunction of the Wnt signaling pathway,
including mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and beta-catenin
genes, and genetic instability play important roles in colorectal carcinogenesis.
However, alteration of the components in the Wnt signaling pathway in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) has not been elucidated. In
order to assess the status of the Wnt signaling components in CRC with MSI,
mutational analyses of the beta-catenin, APC, Axin 1, and T cell factor 4 (TCF4) 
genes were performed. Three of 33 samples had mutations in exon 3 of the
beta-catenin gene and two in the APC gene. Eight mutations in seven samples were 
detected by single-strand conformation polymorphism and subsequent direct
sequence analysis of the entire coding region of the Axin 1 gene. Furthermore,
TCF4, which is one of the transcriptional factors in the Wnt signaling pathway
and has a mononucleotide repeat sequence (a nine- adenine repeat, (A)9) in its
C-terminal region, was mutated in 13 of the 33 samples. Thus, alteration in the
Wnt signaling pathway is frequently observed in CRC with MSI, including
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, as well as in familial adenomatous
polyposis and sporadic CRC without MSI.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6786-93.

Regulation and possible function of beta-catenin in human monocytes.

Thiele A(1), Wasner M, Müller C, Engeland K, Hauschildt S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Department of Immunobiology, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

In this study, we demonstrate that adherence factors, serum constituents, LPS,
and zymosan are capable of inducing a cellular accumulation of beta-catenin in
human monocytes. Whereas adherence-dependent accumulation of beta-catenin can be 
blocked by wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
accumulation induced by the remaining stimuli cannot be prevented by inhibition
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, implying the involvement of beta-catenin in
other not yet described signal transduction pathways. A role of beta-catenin in
adherence-dependent processes by interacting with classical cadherins can be
excluded as we could not detect cadherins in monocytes. To test whether it is
possible that beta-catenin interacts with LEF/TCF (lymphoid enhancer factor/T
cell factor) transcription factors, we studied the expression of this protein
family. TCF-4 was identified as the LEF/TCF transcription factor present in human
monocytes. However, neither cellular induction of beta-catenin nor cotransfection
experiments with beta-catenin conducted in the monocytic cell line THP-1 resulted
in the activation of a LEF/TCF-dependent promoter, suggesting the requirement of 
additional signals. Concurrent with this suggestion, we found that LPS and
zymosan, two physiological inducers of beta-catenin, caused an increase in the
expression of genes that are positively regulated by beta-catenin.

PMID: 11739494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):437-40.

Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the developing
mouse lung.

Tebar M(1), Destrée O, de Vree WJ, Ten Have-Opbroek AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, NL-2300 RC,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Recent evidence that Wnts and other genes in the Wnt signaling pathway are
expressed in embryonic and adult mouse lung suggests that this pathway is
important for cell fate decisions and differentiation of lung cell types. We
therefore examined the expression and protein distribution of several Wnt pathway
components during prenatal mouse lung development using whole-mount in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Between embryonic days 10.5 and 17.5
(E10.5-E17.5), beta-catenin was localized in the cytoplasm, and often also the
nucleus, of the undifferentiated primordial epithelium (PE), differentiating
alveolar epithelium (AE; present from E14.5 onward), and adjacent mesenchyme.
Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4, sFrp1, sFrp2 and sFrp4 were also expressed in the PE, AE,
and adjacent mesenchyme in specific spatio-temporal patterns.

PMID: 11731265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6469-77. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Enhancer-specific modulation of E protein activity.

Markus M(1), Du Z, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Homodimeric complexes of members of the E protein family of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are important for tissue-specific
activation of genes in B lymphocytes (Bain, G., Gruenwald, S., and Murre, C.
(1993) Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 3522-3529; Shen, C. P., and Kadesch, T. (1995) Mol.
Cell Biol. 15, 4518-4524; Jacobs, Y., et al. (1994) Mol. Cell Biol. 14,
4087-4096; Wilson, R. B., et al. (1991) Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 6185-6191). These
homodimers, however, have little activity on myogenic enhancers (Weintraub, H.,
Genetta, T., and Kadesch, T. (1994) Genes Dev. 8, 2203-2211). We report here the 
identification of a novel cis-acting transcriptional repression domain in the E
protein family of bHLH transcription factors. This domain, the Rep domain, is
present in each of the known vertebrate E proteins. Extensive mapping analysis
demonstrates that this domain is an acidic region of 30 amino acids with a
predicted loop structure. Fusion studies indicate that the Rep domain can repress
both of the E protein transactivation domains (AD1 and AD2). Physiologically, the
Rep domain plays a key role in maintaining E protein homodimers in an inactive
state on myogenic enhancers. In addition, we demonstrate that Rep domain mediated
repression of AD1 is a necessary for the function of MyoD-E protein heterodimeric
complexes. These studies demonstrate that the Rep domain is important for
modulating the transcriptional activity of E proteins and provide key insights
into both the selectivity and mechanism of action of E protein containing bHLH
protein complexes.

PMID: 11724804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 15;61(22):8089-93.

Expression of the invasion factor laminin gamma2 in colorectal carcinomas is
regulated by beta-catenin.

Hlubek F(1), Jung A, Kotzor N, Kirchner T, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstrasse
8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The migration-inducing gamma2 chain of laminin-5, one of the best known invasion 
markers, is strongly overexpressed in disseminating and infiltrating tumor cells 
at the invasive front of colorectal carcinomas. The same tumor cells show nuclear
accumulation of the oncoprotein beta-catenin, which together with T-cell
factor-DNA-binding proteins, functions as transcriptional activator of genes
involved in tumor progression. Here we show that beta-catenin activates the human
laminin-5 gamma2 gene through two T-cell factor-binding elements in a synergistic
manner together with hepatocyte growth factor and conclude that laminin-5 gamma2 
is another important target gene of nuclear beta-catenin during tumor
progression.

PMID: 11719433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Dec;8(12):1053-7.

Structure of a human Tcf4-beta-catenin complex.

Poy F(1), Lepourcelet M, Shivdasani RA, Eck MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The multifunctional protein beta-catenin is important for cell adhesion, because 
it binds cadherins, and the Wnt signal transduction pathway, where it interacts
with the Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein and TCF/Lef family
transcription factors. Mutations in APC or in beta-catenin are estimated to
trigger formation of over 90% of all colon cancers. In colonic epithelia, these
mutations produce elevated levels of Tcf4-beta-catenin, which stimulates a
transcriptional response that initiates polyp formation and eventually malignant 
growth. Thus, disruption of the Tcf4-beta-catenin interaction may be an
attractive goal for therapeutic intervention. Here we describe the crystal
structure of a human Tcf4-beta-catenin complex and compare it with recent
structures of beta-catenin in complex with Xenopus Tcf3 (XTcf3) and mammalian
E-cadherin. The structure reveals anticipated similarities with the closely
related XTcf3 complex but unexpectedly lacks one component observed in the XTcf3 
structure.

PMID: 11713476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Dec;8(12):1048-52.

Tcf4 can specifically recognize beta-catenin using alternative conformations.

Graham TA(1), Ferkey DM, Mao F, Kimelman D, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

Accumulation of the Wnt pathway effector beta-catenin is a hallmark of a number
of cancers, including colon cancer. As beta-catenin accumulates in the cell, it
forms a complex with Tcf family transcription factors and activates the
transcription of several critical genes involved in cell proliferation. Because
Tcf4 is the predominant Tcf factor present in colon cancer cells, drugs that
specifically disrupt the beta-catenin-Tcf4 complex could be useful in treating
colon cancers. Earlier structural and biochemical studies demonstrated that the
central region of the beta-catenin binding domain of Tcf is essential for
anchoring Tcf to beta-catenin via two conserved lysines in beta-catenin (called
the charged 'buttons'). Here we report the crystal structure of a
beta-catenin-Tcf4 complex at 2.0 A resolution. Our structural and mutagenesis
studies show that Tcf4 docks specifically to beta-catenin using several distinct 
conformations in its essential central region. These conformations allow
different glutamate residues in the central region of Tcf4 to form a salt bridge 
with the same critical charged button, Lys 312 of beta-catenin. We propose that
this interaction may be the first event in beta-catenin-Tcf4 recognition.

PMID: 11713475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 1;61(21):7722-6.

Up-regulation of the ectodermal-neural cortex 1 (ENC1) gene, a downstream target 
of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor complex, in colorectal carcinomas.

Fujita M(1), Furukawa Y, Tsunoda T, Tanaka T, Ogawa M, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

To clarify the molecular mechanisms of human carcinogenesis associated with
abnormal Wnt/wingless signaling, we searched for genes the expression of which
was significantly altered by introduction of wild-type AXIN1 into LoVo colon
cancer cells. By means of a cDNA microarray, we compared expression profiles of
LoVo cells infected with either adenoviruses expressing wild-type AXIN1 (Ad-Axin)
or those expressing a control gene (Ad-LacZ). Among the genes showing altered
expression, the ectodermal-neural cortex 1 (ENC1) gene was down-regulated in
response to Ad-Axin. The promoter activity of ENC1 was elevated approximately
3-fold by transfection of an activated form of beta-catenin together with
wild-type T-cell factor (Tcf)4 in HeLa cells. Semiquantitative reverse
transcription-PCR experiments revealed that expression of ENC1 was increased in
more than two-thirds of 24 primary colon cancer tissues that we examined compared
with corresponding noncancerous mucosae. Introduction of exogenous ENC1 increased
the growth rate of HCT116 colon cancer cells in serum-depleted medium. In other
experiments, overexpression of ENC1 in HT-29 colon cancer cells suppressed the
usual increase of two differentiation markers, in response to treatment with
sodium butyrate, a differentiation-inducible agent. These data suggest that ENC1 
is regulated by the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway and that its altered expression may 
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by suppressing differentiation of colonic
cells.

PMID: 11691783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45113-9. Epub 2001 Sep 25.

Id2 is a target of the beta-catenin/T cell factor pathway in colon carcinoma.

Rockman SP(1), Currie SA, Ciavarella M, Vincan E, Dow C, Thomas RJ, Phillips WA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Oncology Research Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Activation of beta-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) transcription as a result of
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and/or beta-catenin genes
occurs in the majority of colon tumors. An increasing number of genes, including 
c-myc and cyclin D1, have been implicated as targets of this pathway. We now
report that the dominant negative helix-loop-helix regulator Id2 is also a target
of the beta-catenin/TCF transcription pathway in colon adenocarcinoma.
Investigation of the mechanism for the overexpression of Id2 in colon carcinoma
cells demonstrated that the Id2 promoter is activated, and the Id2 protein is
up-regulated by beta-catenin. Conversely, reducing free beta-catenin blocked this
induction of promoter activity. We have also used an electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and supershift to identify a motif in the Id2 promoter that binds to 
TCF4 protein. Site-directed mutagenesis of this motif abolished promoter reporter
activity. Both transfection of Id2 into SW480 cells and induction of Id2 in HT29 
colon cells was found to increase anchorage-independent survival of these cells. 
Growing evidence associates disruption to Id2 expression with tumorigenesis, and 
our findings suggest that this dysregulation of Id2 expression is due to the
activation of the beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

PMID: 11572874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncology. 2001;61(2):156-61.

Genetic alterations in the human Tcf-4 gene in Japanese patients with sporadic
gastrointestinal cancers with microsatellite instability.

Saeki H(1), Tanaka S, Tokunaga E, Kawaguchi H, Ikeda Y, Maehara Y, Sugimachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. hsaeki@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Disruption of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway has been proposed as an important 
step in the development of cancer. The Tcf-4 transcription factor gene was
reported to be one of the targets of microsatellite instability (MSI) in
colorectal cancers in with MSI. We carried out a sequencing analysis of the Tcf-4
gene in 41 Japanese patients with gastrointestinal tumors with MSI as well as in 
cancer cell lines. Three of 21 (14.3%) colorectal tumors with MSI contained a
mutant Tcf-4 gene encoding 1-bp deletion in an (A)9 repeat, leading to carboxyl
terminal truncation of Tcf-4 protein. No Tcf-4 mutations were detected in 20
gastric tumors with MSI, or in gastric cancer cell lines. Additionally, we found 
a novel transcript of the Tcf-4 gene which contained a segment of 73 bp in front 
of the (A)9 repeat of the Tcf-4 coding sequence. Sequencing analysis revealed
that the inserted fragment was 60% homologous to that of exon IXA of the Tcf-1
gene. It is of interest that this insertion resulted in truncation of Tcf-4,
similar to the 1-bp deletion in the (A)9 repeat. Therefore, in part of the
Japanese colorectal tumors with MSI, frameshift mutations in Tcf-4 may be of
functional significance. Functional alterations in the Tcf-4 signaling network in
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis require further investigations.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11528255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;6(5):565-9.

Association and linkage studies between bipolar affective disorder and the
polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci ERDA1, SEF2-1B, MAB21L and KCNN3.

Meira-Lima IV(1), Zhao J, Sham P, Pereira AC, Krieger JE, Vallada H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience (LIM 27), Institute of Psychiatry, University of
São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

Several reports have suggested the presence of anticipation in bipolar affective 
disorder (BPAD). In addition, independent studies using the RED (repeat expansion
detection) have shown association between BPAD and longer CAG/CTG repeats.
Therefore loci with large CAG/CTG repeats are plausible candidates in the
inheritance of BPAD. The present study assesses the length of the repeats in four
loci: the ERDA-1 locus which is known to account for most of the long CAG repeats
detected by RED, the SEF2-1b locus which is placed in a region where positive
linkage results have been reported and the loci MAB21L and KCNN3 as functional
candidate genes. A Brazilian case-control sample with 115 unrelated BPAD patients
and 196 healthy control subjects and 14 multiply affected bipolar families was
investigated. With the case-control design the distribution of alleles between
the two groups did not approach statistical significance. The extended
transmission disequilibrium test (ETDT) performed in our families did not show
evidence for linkage disequilibrium. Parametric and non-parametric linkage
analysis also did not provide support for linkage between any of the four loci
and BPAD. Our data do not support the hypothesis that variation at the
polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci ERDA-1, SEF2-1b, MAB21L or KCNN3 influence
susceptibility to BPAD in our sample.

PMID: 11526470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Cell Biol. 2001 Sep 3;154(5):983-93. Epub 2001 Aug 27.

Physiological regulation of [beta]-catenin stability by Tcf3 and CK1epsilon.

Lee E(1), Salic A, Kirschner MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The wnt pathway regulates the steady state level of beta-catenin, a
transcriptional coactivator for the Tcf3/Lef1 family of DNA binding proteins. We 
demonstrate that Tcf3 can inhibit beta-catenin turnover via its competition with 
axin and adenomatous polyposis for beta-catenin binding. A mutant of beta-catenin
that cannot bind Tcf3 is degraded faster than the wild-type protein in Xenopus
embryos and extracts. A fragment of beta-catenin and a peptide encoding the NH2
terminus of Tcf4 that block the interaction between beta-catenin and Tcf3
stimulate beta-catenin degradation, indicating this interaction normally plays an
important role in regulating beta-catenin turnover. Tcf3 is a substrate for both 
glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3 and casein kinase (CK) 1epsilon, and
phosphorylation of Tcf3 by CKIepsilon stimulates its binding to beta-catenin, an 
effect reversed by GSK3. Tcf3 synergizes with CK1epsilon to inhibit beta-catenin 
degradation, whereas CKI-7, an inhibitor of CK1epsilon, reduces the inhibitory
effect of Tcf3. Finally, we provide evidence that CK1epsilon stimulates the
binding of dishevelled (dsh) to GSk3 binding protein (GBP) in extracts. Along
with evidence that a significant amount of Tcf protein is nonnuclear, these
findings suggest that CK1epsilon can modulate wnt signaling in vivo by regulating
both the beta-catenin-Tcf3 and the GBP-dsh interfaces.

PMCID: PMC2196183
PMID: 11524435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41675-82. Epub 2001 Aug 24.

Differential modulation of transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors by
direct protein-protein interactions with the T cell factor family of
transcription factors.

El-Tanani M(1), Fernig DG, Barraclough R, Green C, Rudland P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Molecular Medicine Group, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United
Kingdom.

Two major signaling pathways, those triggered by estrogen (E(2)) and by the Wnt
family, interact in the breast to cause growth and differentiation. The estrogen 
receptors ER(alpha) and ER(beta) are activated by binding E(2) and act as
ligand-dependent transcription factors. The effector for the Wnt family is the
Tcf family of transcription factors. Both sets of transcription factors recognize
discrete but different nucleotide sequences in the promoters of their target
genes. By using transient transfections of reporter constructs for the
osteopontin and thymidine kinase promoters in rat mammary cells, we show that
Tcf-4 antagonizes and Tcf-1 stimulates the effects of activated ER/E(2). For
mutants of the former promoter, the stimulatory effects of ER(alpha)/E(2) can be 
made to be dependent on Tcf-1, and for the latter promoter the effects of the T
cell factors (TCFs) are dependent on ER/E(2). Direct interaction between ERs and 
Tcfs either at the Tcf/ER(alpha)-binding site on the DNA or in the absence of DNA
is established by gel retardation assays or by coimmunoprecipitation/biosensor
methods, respectively. These results show that the two sets of transcription
factors can interact directly, the interaction between ERs and Tcf-4 being
antagonistic and that between ERs and Tcf-1 being synergistic on the activity of 
the promoters employed. Since Tcf-4 is the major Tcf family member in the breast,
it is suggested that the antagonistic interaction is normally dominant in vivo in
this tissue.

PMID: 11522780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):38563-9. Epub 2001 Aug 14.

Presenilin 1 regulates beta-catenin-mediated transcription in a glycogen synthase
kinase-3-independent fashion.

Palacino JJ(1), Murphy MP, Murayama O, Iwasaki K, Fujiwara M, Takashima A, Golde 
TE, Wolozin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience Program, Loyola University Medical
Center, Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA.

Presenilin 1 (PS1) is linked with Alzheimer's disease but exhibits functional
roles regulating growth and development. For instance, PS1 binds to beta-catenin 
and modulates beta-catenin signaling. In the current study, we observed that
knockout of PS1 inhibited beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 35%, as shown by
a luciferase reporter driven by the hTcf-4 promoter. Overexpressing wild-type PS1
increased beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 37.5%, and overexpressing PS1
with mutations associated with Alzheimer's disease decreased
beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 66%. To examine whether regulation of
beta-catenin by PS1 requires phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
(GSK 3beta), we examined whether inhibiting GSK 3beta activity overcomes the
inhibition of beta-catenin transcription induced by mutant PS1 constructs. Cells 
expressing wild-type or mutant PS1 were treated with LiCl, which inhibits GSK
3beta, or transfected with beta-catenin constructs that lack the GSK 3beta
phosphorylation sites. Neither treatment overcame PS1-mediated inhibition of
beta-catenin signaling, suggesting that regulation of beta-catenin by PS1 was not
affected by the activity of GSK 3beta. To investigate how PS1 might regulate
beta-catenin signaling, we determined whether PS1 interacts with other elements
of the beta-catenin signaling cascade, such as the Tcf-4 transcription factor.
Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed binding of PS1 and hTcf-4, and examining
nuclear isolates indicated that nuclear hTcf-4 was decreased in cells expressing 
mutant PS1. These data show that PS1 interacts with multiple components of the
beta-catenin signaling cascade and suggest that PS1 regulates beta-catenin in a
manner independent of GSK 3beta activity.

PMID: 11504726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. EMBO J. 2001 Aug 15;20(16):4500-11.

Negative regulation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway by the transcriptional
repressor HBP1.

Sampson EM(1), Haque ZK, Ku MC, Tevosian SG, Albanese C, Pestell RG, Paulson KE, 
Yee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

In certain cancers, constitutive Wnt signaling results from mutation in one or
more pathway components. The result is the accumulation and nuclear localization 
of beta-catenin, which interacts with the lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF)/T-cell
factor (TCF) family of HMG-box transcription factors, which activate important
growth regulatory genes, including cyclin D1 and c-myc. As exemplified by APC and
axin, the negative regulation of beta-catenin is important for tumor suppression.
Another potential mode of negative regulation is transcriptional repression of
cyclin D1 and other Wnt target genes. In mammals, the transcriptional repressors 
in the Wnt pathway are not well defined. We have previously identified HBP1 as an
HMG-box repressor and a cell cycle inhibitor. Here, we show that HBP1 is a
repressor of the cyclin D1 gene and inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway. The
inhibition of Wnt signaling and growth requires a common domain of HBP1. The
apparent mechanism is an inhibition of TCF/LEF DNA binding through a physical
interaction with HBP1. These data suggest that the suppression of Wnt signaling
by HBP1 may be a mechanism to prevent inappropriate proliferation.

PMCID: PMC125566
PMID: 11500377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):39213-9. Epub 2001 Aug 9.

Id-1, ITF-2, and Id-2 comprise a network of helix-loop-helix proteins that
regulate mammary epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.

Parrinello S(1), Lin CQ, Murata K, Itahana Y, Singh J, Krtolica A, Campisi J,
Desprez PY.

Author information: 
(1)Geraldine Brush Cancer Research Institute, California Pacific Medical Center, 
San Francisco, California 94115, USA.

Mammary epithelial cells proliferate, invade the stroma, differentiate, and die
in adult mammals by mechanisms that are poorly understood. We found that Id-1, an
inhibitor of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, regulates mammary
epithelial cell growth, differentiation, and invasion in culture. Here, we show
that Id-1 is expressed highly during mammary development in virgin mice and
during early pregnancy, when proliferation and invasion are high. During
mid-pregnancy, Id-1 expression declined to undetectable levels as the epithelium 
differentiated fully. Surprisingly, Id-1 increased during involution, when the
epithelium undergoes extensive apoptosis. To determine whether Id-1 regulates
both proliferation and apoptosis, we constitutively expressed Id-1 in mammary
epithelial cell cultures. Id-1 stimulated proliferation in sparse cultures but
induced apoptosis in dense cultures, which reflect epithelial cell density during
early pregnancy and involution, respectively. To understand how Id-1 acts, we
screened a yeast two-hybrid library from differentiating mammary epithelial cells
and identified ITF-2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, as an
Id-1-interacting protein. Overexpression of ITF-2 significantly reduced
Id-1-stimulated proliferation and apoptosis. We show further that, in contrast to
Id-1, Id-2 was expressed highly in differentiated mammary epithelial cells in
vivo and in culture. In culture, Id-2 antisense transcripts blocked
differentiation. Our results suggest that Id-1, ITF-2, and Id-2 comprise a
network of interacting molecular switches that govern mammary epithelial cell
phenotypes.

PMID: 11498533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5857-68.

Oncogenic mutants of RON and MET receptor tyrosine kinases cause activation of
the beta-catenin pathway.

Danilkovitch-Miagkova A(1), Miagkov A, Skeel A, Nakaigawa N, Zbar B, Leonard EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
danilkovitch@mail.ncifcrf.gov

beta-Catenin is an oncogenic protein involved in regulation of cell-cell adhesion
and gene expression. Accumulation of cellular beta-catenin occurs in many types
of human cancers. Four mechanisms are known to cause increases in beta-catenin:
mutations of beta-catenin, adenomatous polyposis coli, or axin genes and
activation of Wnt signaling. We report a new cause of beta-catenin accumulation
involving oncogenic mutants of RON and MET receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs).
Cells transfected with oncogenic RON or MET were characterized by beta-catenin
tyrosine phosphorylation and accumulation; constitutive activation of a Tcf
transcriptional factor; and increased levels of beta-catenin/Tcf target oncogene 
proteins c-myc and cyclin D1. Interference with the beta-catenin pathway reduced 
the transforming potential of mutated RON and MET. Activation of beta-catenin by 
oncogenic RON and MET constitutes a new pathway, which might lead to cell
transformation by these and other mutant growth factor RTKs.

PMCID: PMC87305
PMID: 11486025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jul 23;154(2):369-87.

Vitamin D(3) promotes the differentiation of colon carcinoma cells by the
induction of E-cadherin and the inhibition of beta-catenin signaling.

Pálmer HG(1), González-Sancho JM, Espada J, Berciano MT, Puig I, Baulida J,
Quintanilla M, Cano A, de Herreros AG, Lafarga M, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols, " Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, E-28029 Madrid,
Spain.

The beta-catenin signaling pathway is deregulated in nearly all colon cancers.
Nonhypercalcemic vitamin D3 (1alpha,25-dehydroxyvitamin D(3)) analogues are
candidate drugs to treat this neoplasia. We show that these compounds promote the
differentiation of human colon carcinoma SW480 cells expressing vitamin D
receptors (VDRs) (SW480-ADH) but not that of a malignant subline (SW480-R) or
metastasic derivative (SW620) cells lacking VDR. 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) induced the
expression of E-cadherin and other adhesion proteins (occludin, Zonula occludens 
[ZO]-1, ZO-2, vinculin) and promoted the translocation of beta-catenin,
plakoglobin, and ZO-1 from the nucleus to the plasma membrane. Ligand-activated
VDR competed with T cell transcription factor (TCF)-4 for beta-catenin binding.
Accordingly, 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) repressed beta-catenin-TCF-4 transcriptional
activity. Moreover, VDR activity was enhanced by ectopic beta-catenin and reduced
by TCF-4. Also, 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) inhibited expression of
beta-catenin-TCF-4-responsive genes, c-myc, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor delta, Tcf-1, and CD44, whereas it induced expression of ZO-1. Our
results show that 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) induces E-cadherin and modulates
beta-catenin-TCF-4 target genes in a manner opposite to that of beta-catenin,
promoting the differentiation of colon carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2150773
PMID: 11470825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 15;61(14):5619-29.

Metastasis-inducing dna regulates the expression of the osteopontin gene by
binding the transcription factor Tcf-4.

El-Tanani M(1), Barraclough R, Wilkinson MC, Rudland PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Life Sciences Building, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

Small 1,000-bp fragments of genomic DNA obtained from human malignant breast
cancer cell lines when transfected into a benign rat mammary cell line enhance
transcription of the osteopontin gene and thereby cause the cells to metastasize 
in syngeneic rats. To identify the molecular events underlying this process,
transient cotransfections of an osteopontin promoter-reporter construct and
fragments of one metastasis-inducing DNA (Met-DNA) have identified the active
components in the Met-DNA as the binding sites for the T-cell factor (Tcf) family
of transcription factors. Incubation of cell extracts with active DNA fragments
containing the sequence CAAAG caused retardation of their mobilities on
polyacrylamide gels, and Western blotting identified Tcf-4, beta-catenin, and
E-cadherin in the relevant DNA complexes in vitro. Transfection of an expression 
vector for Tcf-4 inhibited the stimulated activity of the osteopontin
promoter-reporter construct caused by transiently transfected active fragments of
Met-DNA or permanently transfected Met-DNA. This stimulated activity of the
osteopontin promoter-reporter construct is accompanied by an increase in
endogenous osteopontin mRNA but not in fos or actin mRNAs in the transfected
cells. Permanent transfection of the benign rat mammary cell line with a 20-bp
fragment from the Met-DNA containing the Tcf recognition sequence CAAAG caused an
enhanced permanent production of endogenous osteopontin protein in vitro and
induced the cells to metastasize in syngeneic rats in vivo. The corresponding
fragment without the CAAAG sequence was without either effect. Therefore, the
regulatory effect of the C9-Met-DNA is exerted, at least in part, by a CAAAG
sequence that can sequester the endogenous inhibitory Tcf-4 and thereby promote
transcription of osteopontin, the direct effector of metastasis in this system.

PMID: 11454716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Jul 1;128(1):43-5.

Beta-catenin activation through mutation is rare in rectal cancer.

Nilbert M(1), Rambech E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
mef.nilbert@onk.lu.se

Increased transcriptional activation through beta-catenin stabilization plays a
central role in colorectal tumorigenesis. Alterations of phosphorylation sites
within the CTNNB1 gene, which codes for beta-catenin has been reported to occur
in about one-half of colorectal tumors without APC-gene mutations. We assessed
the importance of mutations in the regulatory domain, located within exon 3 of
CTNNB1, in 103 rectal carcinomas and correlated these data with presence of
microsatellite instability, somatic frame-shift alterations of the TCF-4 gene,
and APC-gene mutations in the tumors. No mutation was detected in exon 3 of the
CTNNB1 gene and our results thus demonstrate that beta-catenin activation through
mutation rarely contributes to the development of sporadic and microsatellite
instability stable rectal cancer.

PMID: 11454429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genomics. 2001 Mar 1;72(2):169-79.

Physical and transcriptional map of a 311-kb segment of chromosome 18q21, a
candidate lung tumor suppressor locus.

Yanaihara N(1), Kohno T, Takakura S, Takei K, Otsuka A, Sunaga N, Takahashi M,
Yamazaki M, Tashiro H, Fukuzumi Y, Fujimori Y, Hagiwara K, Tanaka T, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1, Tsukiji
5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.

Here, we report the complete genomic sequence and the characterization of the
311-kb region of 18q21, a candidate tumor suppressor locus containing a region of
homozygous deletion in a lung cancer cell line, Ma29. This region contained two
known genes, SMAD4 and ME2 (mitochondrial malate oxydoreductase), and two novel
genes, D29 (deleted in Ma29 HGMW-approved symbol ELAC1), encoding an
evolutionarily conserved protein, and B29 (beside the Ma29 deletion HGMW-approved
symbol C18orf3), with no significant homology to any known genes. The deleted DNA
segment in Ma29, which was estimated to be 195 kb in size, included all the
coding exons of ME2 and D29, but not the coding exons of SMAD4 and B29. The
deleted region also included exon 0, a 5'-noncoding exon, of SMAD4, and the
expression of SMAD4 was greatly reduced in Ma29 cells. Mutations of SMAD4 and D29
were detected in 1 of 45 lung cancer cell lines examined, while those of ME2 and 
B29 were not detected, indicating that these four genes are not major targets for
18q21 deletions. The physical and transcriptional map constructed in this study
will provide basic information for the identification of a tumor suppressor
gene(s) at 18q21 involved in lung carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Anticancer Res. 2001 Mar-Apr;21(2A):911-5.

Enhanced expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and nuclear beta-catenin are related to
mutations in the APC gene in human colorectal cancer.

Dimberg J(1), Hugander A, Sirsjö A, Söderkvist P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Surgery, Division of Cell Biology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Linköping, Sweden. jan.dimberg@hhj.hj.se

Mutational inactivation of the human tumour suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) results in constitutive activation of beta-catenin/T cell factor-4
(Tcf-4) mediated transcription of target genes. Up-regulation of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) protein is frequently found in human colorectal cancer (CRC). We analysed
38 CRC for mutations in APC and beta-catenin and found an association between APC
mutations and elevated COX-2 levels. Furthermore, APC mutations were
predominantly observed in tumour tissues from the rectum compared to tumours of
colonic origin. Western blot analysis revealed that nuclear beta-catenin levels
were generally higher in tumours with APC mutations compared to tumours with wild
type APC. However, there was also a higher level of nuclear beta-catenin in
tumour compared to normal tissue, but nuclear Tcf-4 protein was constitutively
expressed in tumour and normal tissue and showed no differences. An identified
putative Tcf-4 binding element in the COX-2 promoter may partly explain the
enhanced level of COX-2 and support the idea that COX-2 may be a downstream
target of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway.

PMID: 11396184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):28147-54. Epub 2001 May 29.

Involvement of ITF2 in the transcriptional regulation of melanogenic genes.

Furumura M(1), Potterf SB, Toyofuku K, Matsunaga J, Muller J, Hearing VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pigment Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Cell Biology, NCI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In response to agouti signal protein, melanocytes switch from producing eumelanin
to pheomelanin concomitant with the down-regulation of melanogenic gene
transcription. We previously reported that a ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, known as ITF2, is up-regulated during this switch, and we
now report that treatment of melanocytes with melanocyte-stimulating hormone
down-regulates expression of ITF2. To more fully characterize the involvement of 
ITF2 in regulating melanogenic gene transcription, ITF2 sense or antisense
constructs were introduced into melan-a melanocytes. Gene and protein expression 
analyses and luciferase reporter assays using promoters from melanogenic genes
showed that up-regulation of ITF2 suppressed melanogenic gene expression as well 
as the expression of Mitf, a melanocyte-specific transcription factor. In
addition, stable ITF2 sense transfectants had significant reductions in
pigmentation and a less dendritic phenotype compared with mock transfectants. In 
contrast, ITF2 antisense-transfected melanocytes were more pigmented and more
dendritic. These results demonstrate that up-regulation of ITF2 during the
pheomelanin switch is functionally significant and reveal that differential
expression of a ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor can
modulate expression of melanogenic genes and the differentiation of melanocytes.

PMID: 11382753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Gene. 2001 May 16;269(1-2):167-75.

Regulation of human P2X1 promoter activity by beta helix-loop-helix factors in
smooth muscle cells.

Dhulipala PD(1), Lianos EA, Kotlikoff MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

We isolated and characterized genomic clones of the human P2X1 receptor (hP2X1)
gene in an effort to understand its tissue specific expression. The hP2X1 gene
contains 12 exons spanning 20 kb, with exon sizes ranging from 59 to 143 bp. A
385 bp upstream fragment promoted hP2X1 gene expression in smooth muscle (A7R5
and primary trachealis) and fibroblast (NIH3T3) cell lines, and mutation of a
consensus E box sequence (CACCTG) within this fragment (-340 to -345) did not
alter basal promoter activity. However, co-transfected bHLH factors regulated
activity of the 385 bp minimal P2X1 promoter in a tissue-specific manner. E12
expression inhibited and ITF2b augmented activity in A7R5 cells, but had no
effect in NIH3T3 cells. ITF2a, Myo-D, and Id1 proteins had no effect on either
cell line, but co-expression of ITF2a blocked E12 inhibition in A7R5 cells, while
ITF2b failed to reverse the inhibition. Northern analysis of A7R5 RNA identified 
high levels of E12 and ITF2b transcripts, and gel shift assays using A7R5 and
NIH3T3 nuclear extracts indicated the formation of a protein-DNA complex with an 
oligonucleotide corresponding to -330 and -348, which was abolished by base
substitutions within the E box motif. Our results identify a critical E box
response element in the hP2X1 promoter that binds bHLH factors and demonstrate
smooth muscle specific transcriptional regulation by E proteins.

PMID: 11376948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):327-33.

p73beta, a variant of p73, enhances Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in Saos-2 cells.

Ueda Y(1), Hijikata M, Takagi S, Takada R, Takada S, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507,
Japan.

The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and p53 are very common targets for genetic
alterations in colorectal cancer, and relationships between them have been
reported. Here, we describe the relation between Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
the p53-related gene p73. p73, but not p53, activated a promoter containing the
Tcf-binding sequence in Saos-2 cells, and the degree of activation was positively
correlated with that on a p53-responsive promoter. Moreover, p73beta enhanced
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling synergistically with Wnt-3a or exogenously expressed
beta-catenin, unlike p53, and the enhancement was not caused by the accumulation 
of beta-catenin. These results show that the effects of p73 on Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling differ from those of p53.

PMID: 11327702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Neoplasia. 2001 Jan-Feb;3(1):4-9.

Isolation of a novel human gene, MARKL1, homologous to MARK3 and its involvement 
in hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

Kato T(1), Satoh S, Okabe H, Kitahara O, Ono K, Kihara C, Tanaka T, Tsunoda T,
Yamaoka Y, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Activation of the Wnt-signaling pathway is known to play a crucial role in
carcinogenesis of various human organs including the colon, liver, prostate, and 
endometrium. To investigate the mechanisms underlying hepatocellular
carcinogenesis, we attempted to identify genes regulated by beta-catenin/Tcf
complex in a human hepatoma cell line, HepG2, in which an activated form of
beta-catenin is expressed. By means of cDNA microarray, we isolated a novel human
gene, termed MARKL1 (MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase-like 1), whose
expression was downregulated in response to decreased Tcf/LEF1 activity. The
transcript expressed in liver consisted of 3529 nucleotides that contained an
open reading frame of 2256 nucleotides, encoding 752 amino acids homologous to
human MARK3 (MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 3). Expression levels of 
MARKL1 were markedly elevated in eight of nine HCCs in which nuclear accumulation
of beta-catenin were observed, which may suggest that MARKL1 plays some role in
hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1505019
PMID: 11326310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Genet. 2001 May;28(1):53-7.

Beta-catenin-sensitive isoforms of lymphoid enhancer factor-1 are selectively
expressed in colon cancer.

Hovanes K(1), Li TW, Munguia JE, Truong T, Milovanovic T, Lawrence Marsh J,
Holcombe RF, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 May;28(1):3-4.

Constitutive activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is a root cause of many
colon cancers. Activation of this pathway is caused by genetic mutations that
stabilize the beta-catenin protein, allowing it to accumulate in the nucleus and 
form complexes with any member of the lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF1) and T-cell 
factor (TCF1, TCF3, TCF4) family of transcription factors (referred to
collectively as LEF/TCFs) to activate transcription of target genes. Target genes
such as MYC, CCND1, MMP7 and TCF7 (refs. 5-9) are normally expressed in colon
tissue, so it has been proposed that abnormal expression levels or patterns
imposed by beta-catenin/TCF complexes have a role in tumor progression. We report
here that LEF1 is a new type of target gene ectopically activated in colon
cancer. The pattern of this ectopic expression is unusual because it derives from
selective activation of a promoter for a full-length LEF1 isoform that binds
beta-catenin, but not a second, intronic promoter that drives expression of a
dominant-negative isoform. beta-catenin/TCF complexes can activate the promoter
for full-length LEF1, indicating that in cancer high levels of these complexes
misregulate transcription to favor a positive feedback loop for Wnt signaling by 
inducing selective expression of full-length, beta-catenin-sensitive forms of
LEF/TCFs.

PMID: 11326276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):645-53.

The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs aspirin and indomethacin attenuate
beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling.

Dihlmann S(1), Siermann A, von Knebel Doeberitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Diagnostics and Therapy, Department of Surgery,
University of Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Increasing epidemiological and experimental evidence implicates non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as anti-tumorigenic agents. The precise
mechanisms whereby NSAIDs exert their anti-neoplastic effects remain poorly
understood. Studies from hereditary and sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
suggest that NSAIDs may interfere with initiating steps of carcinogenesis, i.e.
disturbances within the beta-catenin signaling pathway. We therefore investigated
beta-catenin/TCF signaling in response to aspirin or indomethacin, respectively, 
in four CRC cell lines (SW948, SW480, HCT116, LoVo). Both, aspirin and
indomethacin inhibited transcription of a beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter
gene in a dose dependent manner. In addition, the beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional target cyclin D1 was downregulated by both drugs. Endogenous
beta-catenin levels remained unaffected by either drug. Moreover, indirect
immunofluorescence studies revealed no significant changes of subcellular
beta-catenin localization in either cell line after NSAID treatment. Likewise,
binding of the beta-catenin/TCF complex to its specific DNA-binding sites was not
altered, as demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) of
nuclear extracts derived from NSAID treated cells. These results strongly suggest
that aspirin and indomethacin attenuate the transcription of
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive genes, by modulating TCF activity without disrupting 
beta-catenin/TCF complex formation.

PMID: 11313997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 29;20(14):1793-7.

Regulatory region of metastasis-inducing DNA is the binding site for T cell
factor-4.

El-Tanani MK(1), Barraclough R, Wilkinson MC, Rudland PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Molecular Medicine Group, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.

Small 1000 bp fragments of DNA derived from human malignant breast cancer cells
have been isolated which, when transfected into a benign rat mammary cell line
induce the production of osteopontin and thereby endow those cells with the
capability to metastasize in syngeneic rats. Using transient transfections of an 
osteopontin promoter-reporter construct, we have now identified the active moiety
in the metastasis-inducing DNA as the binding site for the T cell factor (Tcf)
family of transcription factors and located Tcf-4, beta-catenin and E-cadherin in
the relevant DNA complex in vitro. The regulatory effects of the
metastasis-inducing DNAs are therefore exerted, at least in part, by a CAAAG
sequence which can sequester Tcf-4, thereby promoting transcription of the direct
effector for metastasis in this system, osteopontin.

PMID: 11313926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 15;61(8):3465-71.

Down-regulation of beta-catenin TCF signaling is linked to colonic epithelial
cell differentiation.

Mariadason JM(1), Bordonaro M, Aslam F, Shi L, Kuraguchi M, Velcich A, Augenlicht
LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, 111 East 210th Street, 
Bronx, New York 10467, USA. john_mariadson@netzero.net

The beta-catenin TCF pathway is implicated in the regulation of colonic
epithelial cell proliferation, but its role in the regulation of cell
differentiation is unknown. The colon carcinoma cell line, Caco-2, spontaneously 
undergoes G(0)/G(1) cell cycle arrest and differentiates along the absorptive
cell lineage over 21 days in culture. In parallel, we show that beta-catenin-TCF 
activity and complex formation are significantly down-regulated. The
down-regulation of beta-catenin-TCF signaling was independent of APC, which we
characterized as having a nonsense mutation in codon 1367 in Caco-2 cells, but
was associated with a decrease in TCF-4 protein levels. Total beta-catenin levels
increased during Caco-2 cell differentiation, although this was attributable to
an increase in the membrane, E-cadherin-associated, fraction of beta-catenin.
Importantly, down-regulation of beta-catenin-TCF signaling in undifferentiated
Caco-2 cells by three different mechanisms, ectopic expression of E-cadherin,
wild-type APC, or dominant negative TCF-4, resulted in an increase in the
promoter activities of two genes that are well-established markers of cell
differentiation, alkaline phosphatase and intestinal fatty acid binding protein. 
These studies demonstrate, therefore, that in addition to its established role in
the regulation of cell proliferation, down-regulation of the beta-catenin-TCF
pathway is associated with the promotion of a more-differentiated phenotype in
colonic epithelial cells.

PMID: 11309309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Cancer. 2001 May 20;95(3):194-7.

Reduced membranous and ectopic cytoplasmic expression of beta -catenin correlate 
with cyclin D1 overexpression and poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer.

Qiao Q(1), Ramadani M, Gansauge S, Gansauge F, Leder G, Beger HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Teaching Hospital of Beijing Medical
University, Beijing, P. R. China.

Beta-catenin is a component of the E-cadherin-catenin cell adhesion complex. It
plays also a role in intracellular signaling and can function as an oncogene when
it binds to the T-cell factor 4 (Tcf4)-binding site in the promoter region of
cyclin D1 and transactivates genes after translocation to the nucleus. We
evaluated the immunohistochemical expression pattern of beta-catenin in
relationship with cyclin D1 overexpression, tumor grade, clinicopathologic
parameters and patients' survival in 43 ductal adenocarcinomas of the pancreas
and 5 normal pancreatic tissues. We were able to show that, both reduced
membranous beta-catenin expression (25 of 43, 58.1%) and accumulation of
beta-catenin in the cytoplasm (28 of 43, 65.1%) correlated significantly with
cyclin D1 overexpression (both p < 0.0005). Furthermore, we could show a clear
correlation between reduced membranous expression and ectopic cytoplasmic
expression of beta-catenin (p < 0.0005). Among patients with carcinomas showing
no cytoplasmic expression, the 1-year survival was 86.6% whereas among patients
with carcinomas showing cytoplasmic expression only 35.7% survived 1 year (p <
0.01). Co-precipitation experiments revealed reduced beta-catenin bound to the
E-cadherin-catenin complex in pancreatic tumor tissues compared with normal
pancreatic tissues. These results suggest that beta-catenin may be involved in
the tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer and exhibited its effects mainly by the
transactivation of cyclin D1.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11307154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 15;61(6):2751-8.

Restoration of epithelial cell polarity in a colorectal cancer cell line by
suppression of beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4-mediated gene transactivation.

Naishiro Y(1), Yamada T, Takaoka AS, Hayashi R, Hasegawa F, Imai K, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Beta-catenin acts as a transcriptional coactivator by forming a complex with
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) DNA-binding proteins. Aberrant
transactivation of a certain set of target genes by beta-catenin and TCF4
complexes has been implicated in familial and sporadic colorectal tumorigenesis. 
A colorectal cancer cell line, DLD-1, becomes irregularly multilayered, when
maintained confluent for 2-3 weeks, and forms numerous dome-like polypoid foci
piled-up over the surface of cell sheets. By the use of a strict
tetracycline-regulation system, we found that the continuous suppression of
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene transactivation by dominant-negative TCF4B
(deltaN30) reduced these piled-up foci and restored a simple monolayer of
polarized columnar cells resembling normal intestinal epithelium. The restoration
of epithelial cell polarity was evident in two ways: (a) the formation of
microvilli over the apical surface; and (b) the distribution of a tight junction 
protein, ZO-1, to the lateral plasma membrane. Retroviral expression of
stabilized beta-catenin (deltaN89) induced the formation of similar piled-up foci
in untransformed IEC6 intestinal epithelial cells. Sulindac, a nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug effective against colorectal tumorigenesis in familial
adenomatous polyposis syndrome, suppressed the formation of foci. The loss of
epithelial cell polarity may be a critical cellular event driving
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated intestinal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11289158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 9;306(5):1179-89.

Thermodynamics of the high-affinity interaction of TCF4 with beta-catenin.

Knapp S(1), Zamai M, Volpi D, Nardese V, Avanzi N, Breton J, Plyte S, Flocco M,
Marconi M, Isacchi A, Caiolfa VR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Chemistry, Pharmacia Corporation, Discovery Research 
Oncology, Nerviano, Italy. stefan.knapp@eu.pnu.com

The formation of a complex between beta-catenin and members of the TCF/LEF family
of high-mobility group proteins is a key regulatory event in the wnt-signaling
pathway, essential for embryonal development as well as the growth of normal and 
malignant colon epithelium. We have characterized the binding of TCF4 to human
beta-catenin by steady-state intrinsic fluorescence quenching experiments,
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC).
Binding studies in solution and in heterogeneous phase showed that TCF4 binds
reversibly to beta-catenin with an affinity (KB) of 3(+/-1) 10(8) M(-1).
Site-directed mutagenesis, together with calorimetric measurements, revealed that
residue D16 in TCF4 plays a crucial role in high-affinity binding. Mutation of
this residue to alanine resulted in a decrease of KB by two orders of magnitude
as well as a significant reduction in binding enthalpy. Binding of TCF4 to
beta-catenin gave rise to a large negative enthalpy change at 25 degrees C (-29.7
kcal/mol). Binding enthalpies were strongly temperature dependent, which resulted
in the determination of a large heat capacity change upon binding of -1.5
kcal/(mol K). The molecular events that take place upon complex formation are
discussed using the measured thermodynamic data together with the crystal
structure of the beta-catenin arm repeat region/TCF complex.

PMID: 11237626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 1;61(3):854-8.

A mammalian two-hybrid system for adenomatous polyposis coli-mutated colon cancer
therapeutics.

Wakita K(1), Tetsu O, McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, School of 
Medicine, 94143-0128, USA.

Colon cancer cells frequently lose expression of the tumor suppressor adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC). As result, beta-catenin accumulates and activates
transcription of Tcf-responsive genes. Here we describe a novel mammalian
two-hybrid system that selectively kills APC-mutated cells. This system consists 
of GAL4/beta-catenin, VP16/Tcf4, and a gene that is transcribed when GAL4 and
VP16 associate. In APC-mutated human colon cancer cells, such as SW480,
GAL4/beta-catenin accumulates, and in the presence of VP16/Tcf4, induces high
levels of expression of the reporter gene. Expression of wild-type APC reduced
GAL4/beta-catenin and intact beta-catenin levels and inhibited reporter gene
expression. In colon cancer cells such as SW48 that have wild-type APC,
GAL4/beta-catenin was degraded, and expression levels of the output gene were
low. Replacement of the reporter gene with a suicide gene resulted in selective
killing of SW480 cells. This system may be applicable for broader use of gene
therapy by targeting diseases that involve protein degradation.

PMID: 11221869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):2857-65.

Replicating adenoviruses that target tumors with constitutive activation of the
wnt signaling pathway.

Brunori M(1), Malerba M, Kashiwazaki H, Iggo R.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), 1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland.

Despite important advances in understanding the molecular basis of cancer, few
treatments have been devised which rationally target known causal oncogenic
defects. Selectively replicating viruses have a major advantage over
nonreplicating viruses to target these defects because the therapeutic effect of 
the injected virus is augmented by virus produced within the tumor. To permit
rational targeting of colon tumors, we have developed replicating adenoviruses
that express the viral E1B and E2 genes from promoters controlled by the Tcf4
transcription factor. Tcf4 is constitutively activated by mutations in the
adenomatous polyposis coli and beta-catenin genes in virtually all colon tumors
and is constitutively repressed by Groucho and CtBP in normal tissue. The Tcf-E2 
and Tcf-E1B promoters are active in many, but not all, cell lines with activation
of the wnt pathway. Viruses with Tcf regulation of E2 expression replicate
normally in SW480 colon cancer cells but show a 50- to 100-fold decrease in
replication in H1299 lung cancer cells and WI38 normal fibroblasts. Activation of
wnt signaling by transduction of a stable beta-catenin mutant into normal
fibroblasts renders the cells permissive for virus replication. Insertion of Tcf4
sites in the E1B promoter has only small effects on replication in vitro but
significantly reduces the inflammatory response in a rodent lung model in vivo.
Replicating adenoviruses with Tcf regulation of both E1B and E2 transcription are
potentially useful for the treatment of liver metastases from colorectal tumors, 
but additional changes will be required to produce a virus that can be used to
treat all colon tumors.

PMCID: PMC115912
PMID: 11222711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 2000;84:175-81.

[beta-Catenin induces invasive growth by activating matrix metalloproteinases in 
colorectal carcinoma].

[Article in German]

Brabletz T(1), Jung A, Dag S, Reu S, Kirchner T.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

beta-catenin was shown to be a major oncoprotein in colon cancer development. Its
oncogenic function as a transcriptional activator is upregulated by mutations in 
the APC tumor suppressor gene, leading to a constitutive activation of the
proliferation-associated genes c-myc and cyclin D. The aim of this study was to
demonstrate a role of APC-mutations and dysregulated beta-catenin also for the
progression of colorectal cancer, by identifying new target genes of beta-catenin
associated with tumor invasion and metastasis. Potential invasion genes regulated
by beta-catenin and its DNA binding partner TCF4 were identified by a computer
search for the consensus DNA binding sequence in relevant promoter regions.
Specific DNA binding was confirmed by gel shift assays. Functional importance of 
beta-catenin for the activation of identified genes was determined by luciferase 
reporter assays. The significance was demonstrated by coexpression of nuclear
beta-catenin and the identified target genes by immunohistochemistry. Among other
invasion genes, we identified the matrix metallo proteinases MMP-7 and MMP-1
activated by beta-catenin in the tumor cells. MMP-7 is an important factor for
invasion and metastasis and overexpressed in 75% of colon carcinomas. The
significance for human colon cancer development was demonstrated by a correlated 
overexpression of beta-catenin and the MMPs, beginning in large, severely
dysplastic adenomas. Our results explain the high percentage of MMP-7
overexpression in colorectal tumors and the resulting activation of invasive
growth. Moreover by identifying dysregulated beta-catenin as a transcriptional
activator of MMPs and other invasion factors, we demonstrated an important role
of mutated APC not only for early steps but also for the progression of
colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11217438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(3):902-15.

Gas6 induces growth, beta-catenin stabilization, and T-cell factor
transcriptional activation in contact-inhibited C57 mammary cells.

Goruppi S(1), Chiaruttini C, Ruaro ME, Varnum B, Schneider C.

Author information: 
(1)LNCIB (Laboratorio Nazionale Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie),
34012 Trieste, Italy.

Gas6 is a growth factor related to protein S that was identified as the ligand
for the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family. In this study, we show that
Gas6 induces a growth response in a cultured mammalian mammary cell line, C57MG. 
The presence of Gas6 in the medium induces growth after confluence and similarly 
causes cell cycle reentry of density-inhibited C57MG cells. We show that Axl RTK 
but not Rse is efficiently activated by Gas6 in density-inhibited C57MG cells. We
have analyzed the signaling required for the Gas6 proliferative effect and found 
a requirement for PI3K-, S6K-, and Ras-activated pathways. We also demonstrate
that Gas6 activates Akt and concomitantly inhibits GSK3 activity in a
wortmannin-dependent manner. Interestingly, Gas6 induces up-regulation of
cytosolic beta-catenin, while membrane-associated beta-catenin remains
unaffected. Stabilization of beta-catenin in C57MG cells is correlated with
activation of a T-cell factor (TCF)-responsive transcriptional element. We thus
provide evidence that Gas6 is mitogenic and induces beta-catenin proto-oncogene
stabilization and subsequent TCF/Lef transcriptional activation in a mammary
system. These results suggest that Gas6-Axl interaction, through stabilization of
beta-catenin, may have a role in mammary development and/or be involved in the
progression of mammary tumors.

PMCID: PMC86681
PMID: 11154277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jan 8;152(1):87-96.

Wnt-1 signaling inhibits apoptosis by activating beta-catenin/T cell
factor-mediated transcription.

Chen S(1), Guttridge DC, You Z, Zhang Z, Fribley A, Mayo MW, Kitajewski J, Wang
CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling and Apoptosis, Department of Biologic and
Materials Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, USA.

Wnt signaling plays a critical role in development and oncogenesis. Although
significant progress has been made in understanding the downstream signaling
cascade of Wnt signaling, little is known regarding Wnt signaling modification of
the cell death machinery. Given that numerous oncogenes transform cells by
providing cell survival function, we hypothesized that Wnt signaling may inhibit 
apoptosis. Here, we report that cells expressing Wnt-1 were resistant to cancer
therapy-mediated apoptosis. Wnt-1 signaling inhibited the cytochrome c release
and the subsequent caspase-9 activation induced by chemotherapeutic drugs,
including both vincristine and vinblastine. Furthermore, we found that
Wnt-1-mediated cell survival was dependent on the activation of beta-catenin/T
cell factor (Tcf) transcription. Inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription by 
expression of the dominant-negative mutant of Tcf-4 blocked Wnt-1-mediated cell
survival and rendered cells sensitive to apoptotic stimuli. These results provide
the first demonstration that Wnt-1 inhibits cancer therapy-mediated apoptosis and
suggests that Wnt-1 may exhibit its oncogenic potential through a mechanism of
anti-apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2193656
PMID: 11149923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Lab Invest. 2000 Dec;80(12):1915-23.

MSI-L gastric carcinomas share the hMLH1 methylation status of MSI-H carcinomas
but not their clinicopathological profile.

Pinto M(1), Oliveira C, Machado JC, Cirnes L, Tavares J, Carneiro F, Hamelin R,
Hofstra R, Seruca R, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Portugal.

Sporadic gastric carcinomas (SGC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) exhibit
mutations in target genes and display a particular clinicopathological profile.
In SGC the MSI phenotype has been associated with hMLH1 promoter
hypermethylation. Fifty-seven SGC, classified as high-frequency MSI (MSI-H),
low-frequency MSI (MSI-L), and microsatellite stable (MSS), were analyzed for
hMLH1 promoter methylation status and clinicopathological features. hMLH1
mutations and hMLH1 expression, as well as target gene mutations, were also
evaluated. Our aims were to characterize the molecular and clinicopathological
features of SGC, with and without hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation, and to compare
the molecular and clinicopathological features of MSI-L, MSI-H, and MSS tumors in
an attempt to clarify the place of MSI-L tumors in the mismatch repair (MMR)
pathway. Hypermethylation of hMLH1 promoter occurred in 27 of 57 SGC (47.3%) and 
was significantly associated with MSI status, target gene mutations, and
expansive pattern of growth of the tumors. Seventy-five percent of the MSI-H and 
50% of MSI-L carcinomas showed hypermethylation (Met+) of hMLH1 in contrast to 0%
in MSS carcinomas. No hMLH1 expression was observed in MSI-L/Met+ and MSI-H/Met+ 
cases. MSS and MSI-L tumors share the same clinicopathological profile regardless
of the methylation status of the latter and are distinct from MSI-H tumors. We
conclude that mutations in target genes, more than hypermethylation or absence of
expression of hMLH1, are the link between MSI status and most of the
clinicopathological features of SGC.

PMID: 11140703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8968-78. Epub 2000 Dec 20.

Identification of two regulatory elements within the high mobility group box
transcription factor XTCF-4.

Pukrop T(1), Gradl D, Henningfeld KA, Knochel W, Wedlich D, Kuhl M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Some members of the Wnt family of extracellular glycoproteins regulate target
gene expression by inducing stabilization and nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin, which functions as a transcriptional activator after binding to
transcription factors of the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)
family. Three different members of this family have been identified in Xenopus
laevis thus far that differ in their ability to influence mesodermal
differentiation and to activate expression of the Wnt target gene fibronectin.
Here we report on the isolation and characterization of additional variants of
XTCF-4. We show that the differential ability of these proteins and other members
of the TCF family to activate target genes is neither due to preferential
interaction with transcriptional cofactors of the groucho family or SMAD4 nor to 
different DNA binding affinities. Expression of these proteins in an epithelial
cell line reveals differences in their ability to form a ternary complex with DNA
and beta-catenin. Interestingly, formation of this ternary complex was not
sufficient to activate target gene expression as previously thought. Our
experiments identify two amino acid sequence motifs, LVPQ and SFLSS, in the
central domain of XTCF-4 that regulate the formation of the DNA-TCF-beta-catenin 
complex or activation of target genes, respectively. Biochemical studies reveal
that the phosphorylation state of these XTCF-4 variants correlates with their
ability to form a ternary complex with beta-catenin and DNA but not to activate
target gene expression. The described variants of XTFC-4 with their different
properties in complex formation provide strong evidence that in addition to the
regulation of beta-catenin stability the isoforms of TCF/LEF transcription
factors and their posttranslational modifications define the cellular response of
a Wnt/wingless signal.

PMID: 11124256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 23;19(50):5720-8.

A comparative evaluation of beta-catenin and plakoglobin signaling activity.

Williams BO(1), Barish GD, Klymkowsky MW, Varmus HE.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Division of Basic Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Vertebrates have two Armadillo-like proteins, beta-catenin and plakoglobin.
Mutant forms of beta-catenin with oncogenic activity are found in many human
tumors, but plakoglobin mutations are not commonly found. In fact, plakoglobin
has been proposed to suppress tumorigenesis. To assess differences between
beta-catenin and plakoglobin, we compared several of their biochemical
properties. After transient transfection of 293T cells with an expression vector 
encoding either of the two proteins, soluble wild type beta-catenin does not
significantly accumulate, whereas soluble wild type plakoglobin is readily
detected. As anticipated, beta-catenin is stabilized by the oncogenic mutation
S37A; however, the analogous mutation in plakoglobin (S28A) does not alter its
half-life. S37A-beta-catenin activates a TCF/LEF-dependent reporter 20-fold more 
potently than wild type beta-catenin, and approximately 5-fold more potently than
wild type or S28A plakoglobin. These differences may be attributable to an
enhanced affinity of S37A beta-catenin for LEF1 and TCF4, as observed here by
immunoprecipitation assays. We show that the carboxyl-terminal domain is largely 
responsible for the difference in signaling and that the Armadillo repeats
account for the remainder of the difference. The relatively weak signaling by
plakoglobin and the failure of the S28A mutation to enhance its stability, may
explain why plakoglobin mutations are infrequent in malignancies.

PMID: 11126358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Oct;30(10):2857-63.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E2-2 is involved in T lymphocyte 
development.

Bergqvist I(1), Eriksson M, Saarikettu J, Eriksson B, Corneliussen B, Grundström 
T, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Center for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, Sweden.

E2A, HEB and E2-2 genes encode a group of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors that are structurally and functionally similar. Deletion of
the genes encoding either of these proteins leads to early lethality and a block 
in B lymphocyte development. Evidence for a function in T lymphocyte development 
has, however, only been reported for E2A and HEB. To further elucidate the role
of E2-2 at developmental stages that have proven difficult to study due to the
early lethality phenotype of mice defective in E2-2, we generated and analyzed
mice conditionally mutated in the E2-2 gene. These mice are mosaic with respect
to E2-2 expression, consisting of cells with either one functional and one null
mutated E2-2 allele or two null mutated alleles. Using this experimental model,
we find that cells with a homozygous null mutated E2-2 gene are under-represented
in B lymphocyte as well as T lymphocyte cell lineages as compared to other
hematopoietic or non-hematopoietic cell lineages. Our data suggests that E2-2
deficiency leads to a partial block in both B and T lymphocyte development. The
block in T cell development appears to occur at an early stage in
differentiation, since skewing in the mosaicism is observed already in CD4+8+
double-positive thymocytes.

PMID: 11069067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Genet. 2000 Oct;26(2):146-7.

Mutations in AXIN2 cause colorectal cancer with defective mismatch repair by
activating beta-catenin/TCF signalling.

Liu W(1), Dong X, Mai M, Seelan RS, Taniguchi K, Krishnadath KK, Halling KC,
Cunningham JM, Boardman LA, Qian C, Christensen E, Schmidt SS, Roche PC, Smith
DI, Thibodeau SN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Medical School, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
liu.wanguo@mayo.edu

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2000 Dec;26(4):501.

PMID: 11017067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cancer Res. 2000 Sep 1;60(17):4761-6.

Transactivation of the multidrug resistance 1 gene by T-cell factor
4/beta-catenin complex in early colorectal carcinogenesis.

Yamada T(1), Takaoka AS, Naishiro Y, Hayashi R, Maruyama K, Maesawa C, Ochiai A, 
Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The mutational inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC), results in the accumulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin protein and
the activation of T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional
factors. A colorectal carcinoma cell line, DLD-1, was engineered to suppress
transactivation by the TCF4/beta-catenin complex in a dominant-negative manner
under the strict control of the tetracycline regulatory system. A large-scale
comparison of the expression profiles, using two-color fluorescence hybridization
of cDNA microarray, led to the identification of MDR1 as a target gene of the
TCF4/beta-catenin complex. Luciferase reporter and gel retardation assays
revealed the TCF4/beta-catenin responsive elements in the promoter of the human
MDR1 gene. Corresponding to the accumulation of beta-catenin, expression of the
MDR1 gene product was steadily up-regulated in adenomas and adenocarcinomas of 10
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. In combination with cell
proliferative activities of c-myc and cyclin D1, MDR1 may initiate colorectal
tumorigenesis by suppressing cell death pathways programmed in intestinal
epithelial cells.

PMID: 10987283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Clin Invest. 2000 Aug;106(4):533-9.

Gastrin is a target of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 growth-signaling pathway in a model
of intestinal polyposis.

Koh TJ(1), Bulitta CJ, Fleming JV, Dockray GJ, Varro A, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene occur in 
most colorectal cancers and lead to activation of beta-catenin. Whereas several
downstream targets of beta-catenin have been identified (c-myc, cyclin D1,
PPARdelta), the precise functional significance of many of these targets has not 
been examined directly using genetic approaches. Previous studies have shown that
the gene encoding the hormone gastrin is activated during colon cancer
progression and the less-processed forms of gastrin are important colonic trophic
factors. We show here that the gastrin gene is a downstream target of the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling pathway and that cotransfection of a constitutively 
active beta-catenin expression construct causes a threefold increase in gastrin
promoter activity. APC(min-/+) mice overexpressing one of the alternatively
processed forms of gastrin, glycine-extended gastrin, show a significant increase
in polyp number. Gastrin-deficient APC(min-/+) mice, conversely, showed a marked 
decrease in polyp number and a significantly decreased polyp proliferation rate. 
Activation of gastrin by beta-catenin may therefore represent an early event in
colorectal tumorigenesis and may contribute significantly toward neoplastic
progression. The identification of gastrin as a functionally relevant downstream 
target of the beta-catenin signaling pathway provides a new target for
therapeutic modalities in the treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC380254
PMID: 10953028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2000 Aug 11;289(5481):950-3.

Inhibition of adipogenesis by Wnt signaling.

Ross SE(1), Hemati N, Longo KA, Bennett CN, Lucas PC, Erickson RL, MacDougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Wnts are secreted signaling proteins that regulate developmental processes. Here 
we show that Wnt signaling, likely mediated by Wnt-10b, is a molecular switch
that governs adipogenesis. Wnt signaling maintains preadipocytes in an
undifferentiated state through inhibition of the adipogenic transcription factors
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma). When Wnt signaling in preadipocytes is
prevented by overexpression of Axin or dominant-negative TCF4, these cells
differentiate into adipocytes. Disruption of Wnt signaling also causes
transdifferentiation of myoblasts into adipocytes in vitro, highlighting the
importance of this pathway not only in adipocyte differentiation but also in
mesodermal cell fate determination.

PMID: 10937998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3805-13.

Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling regulates the expression of the homeobox gene Cdx1
in embryonic intestine.

Lickert H(1), Domon C, Huls G, Wehrle C, Duluc I, Clevers H, Meyer BI, Freund JN,
Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

During mammalian development, the Cdx1 homeobox gene exhibits an early period of 
expression when the embryonic body axis is established, and a later period where 
expression is restricted to the embryonic intestinal endoderm. Cdx1 expression is
maintained throughout adulthood in the proliferative cell compartment of the
continuously renewed intestinal epithelium, the crypts. In this study, we provide
evidence in vitro and in vivo that Cdx1 is a direct transcriptional target of the
Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling pathway. Upon Wnt stimulation, expression of Cdx1
can be induced in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as well as in undifferentiated 
rat embryonic endoderm. Tcf4-deficient mouse embryos show abrogation of Cdx1
protein in the small intestinal epithelium, making Tcf4 the likely candidate to
transduce Wnt signal in this part of gut. The promoter region of the Cdx1 gene
contains several Tcf-binding motifs, and these bind Tcf/Lef1/(beta)-catenin
complexes and mediate (beta)-catenin-dependent transactivation. The
transcriptional regulation of the homeobox gene Cdx1 in the intestinal epithelium
by Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling underlines the importance of this signaling
pathway in mammalian endoderm development.

PMID: 10934025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Res. 2000 Jul 15;60(14):3872-9.

The human T-cell transcription factor-4 gene: structure, extensive
characterization of alternative splicings, and mutational analysis in colorectal 
cancer cell lines.

Duval A(1), Rolland S, Tubacher E, Bui H, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U434, Centre d'Etude
du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France.

The human T cell transcription factor-4 (hTCF-4) interacts functionally with
beta-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway, which regulates many developmental
processes. Moreover, inappropriate reactivation of this pathway attributable to
APC or beta-catenin mutations has been described in colorectal cancers. Because
only the human TCF-4 cDNA sequence was known, we determined its genomic
structure. A total of 17 exons, of which 5 were alternative, were identified.
Moreover, four alternative splice sites were observed either experimentally or in
silico by a BLAST approach in expressed sequence tag databases. The alternative
use of three consecutive exons localized in the 3' part of the hTCF-4 gene
changes the reading frames used in the last exon, leading to the synthesis of a
number of hTCF-4 isoforms with short, medium, or long-size COOH-terminal ends. We
next screened the entire hTCF-4 gene for mutations in a series of 24 colorectal
cancer cell lines by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and/or direct
sequencing. Besides an already described deletion of an A in an (A)9 coding
repeat in four cases, we found DNA variants in eight cases for a total of 12
variants, of which 8 were coding. These include one frameshift mutation in the
beta-catenin binding domain (exon 1), and one missense mutation in exon 4. In the
remaining six cases, nonsense or frameshift mutations were localized in the 3'
part of the gene. These latter alterations have as a common consequence to
decrease the proportion of the long COOH-terminal hTCF-4 isoform, which contains 
two binding domains for c-terminal binding protein, a protein implicated in the
repression of the TCF family transcriptional activity. Thus, loss of the TCF-4
capacity to interact with COOH-terminal binding protein could be an important
event during colorectal carcinogenesis by modifying Wnt signaling.

PMID: 10919662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Sep;29(1):33-9.

Somatic frameshift alterations in mononucleotide repeat-containing genes in
different tumor types from an HNPCC family with germline MSH2 mutation.

Planck M(1), Wenngren E, Borg A, Olsson H, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Maria.Planck@onk.lu.se

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is caused by a germline
mutation in one of several DNA repair genes, which in the tumors is reflected as 
microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI+ tumors have been found to carry somatic
frameshift mutations in mononucleotide repeats within the coding regions of
several genes involved in growth control, apoptosis, and DNA repair, e.g.,
TGFBRII, BAX, IGFIIR, TCF4, MSH3, and MSH6. We have studied the occurrence of
somatic frameshift alterations in these mononucleotide repeat-containing genes in
24 tumors (15 colorectal cancers, 1 colon adenoma, 4 endometrial cancers, 1
ovarian cancer, 1 gastric cancer, 1 urothelial cancer, and 1 duodenal cancer)
from 14 individuals in an HNPCC family with germline hMSH2 mutation. Such somatic
frameshift mutations occurred at a variable frequency; the long mononucleotide
repeats that characterize intronic MSI markers were mutated in the majority of
tumors, 13 of the tumors displayed alterations in the (A)(10) tract of TGFBII,
eight tumors (all of gastrointestinal origin) had alterations in the (A)(9)
repeat of TCF4, and one to five tumors had somatic frameshift alterations in the 
shorter mononucleotide repeats of IGFIIR, BAX, MSH3, and MSH6. Thus, longer
mononucleotide repeats were more frequently affected by somatic frameshift
mutations. The pattern of alterations varied between the tumors from different
family members as well as between different tumors from the same individual. To
what extent this variable pattern depends on the widespread mismatch repair
deficiency induced by the underlying MSH2 mutation, or represents alternative
ways whereby the tumors can achieve a tumorigenic phenotype, is unknown. We
suggest, however, that the accumulation of somatic frameshifts, rather than the
specific loci in which these occur, drives the development of the tumorigenic
phenotype in HNPCC.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10918391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 20;275(42):32871-8.

A novel beta-catenin-binding protein inhibits beta-catenin-dependent Tcf
activation and axis formation.

Sakamoto I(1), Kishida S, Fukui A, Kishida M, Yamamoto H, Hino S, Michiue T,
Takada S, Asashima M, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 1-2-3
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, PRESTO, Japan.

beta-Catenin is efficiently phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in
the Axin complex in the cytoplasm, resulting in the down-regulation. In response 
to Wnt, beta-catenin is stabilized and translocated into the nucleus where it
stimulates gene expression through Tcf/Lef. Here we report a novel protein,
designated Duplin (for axis duplication inhibitor), which negatively regulates
the function of beta-catenin in the nucleus. Duplin was located in the nucleus.
Duplin bound directly to the Armadillo repeats of beta-catenin, thereby
inhibiting the binding of Tcf to beta-catenin. It did not affect the stability of
beta-catenin but inhibited Wnt- or beta-catenin-dependent Tcf activation.
Furthermore, expression of Duplin in Xenopus embryos inhibited the axis formation
and beta-catenin-dependent axis duplication, and prevented the beta-catenin's
ability to rescue ventralizing phenotypes induced by ultraviolet light
irradiation. Thus, Duplin is a nuclear protein that inhibits beta-catenin
signaling.

PMID: 10921920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Psychiatr Genet. 2000 Mar;10(1):33-7.

Repeat sizes at CAG/CTG loci CTG18.1, ERDA1 and TGC13-7a in schizophrenia.

Bowen T(1), Guy CA, Cardno AG, Vincent JB, Kennedy JL, Jones LA, Gray M, Sanders 
RD, McCarthy G, Murphy KC, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Cardiff, UK. bowent@cf.ac.uk

A number of studies using the repeat expansion detection (RED) technique have
suggested an association between unknown large CAG/CTG repeats and schizophrenia.
The polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci CTG18.1 and ERDA1 have been reported to
account for a high proportion (approximately 90%) of the large repeats detected
by RED and may therefore be responsible for the cited association. The recently
described locus TGC13-7a contains a highly polymorphic CTA/TAG and CAG/CTG
composite repeat, and is thus another authentic candidate. In the present
investigation, each locus was analysed for association with schizophrenia in a
sample of 206 patients and 219 group-matched controls. No evidence for
association of CTG18.1, ERDA1 and/or TGC13-7a with schizophrenia was found. The
combined data accounted for only 54% of the CAG/CTG arrays of > 40 repeats found 
in our previous RED analysis.

PMID: 10909126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jul 21;274(1):22-31.

HASH-1 and E2-2 are expressed in human neuroblastoma cells and form a functional 
complex.

Persson P(1), Jögi A, Grynfeld A, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, University Hospital
MAS, S-205 02, Sweden.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor mammalian achaete-scute
homolog-1 (MASH-1 in mouse and HASH-1 in human) is essential for proper
development of olfactory and most peripheral autonomic neurons, and for the
formation of distinct neuronal circuits within the central nervous system. We
have previously shown that HASH-1 is expressed in neuroblastoma tumors and cell
lines, and in this study we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to isolate
HASH-1 interacting proteins from a human neuroblastoma cDNA library. Two of the
isolated clones contained cDNA from the E2-2 gene (also known as ITF2/SEF2-1). We
show that E2-2 interacts with HASH-1 in both yeast and mammalian cells. The
HASH-1/E2-2 complex binds an E-box (CACCTG) in vitro, and transactivates an E-box
containing reporter construct in vivo. Furthermore, E2-2 seems to be one of the
major HASH-1 interacting proteins in extracts from neuroblastoma cells. In
conclusion, E2-2 forms a functional complex with HASH-1, and might therefore be
involved in the development of specific parts of the central and peripheral
nervous systems.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10903890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genes Dev. 2000 Jul 15;14(14):1741-9.

Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ICAT, a novel beta-catenin-interacting protein.

Tago K(1), Nakamura T, Nishita M, Hyodo J, Nagai S, Murata Y, Adachi S, Ohwada S,
Morishita Y, Shibuya H, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Wnt signaling has an important role in both embryonic development and
tumorigenesis. beta-Catenin, a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway,
interacts with the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors and activates
transcription of Wnt target genes. Here, we identify a novel
beta-catenin-interacting protein, ICAT, that was found to inhibit the interaction
of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and represses beta-catenin-TCF-4-mediated
transactivation. Furthermore, ICAT inhibited Xenopus axis formation by
interfering with Wnt signaling. These results suggest that ICAT negatively
regulates Wnt signaling via inhibition of the interaction between beta-catenin
and TCF and is integral in development and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC316784
PMID: 10898789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Psychiatry. 2000 Jul;5(4):439-42.

Allelic distribution of CTG18.1 in Caucasian populations: association studies in 
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and ataxia.

McInnis MG(1), Swift-Scanlanl T, Mahoney AT, Vincent J, Verheyen G, Lan TH, Oruc 
L, Riess O, Van Broeckhoven C, Chen H, Kennedy JL, MacKinnon DF, Margolis RL,
Simpson SG, McMahon FJ, Gershon E, Nurnberger J, Reich T, DePaulo JR, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

CTG18.1 is a highly polymorphic and unstable CTG repeat within an intron of the
SEF2-1 gene. We tested the CTG18.1 repeat length in affective disorder,
schizophrenia, and nonspecific ataxia; these diseases all have shown clinical
evidence for anticipation. There was no difference in the allele frequencies
comparing the controls and disease groups. The most common allele contains 11
CAGs (35%) followed by alleles with 14-17 CAGs (35%). There was no difference in 
the distribution of the alleles in the cases vs controls for ataxia (P = 0.11),
affective disorders (P = 0.21), or schizophrenia (P = 0.26). The frequency of
unstable CTG18.1 alleles was approximately 3% in a population of N. European
descent and is not related to the phenotypes tested.

PMID: 10889556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell. 2000 May;5(5):877-82.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling induces the expression and activity of betaTrCP
ubiquitin ligase receptor.

Spiegelman VS(1), Slaga TJ, Pagano M, Minamoto T, Ronai Z, Fuchs SY.

Author information: 
(1)AMC Cancer Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80214, USA.

Beta-transducing repeat-containing protein (betaTrCP) targets the ubiquitination 
and subsequent degradation of both beta-catenin and IkappaB, thereby playing an
important role in beta-catenin/Tcf and NF-kappaB-dependent signaling. Here
evidence is presented that beta-catenin/Tcf signaling elevates the expression of 
betaTrCP mRNA and protein in a Tcf-dependent manner, which does not require
betaTrCP transcription. Induction of betaTrCP expression by the beta-catenin/Tcf 
pathway results in an accelerated degradation of the wild-type beta-catenin,
suggesting that the negative feedback loop regulation may control the
beta-catenin/Tcf pathway. This signaling also upregulated NF-kappaB
transactivation without affecting the activity of IkappaB kinase, thereby
establishing that the maintenance of the betaTrCP level is important for
coordination between beta-catenin/Tcf and NF-kappaB signaling.

PMID: 10882123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 18;275(33):25095-101.

Analysis of the inhibition of MyoD activity by ITF-2B and full-length E12/E47.

Petropoulos H(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

MyoD heterodimerizes with E type factors (E12/E47 and ITF-2A/ITF-2B) and binds E 
box sequences within promoters of muscle-specific genes. In transient
transfection assays, MyoD activates transcription in the presence of ITF-2A but
not ITF-2B, which contains a 182-amino acid N-terminal extension. The first 83
amino acids of the inhibitory N terminus of ITF-2B show high sequence homology to
the N terminus of full-length E12/E47. Previous studies that showed activation of
MyoD by E12 used an artificially N-terminally truncated form. Here we show that
the full-length form of E12 inhibits MyoD function. A conserved alpha-helix
motif, capable of interacting with the transcriptional machinery, was not
essential for inhibition. Furthermore, the fusion of N-terminal ITF-2B sequences 
or non-inhibiting ITF-2A sequences to truncated E12 was sufficient in converting 
the activator into an inhibitor. Overexpression of ITF-2B did not inhibit C2C12
myogenesis or affect levels of endogenous muscle gene expression, consistent with
the finding that inhibitory E type proteins are present in muscle. Furthermore,
we found that MyoD co-transfected with either ITF-2B or ITF-2A converted
fibroblasts into myoblasts with the same frequency. Our findings suggest that the
ability of E type proteins to inhibit MyoD activity is dependent on the context
of the E box.

PMID: 10833525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;88(3-4):264-5.

Assignment of the TCF-4 gene (TCF7L2) to human chromosome band 10q25.3.

Duval A(1), Busson-Leconiat M, Berger R, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434, CEPH, Paris, France.

PMID: 10828605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2357-65.

Pax6 defines the di-mesencephalic boundary by repressing En1 and Pax2.

Matsunaga E(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Transcriptional factors and signaling molecules are responsible for
regionalization of the central nervous system. In the early stage of neural
development, Pax6 is expressed in the prosencephalon, while En1 and Pax2 are
expressed in the mesencephalon. Here, we misexpressed Pax6 in the mesencephalon
to elucidate the mechanism of the di-mesencephalic boundary formation.
Histological analysis, expression patterns of diencephalic marker genes, and
fiber trajectory of the posterior commissure indicated that Pax6 misexpression
caused a caudal shift of the di-mesencephalic boundary. Pax6 repressed En1, Pax2 
and other tectum (mesencephalon)-related genes such as En2, Pax5, Pax7, but
induced Tcf4, a diencephalon marker gene. To know how Pax6 represses En1 and
Pax2, we ectopically expressed a dominant-active or negative form of Pax6. The
dominant-active form of Pax6 showed a similar but more severe phenotype than
Pax6, while the dominant-negative form showed an opposite phenotype, suggesting
that Pax6 acts as a transcriptional activator. Thus Pax6 may repress
tectum-related genes by activating an intervening repressor. The results of
misexpression experiments, together with normal expression patterns of Pax6, En1 
and Pax2, suggest that repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 defines
the di-mesencephalic boundary.

PMID: 10804178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mech Dev. 2000 May;93(1-2):211-4.

The HMG-box transcription factor XTcf-4 demarcates the forebrain-midbrain
boundary.

König A(1), Gradl D, Kühl M, Wedlich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Germany.

A small subfamily of HMG-box transcription factors, the LEF/TCF group, serves as 
nuclear transducer of the Wnt-1/Wg signaling cascade. Upon Wnt-1/Wg signaling
their members interact with beta-catenin and regulate the expression of Xenopus
target genes siamois, twin, nodal related-3 or fibronectin. We have isolated a
new HMG-box transcription factor in Xenopus that will be addressed XTcf-4 based
on its homology to human and murine Tcf-4. Unlike XTcf-3, which is a maternal
gene, and XLef-1 that is expressed after mid blastula transition (Molenaar et
al., 1998. Mech. Dev. 75, 151-154), XTcf-4 expression starts at late neurula
stage and is restricted to the anterior most midbrain demarcating the
forebrain-midbrain boundary. The expression partially overlaps with a broad set
of Xenopus Wnt family members in distinct patterns. XTcf-4 transcripts were also 
found partially co-localized with those of Xaxin, an intracellular antagonist of 
Wnt-1/Wg signaling.

PMID: 10781959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3640-54.

Overlapping expression of early B-cell factor and basic helix-loop-helix proteins
as a mechanism to dictate B-lineage-specific activity of the lambda5 promoter.

Sigvardsson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, CMB, Lund University, S-223 62 Lund, Sweden.
mikael.sigvardsson@immuno.lu.se

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are a large group of
proteins suggested to control key events in the development of B lymphocytes as
well as of other cellular lineages. To examine how bHLH proteins activate a
B-lineage-specific promoter, I investigated the ability of E47, E12, Heb, E2-2,
and MyoD to activate the lambda5 surrogate light chain promoter. Comparison of
the functional capacity of the E2A-encoded E47 and E12 proteins indicated that
even though both were able to activate the lambda5 promoter and act in synergy
with early B-cell factor (EBF), E47 displayed a higher functional activity than
E12. An ability to act in synergy with EBF was also observed for Heb, E2-2, and
MyoD, suggesting that these factors were functionally redundant in this regard.
Mapping of functional domains in EBF and E47 revealed that the dimerization and
DNA binding domains mediated the synergistic activity. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay analysis using the 5' part of the lambda5 promoter revealed formation
of template-dependent heteromeric complexes between EBF and E47, suggesting that 
the synergistic mechanism involves cooperative binding to DNA. These findings
propose a unique molecular function for E47 and provide overlapping expression
with EBF as a molecular mechanism to direct B-cell-specific target gene
activation by bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC85657
PMID: 10779354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1671-6.

The beta-catenin binding domain of adenomatous polyposis coli is sufficient for
tumor suppression.

Shih IM(1), Yu J, He TC, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is a critical event in 
the development of human colorectal cancers. At the biochemical level, several
functions have been assigned to the multidomain APC protein, but the cellular
effects of APC expression and how they relate to its biochemical functions are
less well defined. To address these issues, we generated a recombinant adenovirus
(Ad-CBR) that constitutively expresses the central third of APC, which includes
all of the known beta-catenin binding repeats. When expressed in colon cancer
cells, Ad-CBR blocked the nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and inhibited
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transactivation. Accordingly, expression of
endogenous targets of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway was down-regulated.
Ad-CBR infection of colorectal cancer cell lines with mutant APC but wild-type
beta-catenin resulted in substantial growth arrest followed by apoptosis. These
effects were attenuated in lines with wild-type APC but with mutated
beta-catenin. These findings suggest that the beta-catenin-binding domain in the 
central third of APC is sufficient for its tumor suppressor activity.

PMID: 10749138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):245-50.

AXIN1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in cancer
cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1.

Satoh S(1), Daigo Y, Furukawa Y, Kato T, Miwa N, Nishiwaki T, Kawasoe T, Ishiguro
H, Fujita M, Tokino T, Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Murata M, Shimano T, Yamaoka Y,
Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The Wnt signaling pathway is essential for development and organogenesis. Wnt
signaling stabilizes beta-catenin, which accumulates in the cytoplasm, binds to
1-cell factor (TCF; also known as lymphocyte enhancer-binding factor, LEF) and
then upregulates downstream genes. Mutations in CTNNB1 (encoding beta-catenin) or
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) have been reported in human neoplasms including 
colon cancers and hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Because HCC5 tend to show
accumulation of beta-catenin more often than mutations in CTNNB1, we looked for
mutations in AXIN1, encoding a key factor for Wnt signaling, in 6 HCC cell lines 
and 100 primary HCC5. Among the 4 cell lines and 87 HCC5 in which we did not
detect CTNNB1 mutations, we identified AXIN1 mutations in 3 cell lines and 6
mutations in 5 of the primary HCCs. In cell lines containing mutations in either 
gene, we observed increased DNA binding of TCF associated with beta-catenin in
nuclei. Adenovirus mediated gene transfer of wild-type AXINI induced apoptosis in
hepatocellular and colorectal cancer cells that had accumulated beta-catenin as a
consequence of either APC, CTNNB1 or AXIN1 mutation, suggesting that axin may be 
an effective therapeutic molecule for suppressing growth of hepatocellular and
colorectal cancers.

PMID: 10700176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):206-8.

Axin and hepatocellular carcinomas.

Clevers H.

PMID: 10700164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Mar 15;255(2):207-20.

Analysis of beta-catenin aggregation and localization using GFP fusion proteins: 
nuclear import of alpha-catenin by the beta-catenin/Tcf complex.

Giannini AL(1), Vivanco MM, Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, 
WC1E 6BT.

beta-Catenin plays essential roles in cell adhesion, by associating with
cadherins, and as a signaling molecule, by interacting with the Tcf/LEF-1 family 
of transcription factors. In order to study the protein-protein interactions of
beta-catenin in living cells, we fused it to green fluorescent protein (GFP).
GFP-beta-catenin was incorporated into cell junctions but also accumulated in the
nucleus, where it formed rod-like structures. The carboxyl-terminal armadillo
repeats of GFP-beta-catenin were sufficient for nuclear localization, but
formation of rods required the armadillo repeats and sequences in both the amino-
and the carboxyl-terminal domains. Rod formation was prevented by coexpression of
N-cadherin, APC, and Tcf-4, which bind to the armadillo repeats of beta-catenin, 
but not by coexpression of alpha-catenin, although alpha-catenin expression did
prevent accumulation of beta-catenin in the nucleus. Interestingly, when
alpha-catenin, beta-catenin, and Tcf-4 were coexpressed they colocalized in the
nucleus, and this correlated with a decrease in beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent
transcriptional activity. These results indicate that binding of beta-catenin to 
Tcf-4 overrides the function of alpha-catenin to sequester beta-catenin in the
cytoplasm and suggest that alpha-catenin can regulate beta-catenin signaling in
the nucleus.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10694436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Feb 18;280(2):95-8.

Differential expression patterns of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors during aging of the murine brain.

Uittenbogaard M(1), Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Program of Neuroscience and
Graduate Genetics Program, George Washington University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20037, USA.

In this study, we investigated the expression pattern of the basic
Helix-Loop-Helix transcription factors during brain aging. We provide the first
evidence that NeuroD and ME2 are differentially expressed during brain aging.
Modulation of their expression is specific to distinct areas of the aging brain. 
NeuroD expression is sustained at high levels in aging cerebellum, whereas it
severely declines in aging hippocampus. In contrast, the bHLH E-protein ME2
remains expressed in both aged cerebellum and hippocampus, although at lower
levels. These observations support the idea that a shift in the transcriptional
dynamics controlling gene expression is associated with the progressive
functional decline observed during brain aging.

PMID: 10686386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):530-41.

The HAND1 basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor regulates trophoblast
differentiation via multiple mechanisms.

Scott IC(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Riley P, Reda D, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor genes Hand1 and Mash2 are 
essential for placental development in mice. Hand1 promotes differentiation of
trophoblast giant cells, whereas Mash2 is required for the maintenance of giant
cell precursors, and its overexpression prevents giant cell differentiation. We
found that Hand1 expression and Mash2 expression overlap in the ectoplacental
cone and spongiotrophoblast, layers of the placenta that contain the giant cell
precursors, indicating that the antagonistic activities of Hand1 and Mash2 must
be coordinated. MASH2 and HAND1 both heterodimerize with E factors, bHLH proteins
that are the DNA-binding partners for most class B bHLH factors and which are
also expressed in the ectoplacental cone and spongiotrophoblast. In vitro, HAND1 
could antagonize MASH2 function by competing for E-factor binding. However, the
Hand1 mutant phenotype cannot be solely explained by ectopic activity of MASH2,
as the Hand1 mutant phenotype was not altered by further mutation of Mash2.
Interestingly, expression of E-factor genes (ITF2 and ALF1) was down-regulated in
the trophoblast lineage prior to giant cell differentiation. Therefore,
suppression of MASH2 function, required to allow giant cell differentiation, may 
occur in vivo by loss of its E-factor partner due to loss of its expression
and/or competition from HAND1. In giant cells, where E-factor expression was not 
detected, HAND1 presumably associates with a different bHLH partner. This may
account for the distinct functions of HAND1 in giant cells and their precursors. 
We conclude that development of the trophoblast lineage is regulated by the
interacting functions of HAND1, MASH2, and their cofactors.

PMCID: PMC85124
PMID: 10611232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 18;18(48):6806-9.

Variable mutation frequencies in coding repeats of TCF-4 and other target genes
in colon, gastric and endometrial carcinoma showing microsatellite instability.

Duval A(1), Iacopetta B, Ranzani GN, Lothe RA, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434-CEPH, Paris, France.

Frameshift mutations in genes containing mononucleotide repeats are often
observed in cancers exhibiting a high frequency of microsatellite instability
(MSI-H). Several tumor types, including colorectal, gastric, and endometrial
carcinomas, display this phenotype in a significant proportion of cases. We
recently showed in a large series of MSI-H colorectal tumors that approximately
40% of them exhibited frameshift mutations in an (A)9 tract within the coding
region of the TCF-4 gene, a crucial member of the APC/beta-catenin/TCF pathway.
In the present study, we have examined MSI-H cancers from other primary tumor
sites for mutations in this new target gene. Two of 22 (9%) MSI-H primary gastric
cancers and none of 23 MSI-H endometrial primary tumors and cell lines were found
to have a 1 bp deletion in the TCF-4 repeat. In the same series of tumors we also
looked for frameshift mutations in other coding repeats localized within the TGF 
beta-RII, BAX, IGFIIR, hMSH3 and hMSH6 genes. Our results suggest that the TCF-4 
gene, in a similar manner to some of these latter genes, is differentially
altered in MSI-H tumors from different primary sites.

PMID: 10597289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochem J. 1999 Dec 1;344 Pt 2:565-70.

Adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC)-independent regulation of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 mediated transcription in intestinal cells.

Baulida J(1), Batlle E, García De Herreros A.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cel.lular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Carrer Dr. Aiguader 80, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

Alterations in the transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin-Tcf complex have 
been associated with the earlier stages of colonic transformation. We show here
that the activation of protein kinase C by the phorbol ester PMA in several
intestinal cell lines increases the levels of beta-catenin detected in the
nucleus and augments the transcriptional activity mediated by beta-catenin. The
response to PMA was not related to modifications in the cytosolic levels of
beta-catenin and was observed not only in cells with wild-type adenomatous
polyposis coli protein (APC) but also in APC-deficient cells. Binding assays in
vitro revealed that PMA facilitates the interaction of the beta-catenin with the 
nuclear structure. Our results therefore show that beta-catenin-mediated
transcription can be regulated independently of the presence of APC.

PMCID: PMC1220676
PMID: 10567241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell. 1999 Oct 29;99(3):335-45.

PPARdelta is an APC-regulated target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

He TC(1), Chan TA, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

PPARB was identified as a target of APC through the analysis of global gene
expression profiles in human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. PPARdelta expression 
was elevated in CRCs and repressed by APC in CRC cells. This repression was
mediated by beta-catenin/Tcf-4-responsive elements in the PPARdelta promotor. The
ability of PPARs to bind eicosanoids suggested that PPARdelta might be a target
of chemopreventive non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Reporters
containing PPARdelta-responsive elements were repressed by the NSAID sulindac.
Furthermore, sulindac was able to disrupt the ability of PPARdelta to bind its
recognition sequences. These findings suggest that NSAIDs inhibit tumorigenesis
through inhibition of PPARdelta, the gene for which is normally regulated by APC.

PMCID: PMC3779681
PMID: 10555149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 29;1424(2-3):M23-37.

TCF transcription factors: molecular switches in carcinogenesis.

Roose J(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genetics, University Medical
Center Utrecht, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Although originally cloned as lymphoid transcription factors, members of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family are now well recognized as key activators/repressors
in many developmental processes. Transcriptionally inert Tcf factors become
potent transactivators upon interaction with the Wnt signaling product
beta-catenin or its Drosophila counterpart Armadillo. In contrast, Tcf proteins
mediate repression when bound to members of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors, CBP and CtBP. Recently, Tcf factors have been reported as tumor
inducers, aberrantly activating their target genes as a result of elevated
beta-catenin levels in many types of cancer. These abnormal beta-catenin levels
are usually caused by stabilizing mutations in beta-catenin itself or truncating 
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. In this 
review, we will give a chronological overview of the Tcf factors and the
phenotypes of Tcf mutant mice, as well as Tcf-binding partners. We will discuss
Tcf signaling upon interaction with different partners, resulting in activator
and repressor roles of Tcf factors in the light of carcinogenic events.

PMID: 10528152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Pathol. 1999 Oct;155(4):1033-8.

beta-catenin regulates the expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-7 in human 
colorectal cancer.

Brabletz T(1), Jung A, Dag S, Hlubek F, Kirchner T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
thomas.brabletz@patho.med.uni-erlangen.de

Most colorectal cancers have loss of function mutations in the adenomatosis
polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. This leads to accumulation of
beta-catenin, which together with the DNA binding protein TCF-4 functions as a
transcriptional activator. Recently defined target genes are c-myc and cyclin D1,
linking the APC gene defect to the capacity for autonomous proliferation of colon
tumors. Here we report the identification of the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-7
as another target gene of beta-catenin/TCF-4. MMP-7 is overexpressed in 80% of
human colorectal cancers and known to be an important factor for early tumor
growth, with a potential function also for later progression steps, like invasion
and metastasis. Our results explain the high percentage of MMP-7 overexpression
in colon tumors. Moreover they indicate that defects in the APC tumor suppressor 
gene may also have an influence on later steps of colon tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC1867011
PMID: 10514384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Oct;10(10):3151-69.

Membrane-anchored plakoglobins have multiple mechanisms of action in Wnt
signaling.

Klymkowsky MW(1), Williams BO, Barish GD, Varmus HE, Vourgourakis YE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, 80309-0347, USA. klym@spot.colorado.edu

In Wnt signaling, beta-catenin and plakoglobin transduce signals to the nucleus
through interactions with TCF-type transcription factors. However, when
plakoglobin is artificially engineered to restrict it to the cytoplasm by fusion 
with the transmembrane domain of connexin (cnxPg), it efficiently induces a
Wnt-like axis duplication phenotype in Xenopus. In Xenopus embryos, maternal
XTCF3 normally represses ventral expression of the dorsalizing gene Siamois. Two 
models have been proposed to explain the Wnt-like activity of cnxPg: 1) that
cnxPg inhibits the machinery involved in the turnover of cytosolic beta-catenin, 
which then accumulates and inhibits maternal XTCF3, and 2) that cnxPg directly
acts to inhibit XTCF3 activity. To distinguish between these models, we created a
series of N-terminal deletion mutations of cnxPg and examined their ability to
induce an ectopic axis in Xenopus, activate a TCF-responsive reporter (OT),
stabilize beta-catenin, and colocalize with components of the Wnt signaling
pathway. cnxPg does not colocalize with the Wnt pathway component Dishevelled,
but it does lead to the redistribution of APC and Axin, two proteins involved in 
the regulation of beta-catenin turnover. Expression of cnxPg increases levels of 
cytosolic beta-catenin; however, this effect does not completely explain its
signaling activity. Although cnxPg and Wnt-1 stabilize beta-catenin to similar
extents, cnxPg activates OT to 10- to 20-fold higher levels than Wnt-1. Moreover,
although LEF1 and TCF4 synergize with beta-catenin and plakoglobin to activate
OT, both suppress the signaling activity of cnxPg. In contrast, XTCF3 suppresses 
the signaling activity of both beta-catenin and cnxPg. Both exogenous XLEF1 and
XTCF3 are sequestered in the cytoplasm of Xenopus cells by cnxPg. Based on these 
data, we conclude that, in addition to its effects on beta-catenin, cnxPg
interacts with other components of the Wnt pathway, perhaps TCFs, and that these 
interactions contribute to its signaling activity.

PMCID: PMC25571
PMID: 10512857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Science. 1999 Sep 17;285(5435):1923-6.

Synergy between tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1.

Roose J(1), Huls G, van Beest M, Moerer P, van der Horn K, Goldschmeding R,
Logtenberg T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Mutations in APC or beta-catenin inappropriately activate the transcription
factor Tcf4, thereby transforming intestinal epithelial cells. Here it is shown
that one of the target genes of Tcf4 in epithelial cells is Tcf1. The most
abundant Tcf1 isoforms lack a beta-catenin interaction domain. Tcf1(-/-) mice
develop adenomas in the gut and mammary glands. Introduction of a mutant APC
allele into these mice substantially increases the number of these adenomas. Tcf1
may act as a feedback repressor of beta-catenin-Tcf4 target genes and thus may
cooperate with APC to suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

PMID: 10489374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 1;59(17):4213-5.

Frequent frameshift mutations of the TCF-4 gene in colorectal cancers with
microsatellite instability.

Duval A(1), Gayet J, Zhou XP, Iacopetta B, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434-Centre d'Etude de Polymorphisme Humane, Paris, France.

About 15% of sporadic colorectal cancers show microsatellite instability (MSI)
due to the inactivation of mismatch repair genes and are termed MSI-H tumors. In 
these tumors, frameshift mutations in coding repeats have been found within the
TGFbeta-RII, BAX, and IGFRII genes that are probably involved in their
progression. In the present work, we report frequent mutations in TCF-4, another 
target gene for instability. TCF-4 codes for a transcription factor that is a
crucial member of the adenomatous polyposis coil (APC)/beta-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF) pathway. Fifty percent (4 of 8) of human MSI-H colorectal cell lines and
39% (19 of 49) of MSI-H colorectal primary tumors were found to have a 1-bp
deletion in an (A)9 repeat within the coding region of this gene. In contrast, a 
frameshift mutation was found in only 1 of 56 non-MSI colorectal tumors and in
none of 16 non-MSI colorectal cancer cell lines. These results suggest that TCF-4
frameshift mutations are selected for and play a role in colorectal MSI-H
tumorigenesis. Depending on different reading frames due to alternatively spliced
TCF-4 mRNA, the (A)9 repeat normally codes for several isoforms that could serve 
as modulators of TCF-4 transcriptional activity. The deletion of one nucleotide
in this repeat could change TCF-4 transactivating properties by modifying the
respective proportions of the different isoforms.

PMID: 10485457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Neurobiol Dis. 1999 Aug;6(4):302-7.

CTG18.1 and ERDA-1 CAG/CTG repeat size in bipolar disorder.

Guy CA(1), Bowen T, Jones I, McCandless F, Owen MJ, Craddock N, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Health Park, Cardiff, CF4 4XN, United Kingdom.

Several groups have reported association between large CAG/CTG repeat sequences
in the genome and bipolar disorder using the Repeat Expansion Detection (RED)
method. Unfortunately, the RED method cannot identify the specific repeat(s)
responsible for these findings but it has recently been proposed that around 90% 
of the large CAG/CTG repeats detected by RED can be explained by repeat size at
either CTG18.1, which maps to 18q21.1, or ERDA-1 (also known as Dir 1), which
maps to 17q21.3. These data suggest that the previous associations between
bipolar disorder and large CAG/CTG repeats might be explained at least in part by
a specific association between bipolar disorder and either or both of these loci.
However, using a case control study design, we find no evidence for such
associations. Thus we conclude that in our sample, the previous RED associations 
are not a result of large CAG/CTG repeats at CTG18.1 or ERDA-1.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mech Dev. 1999 Aug;86(1-2):147-50.

Maternal and embryonic expression of zebrafish lef1.

Dorsky RI(1), Snyder A, Cretekos CJ, Grunwald DJ, Geisler R, Haffter P, Moon RT, 
Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI and Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. rdorsky@u.washington.edu

Transcription factors of the TCF/LEF family interact with the Wnt signaling
pathway to control transcription of downstream genes (Clevers, H., van de
Wetering, M., 1997. TCF/LEF factor earn their wings. Trends Genet. 13, 485-489). 
We were interested in cloning family members which were expressed in zebrafish
neural crest, because Wnt signaling modulates specification of neural crest fate 
(Dorsky, R.I., Moon, R.T., Raible, D.W., 1998. Control of neural crest cell fate 
by the Wnt signalling pathway. Nature 396, 370-373). We cloned a zebrafish
homolog of lef1 and localized its chromosomal position by radiation hybrid
mapping. lef1 is expressed in the neural crest as well as the tailbud and
developing mesoderm, and is maternally expressed in zebrafish, unlike mouse and
Xenopus homologs. In addition, we cloned two tcf3 genes and a homolog of tcf4,
neither of which were strongly expressed in premigratory neural crest.

PMID: 10446273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell. 1999 Jul;4(1):63-73.

A conserved motif present in a class of helix-loop-helix proteins activates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA complex.

Massari ME(1), Grant PA, Pray-Grant MG, Berger SL, Workman JL, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

The class I helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins, which include E2A, HEB, and E2-2,
have been shown to be required for lineage-specific gene expression during T and 
B lymphocyte development. Additionally, the E2A proteins function to regulate
V(D)J recombination, possibly by allowing access of variable region segments to
the recombination machinery. The mechanisms by which E2A regulates transcription 
and recombination, however, are largely unknown. Here, we identify a novel motif,
LDFS, present in the vertebrate class I HLH proteins as well as in a yeast HLH
protein that is essential for transactivation. We provide both genetic and
biochemical evidence that the highly conserved LDFS motif stimulates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA histone acetyltransferase
complex.

PMID: 10445028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nature. 1999 Jun 24;399(6738):798-802.

The TAK1-NLK-MAPK-related pathway antagonizes signalling between beta-catenin and
transcription factor TCF.

Ishitani T(1), Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Nagai S, Nishita M, Meneghini M, Barker N,
Waterman M, Bowerman B, Clevers H, Shibuya H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, Japan.

The Wnt signalling pathway regulates many developmental processes through a
complex of beta-catenin and the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) 
family of high-mobility-group transcription factors. Wnt stabilizes cytosolic
beta-catenin, which then binds to TCF and activates gene transcription. This
signalling cascade is conserved in vertebrates, Drosophila and Caenorhabditis
elegans. In C. elegans, the proteins MOM-4 and LIT-1 regulate Wnt signalling to
polarize responding cells during embryogenesis. MOM-4 and LIT-1 are homologous to
TAK1 (a kinase activated by transforming growth factor-beta) mitogen-activated
protein-kinase-kinase kinase (MAP3K) and MAP kinase (MAPK)-related NEMO-like
kinase (NLK), respectively, in mammalian cells. These results raise the
possibility that TAK1 and NLK are also involved in Wnt signalling in mammalian
cells. Here we show that TAK1 activation stimulates NLK activity and
downregulates transcriptional activation mediated by beta-catenin and TCF.
Injection of NLK suppresses the induction of axis duplication by microinjected
beta-catenin in Xenopus embryos. NLK phosphorylates TCF/LEF factors and inhibits 
the interaction of the beta-catenin-TCF complex with DNA. Thus, the
TAK1-NLK-MAPK-like pathway negatively regulates the Wnt signalling pathway.

PMID: 10391247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int Immunol. 1999 Mar;11(3):317-23.

Tcf-1-mediated transcription in T lymphocytes: differential role for glycogen
synthase kinase-3 in fibroblasts and T cells.

Staal FJ(1), Burgering BM, van de Wetering M, Clevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Beta-catenin is the vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila segment polarity gene
Armadillo and plays roles in both cell-cell adhesion and transduction of the Wnt 
signaling cascade. Recently, members of the Lef/Tcf transcription factor family
have been identified as protein partners of beta-catenin, explaining how
beta-catenin alters gene expression. Here we report that in T cells, Tcf-1 also
becomes transcriptionally active through interaction with beta-catenin,
suggesting that the Wnt signal transduction pathway is operational in T
lymphocytes as well. However, although Wnt signals are known to inhibit the
activity of the negative regulatory protein kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3beta
(GSK-3beta), resulting in increased levels of beta-catenin, we find no evidence
for involvement of GSK-3beta in Tcf-mediated transcription in T cells. That is, a
dominant negative GSK-3beta does not specifically activate Tcf transcription and 
stimuli (lithium or phytohemagglutinin) that inhibit GSK-3beta activity also do
not activate Tcf reporter genes. Thus, inhibition of GSK-3beta is insufficient to
activate Tcf-dependent transcription in T lymphocytes. In contrast, in C57MG
fibroblast cells, lithium inactivates GSK-3beta and induces Tcf-controlled
transcription. This is the first demonstration that lithium can alter gene
expression of Tcf-responsive genes, and points to a difference in regulation of
Wnt signaling between fibroblasts and lymphocytes.

PMID: 10221643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3736-47.

Activation of somatostatin receptor II expression by transcription factors MIBP1 
and SEF-2 in the murine brain.

Dörflinger U(1), Pscherer A, Moser M, Rümmele P, Schüle R, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Experimentelle Krebsforschung, Klinik für Tumorbiologie an der
Universität Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Klinikum der RWTH Aachen, D-52074 Aachen,
Germany.

Somatostatin receptor type II expression in the mammalian brain displays a
spatially and temporally very restricted pattern. In an investigation of the
molecular mechanisms controlling these patterns, we have recently shown that
binding of the transcription factor SEF-2 to a novel initiator element in the
SSTR-2 promoter is essential for SSTR-2 gene expression. Further characterization
of the promoter identified a species-conserved TC-rich enhancer element. By
screening a mouse brain cDNA expression library, we cloned a cDNA encoding the
transcription factor MIBP1. MIBP1 interacts specifically with both the TC box in 
the SSTR-2 promoter and with the SEF-2 initiator-binding protein to enhance
transcription from the basal SSTR-2 promoter. We then investigated SSTR-2, SEF-2,
and MIBP1 mRNA expression patterns in the developing and adult murine brain by
Northern blotting and in situ hybridization. While SEF-2 is widely expressed in
many neuronal and nonneuronal tissues, MIBP1 expression overlapped precisely with
expression of SSTR-2 in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. In summary, our data 
for the first time define a regulatory role for the transcription factor MIBP1 in
mediating spatially and temporally regulated SSTR-2 expression in the brain.

PMCID: PMC84194
PMID: 10207097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Endocr Rev. 1999 Apr;20(2):207-39.

The cadherin-catenin system: implications for growth and differentiation of
endocrine tissues.

Pötter E(1), Bergwitz C, Brabant G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Klinische Endokrinologie, Zentrum Innere Medizin, Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Cell-cell adhesion, as mediated by the cadherin-catenin system, is a prerequisite
for normal cell function and the preservation of tissue integrity. With recent
progress in our understanding, beta-catenin as a component of a complex signal
transduction pathway may serve as a common switch in central processes that
regulate cellular differentiation and growth. The function of the
cadherin-catenin system in cell adhesion as well as in intracellular signaling,
appears to be subjected to multifactorial control by a variety of different
mechanisms, and data on a hormonal control of these signaling pathways, even
though scarce to date, suggest an important regulatory influence in many cellular
systems. Loss of E-cadherin-catenin function was described in many tumors along
with an increased invasiveness and a decreased prognosis of many carcinomas,
including tumors of endocrine glands and their target systems, and a causal role 
of this loss-of-function in the multifactorial process of tumorigenesis was
recently proven in genetic mouse models. Modification of E-caderin-catenin
function in endocrine and nonendocrine tumors may involve germline and somatic
gene mutations, epigenetic mechanisms such as gene silencing due to
promotor-hypermethylation, and posttranscriptional events, likely to be involved 
in many endocrine tissues and their target organs. Such events may converge on
nuclear activation of oncogenes such as c-myc by the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex.
The expression and functional status of the components of the cadherin-catenin
system may serve as prognostic markers for endocrine and nonendocrine tumors. The
frequent involvement of functional dysregulation in many tumors raises hopes that
better definition of the regulation of all components of the cadherin-catenin
system and their response to extracellular modulators may eventually lead to new 
therapeutic approaches for these tumors and help to prevent, more specifically,
growth, invasion, and metastasis of these carcinomas.

PMID: 10204118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nature. 1999 Apr 1;398(6726):422-6.

Beta-catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells.

Tetsu O(1), McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, Cancer Research
Institute, 94143-0128, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumour-suppressor gene occur in
most human colon cancers. Loss of functional APC protein results in the
accumulation of beta-catenin. Mutant forms of beta-catenin have been discovered
in colon cancers that retain wild-type APC genes, and also in melanomas,
medulloblastomas, prostate cancer and gastric and hepatocellular carcinomas. The 
accumulation of beta-catenin activates genes that are responsive to transcription
factors of the TCF/LEF family, with which beta-catenin interacts. Here we show
that beta-catenin activates transcription from the cyclin D1 promoter, and that
sequences within the promoter that are related to consensus TCF/LEF-binding sites
are necessary for activation. The oncoprotein p21ras further activates
transcription of the cyclin D1 gene, through sites within the promoter that bind 
the transcriptional regulators Ets or CREB. Cells expressing mutant beta-catenin 
produce high levels of cyclin D1 messenger RNA and protein constitutively.
Furthermore, expression of a dominant-negative form of TCF in colon-cancer cells 
strongly inhibits expression of cyclin D1 without affecting expression of cyclin 
D2, cyclin E, or cyclin-dependent kinases 2, 4 or 6. This dominant-negative TCF
causes cells to arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle; this phenotype can be
rescued by expression of cyclin D1 under the cytomegalovirus promoter. Abnormal
levels of beta-catenin may therefore contribute to neoplastic transformation by
causing accumulation of cyclin D1.

PMID: 10201372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1999 Apr;19(4):435-42.

Altered expression levels of SEF-2 and p112 in the rat hippocampus after
transient cerebral ischemia: identification by mRNA differential display.

Wigle D(1), Ho W, Lo D, Francis J, Eubanks JH, Wallace MC.

Author information: 
(1)Playfair Neuroscience Unit, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The authors used mRNA differential display to identify genes whose expression
levels are altered in the adult rat hippocampus 24 hours after global ischemia.
At this time after challenge, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
SEF-2, and the 26S proteasome complex subunit, p112, were identified as genes
whose expression levels are decreased and increased, respectively, in the
hippocampus. To determine the spatial and temporal patterns of expression change 
for each gene, the authors antisense in situ hybridization to paired brain
sections of sham-operated and global ischemia-challenged rats at 6, 12, and 24
hours after reperfusion SEF-2 expression was not significantly altered from that 
of sham-operated controls in any hippocampal subfield at or before 12 hours after
challenge. At 24 hours after ischemia, however, SEF-2 expression levels were
significantly diminished in the vulnerable CA1 subfield, but not in the less
vulnerable CA3 or dentate granule cell subfields. The proteasome p112 subunit
gene displayed no change in expression levels at 6 hours after insult; however,
an elevated expression was observed at 12 hours after challenge in the dentate
granule cell subfield. By 24 hours after challenge, p112 expression was
significantly elevated in both the CA1 and dentate granule cell subfields. These 
results demonstrate that a member of the basic helix-loop-helix family of
transcription factors, SEF-2, and the major subunit of the 26S proteasome
complex, p112, display altered gene expression in the hippocampus after transient
cerebral ischemia.

PMID: 10197513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genes Dev. 1999 Mar 15;13(6):709-17.

Wnt3a-/--like phenotype and limb deficiency in Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) mice.

Galceran J(1), Fariñas I, Depew MJ, Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Microbiology and
Biochemistry, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Members of the LEF-1/TCF family of transcription factors have been implicated in 
the transduction of Wnt signals. However, targeted gene inactivations of Lef1,
Tcf1, or Tcf4 in the mouse do not produce phenotypes that mimic any known Wnt
mutation. Here we show that null mutations in both Lef1 and Tcf1, which are
expressed in an overlapping pattern in the early mouse embryo, cause a severe
defect in the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm and lead to the formation of
additional neural tubes, phenotypes identical to those reported for
Wnt3a-deficient mice. In addition, Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) embryos have defects in the
formation of the placenta and in the development of limb buds, which fail both to
express Fgf8 and to form an apical ectodermal ridge. Together, these data provide
evidence for a redundant role of LEF-1 and TCF-1 in Wnt signaling during mouse
development.

PMCID: PMC316557
PMID: 10090727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):584-90.

Identification of Tcf4 residues involved in high-affinity beta-catenin binding.

Omer CA(1), Miller PJ, Diehl RE, Kral AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Sumneytown Pike,
West Point, Pennsylvania, 19486, USA. chuck_omer@merck.com

The N-termini of members of the T-cell factor (Tcf) and lymphocyte-enhancement
factor (Lef) protein families bind to beta-catenin, forming bipartite
transcription factors which regulate expression of genes involved in organismal
development and the growth of normal and malignant colon epithelium. Elevated
levels of Tcf4:beta-catenin are found in colon tumor cells with mutations in the 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The elevated levels of Tcf4:beta-catenin
result in increased transcription of genes, including c-myc, important for the
growth of these tumor cells. Here we analyze the interaction between beta-catenin
and Tcf4 and show that the N-terminal 53 amino acids of Tcf4 bind with high
affinity to beta-catenin. We show that this high-affinity interaction involves
multiple contact points including Tcf4 Asp-16, which is essential for
beta-catenin binding. In addition to Tcf/Lef family members, beta-catenin binds
to APC and cadherins. We found that the binding of beta-catenin to Tcf4, APC, or 
E-cadherin was mutually exclusive. These results are discussed with regard to how
beta-catenin interacts with its binding partners and to the potential for
identifying specific, small molecule inhibitors of these interactions.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Pathol. 1999 Feb;154(2):515-23.

Expression of CD44 in Apc and Tcf mutant mice implies regulation by the WNT
pathway.

Wielenga VJ(1), Smits R, Korinek V, Smit L, Kielman M, Fodde R, Clevers H, Pals
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Overexpression of cell surface glycoproteins of the CD44 family is an early event
in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. This suggests a link with
disruption of APC tumor suppressor protein-mediated regulation of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling, which is crucial in initiating tumorigenesis. To
explore this hypothesis, we analyzed CD44 expression in the intestinal mucosa of 
mice and humans with genetic defects in either APC or Tcf-4, leading to
constitutive activation or blockade of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway,
respectively. We show that CD44 expression in the non-neoplastic intestinal
mucosa of Apc mutant mice is confined to the crypt epithelium but that CD44 is
strongly overexpressed in adenomas as well as in invasive carcinomas. This
overexpression includes the standard part of the CD44 (CD44s) as well as variant 
exons (CD44v). Interestingly, deregulated CD44 expression is already present in
aberrant crypt foci with dysplasia (ACFs), the earliest detectable lesions of
colorectal neoplasia. Like ACFs of Apc-mutant mice, ACFs of familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP) patients also overexpress CD44. In sharp contrast, Tcf-4 mutant
mice show a complete absence of CD44 in the epithelium of the small intestine.
This loss of CD44 concurs with loss of stem cell characteristics, shared with
adenoma cells. Our results indicate that CD44 expression is part of a genetic
program controlled by the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling pathway and suggest a role
for CD44 in the generation and turnover of epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1850011
PMID: 10027409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Pathol. 1999 Jan;154(1):29-35.

Restricted high level expression of Tcf-4 protein in intestinal and mammary gland
epithelium.

Barker N(1), Huls G, Korinek V, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
n.barker@lab.azu.nl

Tcf-4 is a member of the Tcf/Lef family of transcription factors that interact
functionally with beta-catenin to mediate Wnt signaling in vertebrates. We have
previously demonstrated that the tumor suppressor function of APC in the small
intestine is mediated via regulation of Tcf-4/beta-catenin transcriptional
activity. To gain further insight into the role of Tcf-4 in development and
carcinogenesis we have generated several mouse monoclonal antibodies, one of
which is specific for Tcf-4 and another of which recognizes both Tcf-3 and Tcf-4.
Immunohistochemistry performed with the Tcf 4- specific monoclonal antibody
revealed high levels of expression in normal intestinal and mammary epithelium
and carcinomas derived therefrom. Additional sites of Tcf-3 expression, as
revealed by staining with the Tcf-3/-4 antibody, occurred only within the stomach
epithelium, hair follicles, and keratinocytes of the skin. A temporal Tcf-4
expression gradient was observed along the crypt-villus axis of human small
intestinal epithelium: strong Tcf-4 expression was present within the crypts of
early (week 16) human fetal small intestine, with the villi showing barely
detectable Tcf-4 protein levels. Tcf-4 expression levels increased dramatically
on the villi of more highly developed (week 22) fetal small intestine. We
conclude that Tcf-4 exhibits a highly restricted expression pattern related to
the developmental stage of the intestinal epithelium. The high levels of Tcf-4
expression in mammary epithelium and mammary carcinomas may also indicate a role 
in the development of this tissue and breast carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1853446
PMID: 9916915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1566-72.

A possible role for the high mobility group box transcription factor Tcf-4 in
vertebrate gut epithelial cell differentiation.

Lee YJ(1), Swencki B, Shoichet S, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Wingless (Wg)/Wnt signaling pathway activates High Mobility Group (HMG)-box
transcription factors of the T-cell Factor (Tcf)/Lymphoid Enhancer Factor (LEF)
subfamily and mediates diverse functions in development, possibly including
endoderm and gut differentiation. Determinants of tissue specificity in the
response to Wg/Wnt signaling remain unknown. We have identified Tcf-4 as the
predominant Tcf/LEF factor in the developing mouse gut. During fetal development,
Tcf-4 mRNA expression is restricted to gut epithelium and specific regions of the
brain, the thalamus and roof of the midbrain. In adults, expression is
widespread, with highest levels observed in the liver, an endodermally derived
organ, and persists in the gastrointestinal tract. Murine Tcf-4 has multiple RNA 
splice variants with consequently significant heterogeneity in sequences 3' to
the HMG box. Microinjection of mRNA or plasmid DNA encoding Tcf-4 into Xenopus
embryos results in ectopic expression of molecular markers of endoderm and
differentiated gut epithelium in isolated animal cap explants. Taken together,
these findings point to a potentially important function for Tcf-4 in development
of the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 9880534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):9-18.

TCF-4 binds beta-catenin and is expressed in distinct regions of the embryonic
brain and limbs.

Cho EA(1), Dressler GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The Tcf family of transcription factors, in association with beta-catenin,
mediate Wnt signaling by transactivating downstream target genes. Given the
function of wnt genes in neural development and organogenesis, Tcf transcription 
factors must be integral to the development of many embryonic tissues. In fact,
the role of Tcf genes in axis formation in Xenopus and in segment polarity in
Drosophila is well established. In this report, we have identified two isoforms
of the mouse Tcf-4 gene. Tcf-4 expressing cells showed nuclear localization of
beta-catenin. Although Tcf-4 RNA was widely distributed throughout embryogenesis,
high levels of Tcf-4 expression were particularly evident in the developing CNS
and limb buds. In extended streak stage embryos (E7.5), Tcf4 expression was
detected in anterior endoderm. E8.5 embryos had Tcf-4 expression in rostral
neural plate and in alternating rhombomeres of the hindbrain. By E9.5 and
thereafter, expression in the hindbrain disappeared and strong expression was
detected in the diencephalon. Strikingly Tcf-4 expression in the forebrain was
undetected in Small eye mutant embryos indicating that Pax-6 is required for
Tcf-4 expression in the forebrain. In developing limbs, Tcf-4 is readily detected
starting at E10.5 and is limited to mesenchymal cells surrounding the areas of
chondrification. These data indicate a function for Tcf-4 in neural and limb
development, two tissues where Wnt signaling plays an essential role.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Oct;7(11):1779-86.

CAG repeat expansion in autosomal dominant familial spastic paraparesis: novel
expansion in a subset of patients.

Benson KF(1), Horwitz M, Wolff J, Friend K, Thompson E, White S, Richards RI,
Raskind WH, Bird TD.

Author information: 
(1)Markey Molecular Medicine Center, Division of Medical Genetics and 6Division
of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Box 357720, Seattle, WA
98195-7720, USA.

Autosomal dominant familial spastic paraplegia (FSP) is a genetically
heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder displaying anticipation for which three 
loci have been mapped to the chromosomal positions 14q11.2-q24.3 (SPG3), 2p21-p24
(SPG4) and 15q11.1 (SPG6). The repeat expansion detection (RED) method has been
used to demonstrate expanded CAG repeats in some FSP families that map to SPG4.
We analyzed 20 FSP families, including four for which there is evidence for
linkage to SPG4, and found that in most cases the repeat expansion detected by
RED is due to non-pathogenic expansions of the chromosome 18q21.1 SEF2-1 or
17q21.3 ERDA1 locus. Polymorphic expansions at SEF2-1 and ERDA1 appear frequent
and may confound RED studies in the search for genes causing disorders
demonstrating anticipation. In six FSP families, however, CAG repeat expansion
was detected in a subset of affected and at-risk individuals that did not result 
from expansion of the SEF2-1 and ERDA1 loci. Overall, 11 of 37 (30%) of the FSP
patients with a CAG/CTG repeat expansion are unaccounted for by the SEF2-1 and
ERDA1 loci, compared with two of 23 (9%) of the unaffected at-risk individuals
and none of 19 controls. In the majority of cases these novel expansions were
shorter than those previously reported.

PMID: 9736780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Science. 1998 Sep 4;281(5382):1509-12.

Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway.

He TC(1), Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Costa LT, Morin PJ,
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, 424 North
Bond Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 1998 Sep 4;281(5382):1438-9, 1441.

The adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) is a tumor suppressor gene that is
inactivated in most colorectal cancers. Mutations of APC cause aberrant
accumulation of beta-catenin, which then binds T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4), causing
increased transcriptional activation of unknown genes. Here, the c-MYC oncogene
is identified as a target gene in this signaling pathway. Expression of c-MYC was
shown to be repressed by wild-type APC and activated by beta-catenin, and these
effects were mediated through Tcf-4 binding sites in the c-MYC promoter. These
results provide a molecular framework for understanding the previously enigmatic 
overexpression of c-MYC in colorectal cancers.

PMID: 9727977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Genet. 1998 Aug;19(4):379-83.

Depletion of epithelial stem-cell compartments in the small intestine of mice
lacking Tcf-4.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Moerer P, van Donselaar E, Huls G, Peters PJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mutations of the genes encoding APC or beta-catenin in colon carcinoma induce the
constitutive formation of nuclear beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes, resulting in
activated transcription of Tcf target genes. To study the physiological role of
Tcf-4 (which is encoded by the Tcf7/2 gene), we disrupted Tcf7/2 by homologous
recombination. Tcf7/2-/- mice die shortly after birth. A single histopathological
abnormality was observed. An apparently normal transition of intestinal endoderm 
into epithelium occurred at approximately embryonic day (E) 14.5. However, no
proliferative compartments were maintained in the prospective crypt regions
between the villi. As a consequence, the neonatal epithelium was composed
entirely of differentiated, non-dividing villus cells. We conclude that the
genetic program controlled by Tcf-4 maintains the crypt stem cells of the small
intestine. The constitutive activity of Tcf-4 in APC-deficient human epithelial
cells may contribute to their malignant transformation by maintaining stem-cell
characteristics.

PMID: 9697701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):19269-76.

A splice variant of E2-2 basic helix-loop-helix protein represses the
brain-specific fibroblast growth factor 1 promoter through the binding to an
imperfect E-box.

Liu Y(1), Ray SK, Yang XQ, Luntz-Leybman V, Chiu IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

We previously demonstrated that a cis-element (-489 to -467) in the
brain-specific fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1 promoter (FGF-1.B) binds multiple
nuclear factors, and this binding enhances transcriptional activity of this
promoter. Here we report the isolation of three cDNA clones, VL1, VL2 and VL3,
from a human brain stem cDNA expression library using four tandem repeats of the 
26-base pair sequence (-492 to -467) as the probe. These cDNA clones represent
the variant of bHLH protein E2-2/SEF2-1 in having 12 additional nucleotides
encoding the amino acids RSRS. The glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion
proteins of VLl, VL2, and VL3 immunologically react with anti-E2-2 antibody and
anti-GST-VL2 antibody. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and methylation
interference assay revealed that the GST fusion proteins specifically bind to an 
imperfect E-box sequence (GACCTG) present in the 26-base pair sequence. Transient
expression of the full-length E2-2 without RSRS in U1240MG glioblastoma cells
resulted in repression of FGF-1.B promoter activity. We further showed a
significant repression of promoter activity (>40 fold) by E2-2 (lacking the amino
acid sequence RSRS) when the E47 reporter construct, containing a hexameric E-box
site, was used. In contrast, the E2-2 variant containing the RSRS sequence has no
significant effect on either the FGF-1 promoter or E47 promoter. These results
suggest that the relative abundance of the two splice variants of E2-2 in brain
could be an important determinant for the expression of FGF-1.

PMID: 9668116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Semin Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(2):143-53.

The role of E-proteins in B- and T-lymphocyte development.

Bain G(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

Department of lymphocytes from hematopoietic stem cells is controlled, in part,
by the activity of transcriptional regulatory proteins. In particular, one class 
of helix-loop-helix proteins, termed E-proteins, have been implicated in the
regulation of gene expression during B-cell development. Recent analysis of
gene-targeted mice has allowed a direct assessment of the functional roles of
several E-protein family members in hematopoiesis. In this review we describe the
defects in B- and T-lymphocyte development in mice carrying targeted mutations in
the E-protein genes and discuss our current understanding of the role of these
proteins in lymphoid development.

PMID: 9618760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gene Expr. 1998;7(1):25-38.

Induction of basic helix-loop-helix protein-containing complexes during erythroid
differentiation.

Lister JA(1), Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The involvement of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in
erythroid differentiation and development has been established by forced
expression of the proteins TAL1 and Id1 in cultured cell lines and by targeted
disruption of the mouse TAL1 gene. To better understand the mechanism by which
bHLH proteins regulate erythropoiesis, we have investigated HLH protein-DNA
interactions in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells before and during chemically
induced differentiation. Three bHLH (E-box) binding activities were found to be
induced in nuclei from differentiating MEL cells. Using specific antisera, we
have demonstrated that these complexes are dimers of TAL1 and ubiquitous E
proteins. Similar complexes were detected in nuclear extracts from a human
erythroid cell line, K562, and from mouse fetal liver. All three bHLH complexes
were disrupted in vitro by Id1, a dominant-negative HLH protein that we and
others have previously shown to antagonize MEL cell differentiation. During
differentiation of an Id1-overexpressing MEL cell line, induction of a complex
containing TAL1 and E2A was not only blocked but reduced below the levels seen in
undifferentiating cells. These observations are consistent with the idea that
TAL1 and Id1 have opposing effects on erythroid differentiation and that the
level of TAL1/E2A heterodimer and/or another E protein-containing complex may
influence the decision of a cell to terminally differentiate.

PMID: 9572395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Res. 1998 Mar 15;58(6):1130-4.

Mutational analysis of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer.

Sparks AB(1), Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene initiates 
the majority of colorectal (CR) cancers. One consequence of this inactivation is 
constitutive activation of beta-catenin/Tcf-mediated transcription. To further
explore the role of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in CR tumorigenesis, we
searched for mutations in genes implicated in this pathway in CR tumors lacking
APC mutations. No mutations of the gamma-catenin (CTNNG1), GSK-3alpha (GSK3A), or
GSK-3beta (GSK3B) genes were detected. In contrast, mutations in the NH2-terminal
regulatory domain of beta-catenin (CTNNB1) were found in 13 of 27 (48%) CR tumors
lacking APC mutations. Mutations in the beta-catenin regulatory domain and APC
were observed to be mutually exclusive, consistent with their equivalent effects 
on beta-catenin stability and Tcf transactivation. In addition, we found that
CTNNB1 mutations can occur in the early, adenomatous stage of CR neoplasia, as
has been observed previously with APC mutations. These results suggest that
CTNNB1 mutations can uniquely substitute for APC mutations in CR tumors and that 
beta-catenin signaling plays a critical role in CR tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9515795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1248-56.

Two members of the Tcf family implicated in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during
embryogenesis in the mouse.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Willert K, Molenaar M, Roose J, Wagenaar G, Markman M,
Lamers W, Destree O, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Tcf transcription factors interact with beta-catenin and Armadillo to mediate
Wnt/Wingless signaling. We now report the characterization of genes encoding two 
murine members of the Tcf family, mTcf-3 and mTcf-4. mTcf-3 mRNA is ubiquitously 
present in embryonic day 6.5 (E6.5) mouse embryos but gradually disappears over
the next 3 to 4 days. mTcf-4 expression occurs first at E10.5 and is restricted
to di- and mesencephalon and the intestinal epithelium during embryogenesis. The 
mTcf-3 and mTcf-4 proteins bind a canonical Tcf DNA motif and can complex with
the transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin. Overexpression of Wnt-1 in a
mammary epithelial cell line leads to the formation of a nuclear complex between 
beta-catenin and Tcf proteins and to Tcf reporter gene transcription. These data 
demonstrate a direct link between Wnt stimulation and beta-catenin/Tcf
transcriptional activation and imply a role for mTcf-3 and -4 in early Wnt-driven
developmental decisions in the mouse embryo.

PMCID: PMC108837
PMID: 9488439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):2866-73.

Identification of a highly conserved module in E proteins required for in vivo
helix-loop-helix dimerization.

Goldfarb AN(1), Lewandowska K, Pennell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4943, USA. ang@po.cwru.edu

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors often function as
heterodimeric complexes consisting of a tissue-specific factor such as SCL/tal or
MyoD bound to a broadly expressed E protein. bHLH dimerization therefore appears 
to represent a key regulatory step in cell lineage determination and oncogenesis.
Previous functional and structural studies have indicated that the well defined
HLH domain is both necessary and sufficient for dimerization. Most of these
studies, however, have employed in vitro systems for analysis of HLH
dimerization, and their implications for the requirements for in vivo
dimerization remain unclear. Using multiple approaches, we have analyzed bHLH
dimerization in intact, living cells and have identified a novel domain in E
proteins, domain C, which is required for in vivo dimerization. Domain C, which
lies just carboxyl-terminal to helix 2 of the HLH domain, represents the most
highly conserved region within E proteins and appears to influence the in vivo
conformation of the adjacent HLH domain. These results suggest that HLH
dimerization in vivo may represent a complex, regulated process that is distinct 
from HLH dimerization in vitro.

PMID: 9446597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gastroenterology. 1997 Dec;113(6):2009-10.

The gatekeeper has many keys: dissecting the function of the APC gene.

Bresalier RS.

PMID: 9394744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Oct;6(11):1855-63.

A novel, heritable, expanding CTG repeat in an intron of the SEF2-1 gene on
chromosome 18q21.1.

Breschel TS(1), McInnis MG, Margolis RL, Sirugo G, Corneliussen B, Simpson SG,
McMahon FJ, MacKinnon DF, Xu JF, Pleasant N, Huo Y, Ashworth RG, Grundstrom C,
Grundstrom T, Kidd KK, DePaulo JR, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)George Browne Genetics Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

There are currently 13 diseases known to be caused by unstable triplet repeat
mutations; however, there are some instances (as with FRAXF and FRA16) when these
mutations appear to be asymptomatic. In a search for polymorphic CTG repeats as
candidate genes for bipolar disorder, we screened a genomic human chromosome
18-specific library and identified a 1.6 kb clone (7,6A) with a CTG24 repeat that
maps to 18q21.1. The CTG repeat locus, termed CTG18.1, is located within an
intron of human SEF2-1, a gene encoding a basic hellx-loop-hellx DNA binding
protein involved in transcriptional regulation. The CTGn repeat is highly
polymorphic and very enlarged alleles, consistent with expansions of up to
CTG2100, were identified. PCR and Southern blot analysis in pedigrees ascertained
for a Johns Hopkins University bipolar disorder linkage study and in CEPH
reference pedigrees revealed a tripartite distribution of CTG18.1 alleles with
stable alleles (CTG10-CTG37), moderately enlarged and unstable alleles
(CTG53-CTG250), and very enlarged, unstable alleles (CTG800-CTG2100). Moderately 
enlarged alleles were not associated with an abnormal phenotype and have a
combined enlarged allele frequency of 3% in the CEPH and bipolar populations.
Very enlarged alleles, detectable only by Southern blot analysis of genomic
digests, have thus far been found in only three individuals from our bipolar
pedigrees, and to date, have not been found in any of the CEPH reference
pedigrees. These enlarged alleles may arise, at least in part, via somatic
mutation.

PMID: 9302263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19785-93.

Differential interactions of Id proteins with basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factors.

Langlands K(1), Yin X, Anand G, Prochownik EV.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, The,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Dimerization of three Id proteins (Id1, Id2, and Id3) with the four class A E
proteins (E12, E47, E2-2, and HEB) and two groups of class B proteins, the
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs: MyoD, myogenin, Myf-5 and MRF4/Myf-6), and the
hematopoietic factors (Scl/Tal-1, Tal-2, and Lyl-1) were tested in a quantitative
yeast 2-hybrid assay. All three Ids bound with high affinity to E proteins, but a
much broader range of interactions was observed between Ids and the class B
factors. Id1 and Id2 interacted strongly with MyoD and Myf-5 and weakly with
myogenin and MRF4/Myf-6, whereas Id3 interacted weakly with all four MRFs.
Similar specificities were observed in co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian
2-hybrid analyses. No interactions were found between the Ids and any of the
hematopoietic factors. Each Id was able to disrupt the ability of E protein-MyoD 
complexes to transactivate from a muscle creatine kinase reporter construct in
vivo. Finally, mutagenesis experiments showed that the differences between Id1
and Id3 binding map to three amino acids in the first helix and to a small
cluster of upstream residues. The Id proteins thus display a signature range of
interactions with all of their potential dimerization partners and may play a
role in myogenesis which is distinct from that in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9242638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1787-90.

Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in
beta-catenin or APC.

Morin PJ(1), Sparks AB, Korinek V, Barker N, Clevers H, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, 424 North
Bond Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1752-3.

Inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene
initiates colorectal neoplasia. One of the biochemical activities associated with
the APC protein is down-regulation of transcriptional activation mediated by
beta-catenin and T cell transcription factor 4 (Tcf-4). The protein products of
mutant APC genes present in colorectal tumors were found to be defective in this 
activity. Furthermore, colorectal tumors with intact APC genes were found to
contain activating mutations of beta-catenin that altered functionally
significant phosphorylation sites. These results indicate that regulation of
beta-catenin is critical to APC's tumor suppressive effect and that this
regulation can be circumvented by mutations in either APC or beta-catenin.

PMID: 9065402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1784-7.

Constitutive transcriptional activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC-/-
colon carcinoma.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Morin PJ, van Wichen D, de Weger R, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA 
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1752-3.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein binds to
beta-catenin, a protein recently shown to interact with Tcf and Lef transcription
factors. The gene encoding hTcf-4, a Tcf family member that is expressed in
colonic epithelium, was cloned and characterized. hTcf-4 transactivates
transcription only when associated with beta-catenin. Nuclei of APC-/- colon
carcinoma cells were found to contain a stable beta-catenin-hTcf-4 complex that
was constitutively active, as measured by transcription of a Tcf reporter gene.
Reintroduction of APC removed beta-catenin from hTcf-4 and abrogated the
transcriptional transactivation. Constitutive transcription of Tcf target genes, 
caused by loss of APC function, may be a crucial event in the early
transformation of colonic epithelium.

PMID: 9065401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 24;272(4):2459-63.

Physical and functional interactions between the transcriptional inhibitors Id3
and ITF-2b. Evidence toward a novel mechanism regulating muscle-specific gene
expression.

Chen B(1), Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Missouri, School of Medicine,
Columbia, Missouri 65212, USA.

We have used an interaction cloning strategy to identify an inhibitory isoform of
the ITF-2 transcription factor, ITF-2b, that interacts with the transcriptional
inhibitor Id3/HLH462. The interaction was confirmed in vitro, and inside intact
myogenic C2C12 cells. As expected, overexpression of either Id3/HLH462 or ITF-2b 
effectively inhibited the activation of the muscle-specific creatine kinase
promoter by the myogenic transcription factor MyoD. However, when overexpressed
simultaneously, ITF-2b and Id3/HLH462 counteracted each other's inhibitory effect
to produce a reduced overall inhibition. Moreover, while ITF-2b inhibited the
creatine kinase promoter, it acted as a weak transactivator on an artificial
promoter consisting of three tandem copies of the consensus myogenic factor DNA
binding site. Further investigation indicated that the ITF-2b/MyoD heterodimer
bound to its specific DNA binding site in vitro, and the DNA binding was
effectively blocked by Id3/HLH462. Additional analysis revealed the presence of
transcripts for both the activating (ITF-2a) and inhibitory (ITF-2b) isoforms in 
differentiating C2C12 cultures, suggesting that both isoforms might participate
in regulating the differentiation process. Taken together, this study reveals a
more complex pattern of regulatory interactions involving the helix-loop-helix
proteins than was previously anticipated.

PMID: 8999959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Prog Brain Res. 1997;114:3-19.

Functional cloning of candidate genes that regulate Purkinje cell-specific gene
expression.

Sanlioglu-Crisman S(1), Oberdick J.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiotechnology Center, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

PMID: 9193135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6680-90.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor SEF-2 regulates the activity of a novel
initiator element in the promoter of the human somatostatin receptor II gene.

Pscherer A(1), Dörflinger U, Kirfel J, Gawlas K, Rüschoff J, Buettner R, Schüle
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Regensburg, Germany.

The effects of somatostatin hormones are mediated by a family of five different
seven-helix transmembrane spanning receptors (SSTR1-5). The expression of the
five different SSTR subtypes displays a complex temporal- and tissue-specific
pattern. To investigate the molecular mechanisms controlling the different
expression patterns of the SSTRs, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the human
SSTR2 gene. Characterization of the SSTR2 promoter resulted in the identification
of a novel initiator element (SSTR2inr). Transcriptional activity of the SSTR2inr
is dependent on the presence of a binding site (E-box) for basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors. By screening a mouse brain cDNA expression library 
we isolated a cDNA coding for the bHLH transcription factor SEF-2. SEF-2 binds to
the E-box present in the SSTR2inr, both in vitro and in vivo and activates
transcription from the SSTR2inr. A single point mutation within the E-box
eliminates binding of SEF-2 and results in a complete loss of transcriptional
activity of the SSTR2inr. Furthermore, DNA binding studies demonstrate that the
basal transcription factor TFIIB can be tethered to the SSTR2inr through physical
interaction with SEF-2. In summary, the SSTR2inr represents a novel type of
initiator element that confers gene expression in the absence of a TATA-box or
binding sites for other known initiator factors, like YY-1 or USF.

PMCID: PMC452492
PMID: 8978694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2898-905.

B-lymphocyte development is regulated by the combined dosage of three basic
helix-loop-helix genes, E2A, E2-2, and HEB.

Zhuang Y(1), Cheng P, Weintraub H.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

B-lymphocyte development requires the basic helix-loop-helix proteins encoded by 
the E2A gene. In this study, the control mechanism of E2A was further explored by
disruption of the E2A-related genes, E2-2 and HEB. In contrast to E2A, E2-2 and
HEB are not essential for the establishment of the B-cell lineage. However, both 
E2-2 and HEB are required for the generation of the normal numbers of pro-B cells
in mouse embryos. Breeding tests among mice carrying different mutations revealed
that E2-2 and HEB interact with E2A in many developmental processes including
generation of B cells. Specifically, mice transheterozygous for any two mutations
of these three genes produced fewer pro-B cells than the singly heterozygous
littermates. This study indicates that B-cell development is dependent not only
on an essential function provided by the E2A gene but also on a combined dosage
set by E2A, E2-2, and HEB.

PMCID: PMC231283
PMID: 8649400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3555-61.

A splice variant of the ITF-2 transcript encodes a transcription factor that
inhibits MyoD activity.

Skerjanc IS(1), Truong J, Filion P, McBurney MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Health Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Proteins of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family are transcription factors
that bind DNA containing the E box motif (CANNTG) found in the promoters of many 
muscle-specific genes. ITF-2 is a bHLH protein with widespread expression that is
thought to form active heterodimers with MyoD, a muscle-specific bHLH
transcription factor. We have isolated cDNAs derived from two alternatively
spliced forms of mouse ITF-2, termed MITF-2A and -2B. These proteins differ in
their N termini. Neither MITF-2A nor -2B transactivated the cardiac alpha-actin
promoter, which contains an E box, when transfected into nonmuscle cells. In
fact, MITF-2B inhibited MyoD activation of the cardiac alpha-actin promoter. This
inhibitory activity required the N-terminal 83 amino acids since MITF-2A showed
no inhibitory activity, and a mutant MITF-2B with deletion of the N-terminal 83
amino acids failed to inhibit MyoD-mediated transcriptional activation. MyoD
activity was also inhibited by Id, a HLH protein, and this inhibition was
reversed by the addition of excess E12 or MITF-2A. However, the inhibition of
MyoD activity by MITF-2B was not reversed with E12 or MITF-2A. While Id is
thought to inhibit MyoD by binding and sequestering potential dimerization
partners, MITF-2B appears to inhibit MyoD activity by forming an inactive
heterodimer with MyoD. Thus, differentially spliced transcripts of mouse ITF-2
encode different proteins that appear to dimerize with MyoD and activate or
repress transcription.

PMID: 8631961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. FEBS Lett. 1995 Oct 30;374(2):279-83.

Helix-loop-helix transcription factors regulate Id2 gene promoter activity.

Neuman K(1), Nornes HO, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523, USA.

Id-like helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are involved in the
regulation of proliferation and differentiation of several cell types. We
isolated 5' regulatory region of mouse Id2 gene and demonstrated that it contains
several E-box clusters. These E-boxes mediate stimulatory effects of basic-HLH
(bHLH) transcription factors ME1, ME2, and NSCL1 on Id2 promoter activity.
Co-expression of Id2 blocks the stimulatory effect of bHLH transcription factors 
which suggests the presence of feedback loops in Id2 transcriptional regulation. 
Overexpression of NSCL1 in F9 cells blocks the downregulation of Id2 gene
expression during retinoic acid induced differentiation. Our data demonstrate
that bHLH transcription factors regulate Id2 gene expression.

PMID: 7589553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4175-83.

Regulation of Id1 and its association with basic helix-loop-helix proteins during
nerve growth factor-induced differentiation of PC12 cells.

Einarson MB(1), Chao MV.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Cornell University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, New York, New York, USA.

Cell differentiation in the nervous system is dictated by specific patterns of
gene expression. We have investigated the role of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins
during differentiation of PC12 pheochromocytoma cells in response to nerve growth
factor. Gel mobility shift assays using PC12 cell nuclear extracts demonstrated
that active basic HLH complexes exist throughout differentiation. Addition of
exogeneous Id1 protein, a negative regulator of basic HLH proteins, disrupted
specific complexes formed by PC12 cell nuclear extracts on a CANNTG consensus
oligonucleotide. To identify possible novel basic HLH proteins in these
complexes, a glutathione S-transferase-Id1 fusion protein was used to screen a
PC12 cell cDNA expression library. A single clone representing the rat E2-2 gene 
was identified. Sequential immunoprecipitations with antibodies to each HLH
protein revealed an association between Id1 and E2-2 that could be detected in
both untreated and nerve growth factor-treated PC12 cell lysates. These
experiments define a new HLH interaction between Id1 and E2-2 in neuronal cells
and suggest that neuronal differentiation may be regulated by HLH proteins in a
distinctive manner.

PMCID: PMC230656
PMID: 7623812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Curr Biol. 1995 Jun 1;5(6):605-8.

Lymphopoiesis. Transcription factors controlling B-cell development.

Desiderio S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Two structurally dissimilar transcriptional regulators, E2A and Pax-5, have been 
shown to play essential roles in B-cell development; the p50 subunit of NF kappa 
B, by contrast, is required for normal immune responses.

PMID: 7552167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Genet Res. 1995 Apr;65(2):83-93.

Thirteen genes (Cebpb, E2f1, Tcf4, Cyp24, Pck1, Acra4, Edn3, Kcnb1, Mc3r, Ntsr,
Cd40, Plcg1 and Rcad) that probably lie in the distal imprinting region of mouse 
chromosome 2 are not monoallelically expressed.

Williamson CM(1), Dutton ER, Abbott CM, Beechey CV, Ball ST, Peters J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Radiobiology Unit, Didcot, Oxon, UK.

Seven imprinted genes are currently known in the mouse but none have been
identified yet in the distal imprinting region of mouse Chromosome (Chr) 2, a
region which shows striking linkage conservation with human chromosome 20q13.
Both maternal duplication/paternal deficiency and its reciprocal for distal Chr 2
lead to mice with abnormal body shapes and behavioural abnormalities. We have
tested a number of candidate genes, that are either likely or known to lie within
the distal imprinting region, for monoallelic expression. These included 3 genes 
(Cebpb, E2f1 and Tcf4) that express transcription factors, 2 genes (Cyp24 and
Pck1) that are involved in growth, 5 genes (Acra4, Edn3, Kcnb1, Mc3r and Ntsr)
where a defect could lead to neurological and probably behavioural problems, and 
3 genes (Cd40, Plcg1 and Rcad) that are less obvious candidates but sequence
information was available for designing primers to test their expression. On/off 
expression of each gene was tested by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of RNA extracted from tissues of mice with maternal
duplication/paternal deficiency and its reciprocal for the distal region of Chr
2. None of the 13 genes is monoallelically expressed in the appropriate tissues
before and shortly after birth which suggests that these genes are not imprinted 
later in development. This study has narrowed down the search for imprinted
genes, and valuable information on which genes have been tested for on/off
expression is provided. Since there is considerable evidence of conservation of
imprinting between mouse and human, we would predict that the 13 genes are not
imprinted in human. Five of the genes: E2f1, Tcf4, Kcnb1, Cd40 and Rcad, have not
yet been mapped in human. However, because of the striking linkage conservation
observed between mouse Chr 2 and human chromosome 20, we would expect these genes
to map on human chromosome 20q13.

PMID: 7781998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995 Mar;29(1):107-18.

Differential expression and distinct DNA-binding specificity of ME1a and ME2
suggest a unique role during differentiation and neuronal plasticity.

Chiaramello A(1), Soosaar A, Neuman T, Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

Class A basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins have been referred to as
ubiquitous and are believed to have redundant functions. They are involved in the
control of several developmental pathways, such as neurogenesis and myogenesis.
To rationalize the existence of multiple class A bHLH proteins, we evaluated the 
differences and similarities between ME1a and ME2, two class A bHLH proteins,
highly expressed in differentiating neuronal cells. In situ hybridization
analyses reveal that ME1a and ME2 are characterized by distinguishable patterns
of expression in areas of the adult mouse brain where neuronal plasticity occurs.
Also, DNA-binding assays show that both proteins bind to E-boxes as homodimers
and heterodimers, and show differences in their DNA-binding specificities, which 
suggest selective interactions with different binding sites of target genes. In
addition, in vitro DNA-binding assays demonstrate that Id2 forms heterodimers
with ME1a and ME2. As a result of these interactions, their DNA-binding activity 
is abolished. Furthermore, overexpression of Id2 in neuronal cells suppresses
ME1a and ME2 transcriptional activity. Based on our data, we hypothesize that
ME1a and ME2 may activate gene expression of different target genes and therefore
are likely to be differently involved during neurogenesis.

PMID: 7769987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 1995 Jan 15;85(2):465-71.

Inhibition of cellular differentiation by the SCL/tal oncoprotein:
transcriptional repression by an Id-like mechanism.

Goldfarb AN(1), Lewandowska K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106-4943.

In cases of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) oncogene SCL/tal undergoes frequent rearrangements
activating ectopic expression. Despite the compelling epidemiological association
of SCL/tal expression with T-ALL, no specific transforming function has been
attributable to the protein product. However, investigators have recently
demonstrated that forced overexpression of SCL/tal can block monocytic
differentiation of M1 murine myeloid leukemia cells. Thus, inappropriate
expression of wild-type SCL/tal protein may in part account for the maturation
arrest phenotype observed in T-ALL cells. In this study, ectopic expression of
the SCL/tal gene blocked the differentiation of C2C12 muscle precursor cells.
Characterization of the mechanism of differentiation blockade showed that the
SCL/tal protein repressed transcriptional activation by the myogenic bHLH factor 
MyoD. Protein interaction analysis showed that SCL/tal and MyoD compete for
common partners (E bHLH proteins) but do not directly bind one other. A model is 
thus proposed in which ectopic SCL/tal protein, by its ability to titrate out E
proteins, prevents the formation of bHLH complexes that drive cellular
differentiation: the "Id-like" mechanism.

PMID: 7812000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Aug;25(1-2):176-80.

Expression of basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor ME2 during brain
development and in the regions of neuronal plasticity in the adult brain.

Soosaar A(1), Chiaramello A, Zuber MX, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523.

We report the isolation of a cDNA encoding the mouse class A bHLH transcription
factor ME2 and the analysis of its expression. ME2 is expressed in the cerebral
cortex, Purkinje and granule cell layers of the cerebellum, olfactory
neuroepithelium, pyramidal cells of hippocampal layers CA1-CA4, and in the
granular cells of the dentate gyrus. The specific expression of ME2 during
development and in the regions of neuronal plasticity in the adult brain suggest 
that ME2 may have a regulatory function in developmental processes as well as
during neuronal plasticity.

PMID: 7984047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 15;269(28):18453-62.

Isolation of two E-box binding factors that interact with the rat tyrosine
hydroxylase enhancer.

Yoon SO(1), Chikaraishi DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111.

The enhancer of the rat tyrosine hydroxylase gene (TH) in PC8b cells is composed 
of the AP1 motif (TCATTCA, -205 to -199) and an overlapping 20-base pair dyad
symmetry element (TCAGAGGCAGGTGCCTGTGA, -201 to -182) whose core is an E-box. We 
have isolated two partial cDNA clones that encode factors which bind the TH-dyad.
One is rITF2 with a basic helix-loop-helix motif and the other is CDP2 with a
homeodomain. rITF2 is a rat homolog of human ITF2 (or E2-2), and CDP2 is a member
of a new family of homeoproteins defined by histidine as the 9th residue of the
recognition helix and by unique 64 amino acid repeats related to those of the
Drosophila cut gene. The binding affinity of CDP2 alone is relatively weak, but
it enhances the binding of rITF2 to the TH-dyad. In transfected F9 cells,
activation of a TH-driven reporter requires both rITF2 and CDP2, suggesting that 
the proteins may functionally interact. However, rITF2 and CDP2 are not
restricted to TH-expressing tissues; hence they may not be involved in the
tissue-specific expression of TH. In addition, CDP2 is phosphorylated in vitro
and in vivo.

PMID: 7913462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Virol. 1991 Nov;65(11):6084-93.

Helix-loop-helix transcriptional activators bind to a sequence in glucocorticoid 
response elements of retrovirus enhancers.

Corneliussen B(1), Thornell A, Hallberg B, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

A family of nuclear proteins, designated SL3-3 enhancer factors 2 (SEF2), were
found to interact with an Ephrussi box-like motif within the glucocorticoid
response element in the enhancer of the murine leukemia virus SL3-3. Mutation of 
the DNA sequence decreased the basal enhancer activity in various cell lines. The
important nucleotides for binding of SEF2 are conserved in most type C
retroviruses. Various cell types displayed differences both in the sets of
SEF2-DNA complexes formed and in their amounts. A cDNA which encoded a protein
that interacted specifically with the SEF2-binding sequence was isolated from
human thymocytes. The nucleotide sequence specificity of the recombinant protein,
expressed in Escherichia coli, corresponded to that of at least one of the
nuclear SEF2 proteins. Sequence analysis of the cDNA revealed that it belongs to 
the basic helix-loop-helix class of DNA-binding proteins. Several mRNA
transcripts of different sizes were identified. Molecular analysis of cDNA clones
revealed multiple related mRNA species containing alternative coding regions,
which are most probably a result of differential splicing.

PMCID: PMC250283
PMID: 1681116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Feb 11;18(3):678.

Sequence of the cDNA encoding ITF-2, a positive-acting transcription factor.

Henthorn P(1), McCarrick-Walmsley R, Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6145.

PMCID: PMC333500
PMID: 2308860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


