
1. Nat Genet. 2016 Mar;48(3):323-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.3496. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

High-density genotyping of immune-related loci identifies new SLE risk variants
in individuals with Asian ancestry.

Sun C(1), Molineros JE(1), Looger LL(2), Zhou XJ(3), Kim K(4), Okada Y(5,)(6), Ma
J(7), Qi YY(3), Kim-Howard X(1), Motghare P(1), Bhattarai K(1), Adler A(1), Bang 
SY(4), Lee HS(4), Kim TH(4), Kang YM(8), Suh CH(9), Chung WT(10), Park YB(11),
Choe JY(12), Shim SC(13), Kochi Y(14), Suzuki A(14), Kubo M(15), Sumida T(16),
Yamamoto K(14,)(17), Lee SS(18), Kim YJ(19), Han BG(19), Dozmorov M(20), Kaufman 
KM(21), Wren JD(1), Harley JB(21), Shen N(7,)(22), Chua KH(23), Zhang H(3), Bae
SC(4), Nath SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, Virginia, USA. (3)Renal Division, Peking
University First Hospital, Peking University Institute of Nephrology, Key
Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China and Key Laboratory of
Chronic Kidney Disease Prevention and Treatment (Peking University), Ministry of 
Education, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University
Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Human Genetics
and Disease Diversity, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Laboratory for Statistical
Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(7)Shanghai Institute of Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (8)School of Medicine, Kyungpook 
National University Hospital, Daegu, Korea. (9)Department of Rheumatology, Ajou
University Hospital, Suwon, Korea. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A
University Hospital, Busan, Korea. (11)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (12)Department of Internal
Medicine, Daegu Catholic University Hospital, Daegu, Korea. (13)Daejeon
Rheumatoid and Degenerative Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University
Hospital, Daejeon, Korea. (14)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. (15)Laboratory for
Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 
Japan. (16)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (17)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (18)Department of
Rheumatology, Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju, Korea. (19)Korea
National Institute of Health, Osong, Korea. (20)Department of Biostatistics,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA. (21)Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and US Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (22)Center for Autoimmune
Genomics and Etiology (CAGE), Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (23)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) has a strong but incompletely understood
genetic architecture. We conducted an association study with replication in 4,478
SLE cases and 12,656 controls from six East Asian cohorts to identify new SLE
susceptibility loci and better localize known loci. We identified ten new loci
and confirmed 20 known loci with genome-wide significance. Among the new loci,
the most significant locus was GTF2IRD1-GTF2I at 7q11.23 (rs73366469, Pmeta =
3.75 × 10(-117), odds ratio (OR) = 2.38), followed by DEF6, IL12B, TCF7, TERT,
CD226, PCNXL3, RASGRP1, SYNGR1 and SIGLEC6. We identified the most likely
functional variants at each locus by analyzing epigenetic marks and gene
expression data. Ten candidate variants are known to alter gene expression in cis
or in trans. Enrichment analysis highlights the importance of these loci in B
cell and T cell biology. The new loci, together with previously known loci,
increase the explained heritability of SLE to 24%. The new loci share functional 
and ontological characteristics with previously reported loci and are possible
drug targets for SLE therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4767573 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26808113  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cell Res. 2016 Feb;26(2):217-28. doi: 10.1038/cr.2016.13. Epub 2016 Jan 22.

Cross-kingdom inhibition of breast cancer growth by plant miR159.

Chin AR(1,)(2), Fong MY(1), Somlo G(3), Wu J(4), Swiderski P(5), Wu X(6), Wang
SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (2)City of Hope Irell &
Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular Medicine, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (5)Cores of Synthetic and Biopolymer
Chemistry, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (6)Cores of Integrative Genomics, City of Hope 
Beckman Research Institute and Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are critical regulators of gene expression, and exert
extensive impacts on development, physiology, and disease of eukaryotes. A high
degree of parallelism is found in the molecular basis of miRNA biogenesis and
action in plants and animals. Recent studies interestingly suggest a potential
cross-kingdom action of plant-derived miRNAs, through dietary intake, in
regulating mammalian gene expression. Although the source and scope of plant
miRNAs detected in mammalian specimens remain controversial, these initial
studies inspired us to determine whether plant miRNAs can be detected in Western 
human sera and whether these plant miRNAs are able to influence gene expression
and cellular processes related to human diseases such as cancer. Here we found
that Western donor sera contained the plant miRNA miR159, whose abundance in the 
serum was inversely correlated with breast cancer incidence and progression in
patients. In human sera, miR159 was predominantly detected in the extracellular
vesicles, and was resistant to sodium periodate oxidation suggesting the
plant-originated 2'-O-methylation on the 3' terminal ribose. In breast cancer
cells but not non-cancerous mammary epithelial cells, a synthetic mimic of miR159
was capable of inhibiting proliferation by targeting TCF7 that encodes a Wnt
signaling transcription factor, leading to a decrease in MYC protein levels. Oral
administration of miR159 mimic significantly suppressed the growth of xenograft
breast tumors in mice. These results demonstrate for the first time that a plant 
miRNA can inhibit cancer growth in mammals.

PMCID: PMC4746606 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26794868  [PubMed - in process]


3. Nat Med. 2016 Jan;22(1):84-90. doi: 10.1038/nm.3997. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

TCF1 links GIPR signaling to the control of beta cell function and survival.

Campbell JE(1), Ussher JR(1), Mulvihill EE(1), Kolic J(2,)(3), Baggio LL(1), Cao 
X(1), Liu Y(1), Lamont BJ(1), Morii T(1), Streutker CJ(4), Tamarina N(5),
Philipson LH(5), Wrana JL(1), MacDonald PE(2,)(3), Drucker DJ(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada. (3)Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada. (4)St. Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (5)Department of Medicine, Kovler Diabetes Center, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor and the glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor transduce nutrient-stimulated signals
to control beta cell function. Although the GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) is a
validated drug target for diabetes, the importance of the GIP receptor (GIPR) for
the function of beta cells remains uncertain. We demonstrate that mice with
selective ablation of GIPR in beta cells (MIP-Cre:Gipr(Flox/Flox);
Gipr(-/-ßCell)) exhibit lower levels of meal-stimulated insulin secretion,
decreased expansion of adipose tissue mass and preservation of insulin
sensitivity when compared to MIP-Cre controls. Beta cells from Gipr(-/-ßCell)
mice display greater sensitivity to apoptosis and markedly lower islet expression
of T cell-specific transcription factor-1 (TCF1, encoded by Tcf7), a protein not 
previously characterized in beta cells. GIP, but not GLP-1, promotes beta cell
Tcf7 expression via a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-independent and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent pathway. Tcf7 (in mice) or 
TCF7 (in humans) levels are lower in islets taken from diabetic mice and in
humans with type 2 diabetes; knockdown of TCF7 in human and mouse islets impairs 
the cytoprotective responsiveness to GIP and enhances the magnitude of apoptotic 
injury, whereas restoring TCF1 levels in beta cells from Gipr(-/-ßCell) mice
lowers the number of apoptotic cells compared to that seen in MIP-Cre controls.
Tcf7(-/-) mice show impaired insulin secretion, deterioration of glucose
tolerance with either aging and/or high-fat feeding and increased sensitivity to 
beta cell injury relative to wild-type (WT) controls. Hence the GIPR-TCF1 axis
represents a potential therapeutic target for preserving both the function and
survival of vulnerable, diabetic beta cells.

PMID: 26642437  [PubMed - in process]


4. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 25;16:1002. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2189-6.

Regulatory network reconstruction reveals genes with prognostic value for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Yepes S(1), Torres MM(2), López-Kleine L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los 
Andes, Bogotá D.C., Colombia. sl.yepes233@uniandes.edu.co. (2)Facultad de
Ciencias, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá
D.C., Colombia. maritorr@uniandes.edu.co. (3)Departamento de Estadística,
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá D.C., Colombia. llopezk@unal.edu.co.

BACKGROUND: The clinical course of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is highly
variable; some patients follow an indolent course, but others progress to a more 
advanced stage. The mutational status of rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain
variable (IGVH) genes in CLL is a feature that is widely recognized for dividing 
patients into groups that are related to their prognoses. However, the regulatory
programs associated with the IGVH statuses are poorly understood, and markers
that can precisely predict survival outcomes have yet to be identified.
METHODS: In this study, (i) we reconstructed gene regulatory networks in CLL by
applying an information-theoretic approach to the expression profiles of 5
cohorts. (ii) We applied master regulator analysis (MRA) to these networks to
identify transcription factors (TFs) that regulate an IGVH mutational status
signature. The IGVH mutational status signature was developed by searching for
differentially expressed genes between the IGVH mutational statuses in numerous
CLL cohorts. (iii) To evaluate the biological implication of the inferred
regulators, prognostic values were determined using time to treatment (TTT) and
overall survival (OS) in two different cohorts.
RESULTS: A robust IGVH expression signature was obtained, and various TFs emerged
as regulators of the signature in most of the reconstructed networks. The TF
targets expression profiles exhibited significant differences with respect to
survival, which allowed the definition of a reduced profile with a high value for
OS. TCF7 and its targets stood out for their roles in progression.
CONCLUSION: TFs and their targets, which were obtained merely from inferred
regulatory associations, have prognostic implications and reflect a regulatory
context for prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4659237
PMID: 26606983  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Biochem. 2016 Jan;159(1):27-30. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvv117. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

Regulation of the TMEPAI promoter by TCF7L2: the C-terminal tail of TCF7L2 is
essential to activate the TMEPAI gene.

Nakano N(1), Kato M(2), Itoh S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Showa Pharmaceutical University, 3-3165
Higashi-Tamagawagakuen, Machida, Tokyo 194-8543, Japan; Laboratory of
Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8577, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, 
Showa Pharmaceutical University, 3-3165 Higashi-Tamagawagakuen, Machida, Tokyo
194-8543, Japan; sitoh@ac.shoyaku.ac.jp.

We previously found that TCF7L2 could activate the TMEPAI gene efficiently,
whereas LEF1 could not nearly augment its transcription. When we comprehended the
functional difference(s) between TCF7L2 and LEF1 with respect to the activation
of the TMEPAI gene, the C-terminal tail of TCF7L2 was needed to reveal its
transcriptional activity as well as its interaction with Smad3. Consistently,
both TCF7/TCF7L2 and LEF1/TCF7L2 chimeric proteins exhibited an activity similar 
to TCF7L2 in transcription and Smad3 binding in contrast with LEF1 and TCF7. Our 
data elaborated on the diverse activity among TCF/LEF family members with respect
to the transcriptional regulation of the TMEPAI gene.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26590303  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Transl Med. 2015 Nov 14;13:361. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0718-3.

Identification of potential biomarkers to differentially diagnose solid
pseudopapillary tumors and pancreatic malignancies via a gene regulatory network.

Li P(1), Hu Y(2), Yi J(3), Li J(4), Yang J(5), Wang J(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Chemistry for Life Sciences, Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for
MicroRNA Biology and Biotechnology, NJU Advanced Institute for Life Sciences
(NAILS), School of life sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 
210023, China. lipengping2005@163.com. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Jinling
Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing University, 305 East Zhongshan Road,
Nanjing, 210002, China. huyuebing2000@163.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for
Life Sciences, Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA Biology and
Biotechnology, NJU Advanced Institute for Life Sciences (NAILS), School of life
sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 210023, China.
nju_yj@163.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Life Sciences, Jiangsu
Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA Biology and Biotechnology, NJU Advanced 
Institute for Life Sciences (NAILS), School of life sciences, Nanjing University,
163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 210023, China. jlee@nju.edu.cn. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Collaborative Innovation Center of
Chemistry for Life Sciences, Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA
Biology and Biotechnology, NJU Advanced Institute for Life Sciences (NAILS),
School of life sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 210023,
China. yangjie@nju.edu.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Life Sciences,
Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA Biology and Biotechnology, NJU
Advanced Institute for Life Sciences (NAILS), School of life sciences, Nanjing
University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 210023, China. jwang@nju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPN) are pancreatic tumors with low 
malignant potential and good prognosis. However, differential diagnosis between
SPN and pancreatic malignancies including pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor
(PanNET) and ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is difficult. This study tried to
identify candidate biomarkers for the distinction between SPN and the two
malignant pancreatic tumors by examining the gene regulatory network of SPN.
METHODS: The gene regulatory network for SPN was constructed by a co-expression
model. Genes that have been reported to be correlated with SPN were used as the
clues to hunt more SPN-related genes in the network according to a shortest path 
approach. By means of the K-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN) classifier evaluated
by the jackknife test, sets of genes to distinguish SPN and malignant pancreatic 
tumors were determined.
RESULTS: We took a new strategy to identify candidate biomarkers for
differentiating SPN from the two malignant pancreatic tumors PanNET and PDAC by
analyzing shortest paths among SPN-related genes in the gene regulatory network. 
43 new SPN-relevant genes were discovered, among which, we found hsa-miR-194 and 
hsa-miR-7 along with 7 transcription factors (TFs) such as SOX11, SMAD3 and SOX4 
etc. could correctly differentiate SPN from PanNET, while hsa-miR-204 and 4 TFs
such as SOX9, TCF7 and PPARD etc. were demonstrated as the potential markers for 
SPN versus PDAC. 14 genes were demonstrated to serve as the candidate biomarkers 
for distinguishing SPN from PanNET and PDAC when considering them as malignant
pancreatic tumors together.
CONCLUSION: This study provides new candidate genes related to SPN and the
potential biomarkers to differentiate SPN from PanNET and PDAC, which may help to
diagnose patients with SPN in clinical setting. Furthermore, candidate biomarkers
such as SOX11 and hsa-miR-204 which could cause cell proliferation but inhibit
invasion or metastasis may be of importance in understanding the molecular
mechanism of pancreatic oncogenesis and could be possible therapeutic targets for
malignant pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4650856
PMID: 26578390  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 2;4(11):1376-86. doi: 10.1242/bio.012088.

Both ciliary and non-ciliary functions of Foxj1a confer Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
in zebrafish left-right patterning.

Zhu P(1), Xu X(1), Lin X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA lin.xueying@mayo.edu.

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is implicated in left-right (LR) axis determination;
however, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Prompted by our recent
discovery that Wnt signaling regulates ciliogenesis in the zebrafish Kupffer's
vesicle (KV) via Foxj1a, a ciliogenic transcription factor, we decided to
elucidate functions of Foxj1a in Wnt-regulated LR pattern formation. We showed
that targeted injection of wnt8a mRNA into a single cell at the 128-cell stage is
sufficient to induce ectopic foxj1a expression and ectopic cilia. By
interrogating the transcription circuit of foxj1a regulation, we found that both 
Lef1 and Tcf7 bind to a consensus element in the foxj1a promoter region.
Depletion of Lef1 and Tcf7 inhibits foxj1a transcription in the dorsal forerunner
cells, downregulates cilia length and number in KV, and randomizes LR asymmetry. 
Targeted overexpression of a constitutively active form of Lef1 also induced an
ectopic protrusion that contains ectopic transcripts for sox17, foxj1a, and
charon, and ectopic monocilia. Further genetic studies using this ectopic
expression platform revealed two distinct functions of Foxj1a; mediating
Wnt-governed monocilia length elongation as well as charon transcription. The
novel Foxj1a-charon regulation is conserved in KV, and importantly, it is
independent of the canonical role of Foxj1a in the biosynthesis of motile cilia. 
Together with the known function of motile cilia movement in generating
asymmetric expression of charon, our data put forward a hypothesis that Foxj1a
confers both ciliary and non-ciliary functions of Wnt signaling, which converge
on charon to regulate LR pattern formation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728341
PMID: 26432885  [PubMed]


8. Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1011-2. doi: 10.1038/ni.3276.

ILC development: TCF-1 reporting in.

Kaye J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division of Immunology, Departments of Biomedical Sciences and
Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, California, USA, and the Department of Medicine, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California,
USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1044-50.

PMID: 26382863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3058-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500821. Epub 2015
Aug 31.

Transcription Factor 7 Limits Regulatory T Cell Generation in the Thymus.

Barra MM(1), Richards DM(1), Hansson J(2), Hofer AC(1), Delacher M(1), Hettinger 
J(1), Krijgsveld J(2), Feuerer M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Tolerance, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and. (2)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Immune Tolerance, Tumor
Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and
m.feuerer@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) differentiate in the thymus, but the mechanisms that
control this process are not fully understood. We generated a comprehensive
quantitative and differential proteome of murine Tregs and conventional T cells. 
We identified 5225 proteins, 164 of which were differentially expressed in Tregs.
Together with the comparative analysis of proteome and gene expression data, we
identified TCF7 as a promising candidate. Genetic elimination of transcription
factor 7 (TCF7) led to increased fractions of Tregs in the thymus. Reduced levels
of TCF7, found in the heterozygote, resulted in a greater potential for Treg
precursors to differentiate into the Treg lineage. In contrast, activation of
TCF7 through ß-catenin had the opposite effect. TCF7 levels influenced the
required TCR signaling strength of Treg precursors, and TCF7 deficiency broadened
the repertoire and allowed lower TCR affinities to be recruited into the Treg
lineage. FOXP3 was able to repress TCF7 protein expression. In summary, we
propose a regulatory role for TCF7 in limiting access to the Treg lineage.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26324778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Transl Med. 2015 Aug 20;13:273. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0617-7.

Roles of transcriptional factor 7 in production of inflammatory factors for lung 
diseases.

Zhu Y(1), Wang W(2), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Respiratory Research Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University 
Center for Clinical Bioinformatics, Fenglin Rd 180, Shanghai, 200032, China.
zhu.yichun@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (2)Shanghai Respiratory Research Institute,
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University Center for Clinical Bioinformatics, Fenglin 
Rd 180, Shanghai, 200032, China. william_95a@hotmail.com. (3)Shanghai Respiratory
Research Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University Center for Clinical
Bioinformatics, Fenglin Rd 180, Shanghai, 200032, China.
xiangdong.wang@clintransmed.com.

Lung disease is the major cause of death and hospitalization worldwide.
Transcription factors such as transcription factor 7 (TCF7) are involved in the
pathogenesis of lung diseases. TCF7 is important for T cell development and
differentiation, embryonic development, or tumorogenesis. Multiple TCF7 isoforms 
can be characterized by the full-length isoform (FL-TCF7) as a transcription
activator, or dominant negative isoform (dn-TCF7) as a transcription repressor.
TCF7 interacts with multiple proteins or target genes and participates in several
signal pathways critical for lung diseases. TCF7 is involved in pulmonary
infection, allergy or asthma through promoting T cells differentiating to Th2 or 
memory T cells. TCF7 also works in tissue repair and remodeling after acute lung 
injury. The dual roles of TCF7 in lung cancers were discussed and it is
associated with the cellular proliferation, invasion or metastasis. Thus, TCF7
plays critical roles in lung diseases and should be considered as a new
therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4543455
PMID: 26289446  [PubMed - in process]


11. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):900-1. doi: 10.1038/ni.3254.

TCF-1 and LEF-1 help launch the T(FH) program.

Kubo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biomedical Science, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba,
Japan and the RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS), Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan.

PMID: 26287589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 19;5:13107. doi: 10.1038/srep13107.

Age-related profiling of DNA methylation in CD8+ T cells reveals changes in
immune response and transcriptional regulator genes.

Tserel L(1), Kolde R(2), Limbach M(1), Tretyakov K(2), Kasela S(3), Kisand K(1), 
Saare M(1), Vilo J(2), Metspalu A(3), Milani L(4), Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedical and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (2)Institute of Computer Science, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (3)1] Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia [2] Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, 
Tartu, Estonia. (4)Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Human ageing affects the immune system resulting in an overall decline in
immunocompetence. Although all immune cells are affected during aging, the
functional capacity of T cells is most influenced and is linked to decreased
responsiveness to infections and impaired differentiation. We studied age-related
changes in DNA methylation and gene expression in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from
younger and older individuals. We observed marked difference between T cell
subsets, with increased number of methylation changes and higher methylome
variation in CD8+ T cells with age. The majority of age-related hypermethylated
sites were located at CpG islands of silent genes and enriched for repressive
histone marks. Specifically, in CD8+ T cell subset we identified strong inverse
correlation between methylation and expression levels in genes associated with T 
cell mediated immune response (LGALS1, IFNG, CCL5, GZMH, CCR7, CD27 and CD248)
and differentiation (SATB1, TCF7, BCL11B and RUNX3). Our results thus suggest the
link between age-related epigenetic changes and impaired T cell function.

PMCID: PMC4541364
PMID: 26286994  [PubMed - in process]


13. Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1044-50. doi: 10.1038/ni.3248. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

TCF-1 upregulation identifies early innate lymphoid progenitors in the bone
marrow.

Yang Q(1,)(2), Li F(3), Harly C(1), Xing S(3), Ye L(1), Xia X(2), Wang H(2), Wang
X(2), Yu S(3), Zhou X(3), Cam M(4), Xue HH(3), Bhandoola A(1).

Author information: 
(1)T-Cell Biology and Development Unit, Laboratory of Genome Integrity, Center
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa,
USA. (4)CCR Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1011-2.

The cellular and molecular events that drive the early development of innate
lymphoid cells (ILCs) remain poorly understood. We show that the transcription
factor TCF-1 is required for the efficient generation of all known adult ILC
subsets and their precursors. Using novel reporter mice, we identified a new
subset of early ILC progenitors (EILPs) expressing high amounts of TCF-1. EILPs
lacked efficient T and B lymphocyte potential but efficiently gave rise to NK
cells and all known adult helper ILC lineages, indicating that they are the
earliest ILC-committed progenitors identified so far. Our results suggest that
upregulation of TCF-1 expression denotes the earliest stage of ILC fate
specification. The discovery of EILPs provides a basis for deciphering additional
signals that specify ILC fate.

PMCID: PMC4575643
PMID: 26280998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):980-90. doi: 10.1038/ni.3226. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

LEF-1 and TCF-1 orchestrate T(FH) differentiation by regulating differentiation
circuits upstream of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6.

Choi YS(1), Gullicksrud JA(2), Xing S(3), Zeng Z(4), Shan Q(3), Li F(3), Love
PE(5), Peng W(4), Xue HH(2), Crotty S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, California, USA. (2)1] Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (4)Department of Physics,
The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (5)Section on Cellular and
Developmental Biology, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) are specialized effector CD4(+) T cells
that help B cells develop germinal centers (GCs) and memory. However, the
transcription factors that regulate the differentiation of T(FH) cells remain
incompletely understood. Here we report that selective loss of Lef1 or Tcf7
(which encode the transcription factor LEF-1 or TCF-1, respectively) resulted in 
T(FH) cell defects, while deletion of both Lef1 and Tcf7 severely impaired the
differentiation of T(FH) cells and the formation of GCs. Forced expression of
LEF-1 enhanced T(FH) differentiation. LEF-1 and TCF-1 coordinated such
differentiation by two general mechanisms. First, they established the
responsiveness of naive CD4(+) T cells to T(FH) cell signals. Second, they
promoted early T(FH) differentiation via the multipronged approach of sustaining 
expression of the cytokine receptors IL-6Ra and gp130, enhancing expression of
the costimulatory receptor ICOS and promoting expression of the transcriptional
repressor Bcl6.

PMCID: PMC4545301
PMID: 26214741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Diabetes. 2015 Nov;64(11):3659-69. doi: 10.2337/db14-1924. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Elevated Hepatic miR-22-3p Expression Impairs Gluconeogenesis by Silencing the
Wnt-Responsive Transcription Factor Tcf7.

Kaur K(1), Vig S(2), Srivastava R(3), Mishra A(3), Singh VP(1), Srivastava AK(3),
Datta M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India. (2)Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research, Training and Development Complex, Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research Campus, Taramani, Chennai, India.
(3)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Central Drug Research Institute,
Jankipuram Extension, Lucknow, India. (4)Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research, Training and Development Complex, Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research Campus, Taramani, Chennai, India
mdatta@igib.res.in.

Levels of miR-22-3p, a highly abundant hepatic microRNA, are abnormally increased
in mouse models of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, yet its contribution
to deregulated hepatic metabolism under diseased states is not well understood.
Here, we unravel a novel link between elevated hepatic miR-22-3p expression and
impaired gluconeogenesis in diabetic db/db mice via the regulation of Tcf7
(transcription factor 7). Our data demonstrate that miR-22-3p binds to the 3'
untranslated region of TCF7 and downregulates it, and this microRNA-mediated
regulation of TCF7 increases the expression of enzymes of the gluconeogenic
pathway in HepG2 cells. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of TCF7 in HepG2
cells also causes similar upregulation of gluconeogenic genes. Furthermore, in
vivo silencing of miR-22-3p by antagomiR administration lowered random as well as
fasting glucose levels in diabetic mice. miR-22-3p antagonism improved glucose
tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Importantly, the hepatic Tcf7 levels were
restored along with reduced hepatic glucose output, which was also reflected by
the decreased expression of gluconeogenic genes. Our results support a critical
role for miR-22-3p and its target, Tcf7, in the pathogenesis of diabetes by
upregulating gluconeogenesis. Moreover, targeting the miR-22/Tcf7/Wnt axis might 
hold therapeutic potential for the treatment of altered hepatic physiology during
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 26193896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1071-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402402. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

Cell-Intrinsic gp130 Signaling on CD4+ T Cells Shapes Long-Lasting Antiviral
Immunity.

Harker JA(1), Wong KA(2), Dolgoter A(2), Zuniga EI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 j.harker@imperial.ac.uk
eizuniga@ucsd.edu. (2)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

The IL-6 cytokine family utilizes the common signal transduction molecule gp130, 
which can mediate a diverse range of outcomes. To clarify the role of gp130
signaling in vivo during acute viral infection, we infected Cd4-cre Il6st(fl/fl) 
mice, in which gp130 is conditionally ablated in T cells, with acute lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus. We found that by day 12, but not at day 8, after
infection the number of virus-specific CD4(+) T cells was reduced in the absence 
of gp130, and this was sustained for up to 2 mo postinfection. Additionally,
gp130-deficient T follicular helper cells had lower expression of Maf, IL-21, and
ICOS, and this was accompanied by a reduction in the proportion of germinal
center B cells and plasmablasts. Remarkably, at 2 mo postinfection the proportion
of IgG2a/c(+) memory B cells and the systemic levels of lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus-specific IgG2 Abs were dramatically decreased, whereas
there was a corresponding increase in IgG1(+) memory B cells and virus-specific
IgG1 Abs. In the same animals gp130-deficient virus-specific CD8(+) T cells
showed a reduced proportion of memory cells, which expressed lower levels of
Tcf7, and displayed diminished recall responses on secondary infection. Mixed
bone marrow chimeras revealed that the aforementioned gp130 effects on CD4(+) T
cells were cell intrinsic. Overall, our data show that gp130 signaling in T cells
influences the quantity and quality of long-lasting CD4(+) T cell responses as
well as CD8(+) T cell- and Ab-mediated immunity after acute viral infection.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4506854
PMID: 26085685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20697-710.

AF1q is a novel TCF7 co-factor which activates CD44 and promotes breast cancer
metastasis.

Park J(1), Schlederer M(2,)(3), Schreiber M(4), Ice R(5,)(6), Merkel O(7), Bilban
M(8), Hofbauer S(4), Kim S(1), Addison J(5,)(6), Zou J(9), Ji C(9), Bunting
ST(10), Wang Z(10), Shoham M(11), Huang G(12), Bago-Horvath Z(3), Gibson LF(5),
Rojanasakul Y(5,)(13), Remick S(5), Ivanov A(5,)(6), Pugacheva E(5,)(6), Bunting 
KD(10), Moriggl R(2,)(14), Kenner L(2,)(3,)(15), Tse W(1).

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Division of Blood and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Department of Medicine, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA. (2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research,
Vienna, Austria. (3)Clinical Institute for Pathology, Medical University Vienna, 
Austria. (4)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (5)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West Virginia University Health
Science Center, Morgantown, WV, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA. (7)National Center for Tumor 
Diseases, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna and Core Facility Genomics,
Core Facilities, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (9)Department of 
Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong, PR China. (10)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center of Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta and Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
(11)Case Western University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(12)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(13)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, West Virginia University School of
Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA. (14)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (15)Unit of Pathology of Laboratory Animals (UPLA), University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.

AF1q is an MLL fusion partner that was identified from acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) patients with t (1; 11) (q21; q23) chromosomal abnormality. The function of
AF1q is not yet fully known, however, elevated AF1q expression is associated with
poor clinical outcomes in various malignancies. Here, we show that AF1q
specifically binds to T-cell-factor-7 (TCF7) in the Wnt signaling pathway and
results in transcriptional activation of CD44 as well as multiple downstream
targets of the TCF7/LEF1. In addition, enhanced AF1q expression promotes breast
cancer cell proliferation, migration, mammosphere formation, and
chemo-resistance. In xenograft models, enforced AF1q expression in breast cancer 
cells also promotes liver metastasis and lung colonization. In a cohort of 63
breast cancer patients, higher percentages of AF1q-positive cancer cells in
primary sites were associated with significantly poorer overall survival (OS),
disease-free survival (DFS), and brain metastasis-free survival (b-MFS). Using
paired primary/metastatic samples from the same patients, we demonstrate that
AF1q-positive breast cancer cells become dynamically dominant in the metastatic
sites compared to the primary sites. Our findings indicate that breast cancer
cells with a hyperactive AF1q/TCF7/CD44 regulatory axis in the primary sites may 
represent "metastatic founder cells" which have invasive properties.

PMCID: PMC4653036
PMID: 26079538  [PubMed - in process]


18. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 21;16(5):11699-712. doi: 10.3390/ijms160511699.

MicroRNA-24 Regulates Osteogenic Differentiation via Targeting T-Cell Factor-1.

Zhao W(1), Wu C(2), Dong Y(3), Ma Y(4), Jin Y(5), Ji Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. weigongzhao@126.com.
(2)Department of Immunology and Pathogenic Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an 710061, China.
caijunwucc@163.com. (3)Department of Immunology and Pathogenic Biology, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an
710061, China. yanyingdong11@163.com. (4)Department of Immunology and Pathogenic 
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health
Science Center, Xi'an 710061, China. yunfengma126@163.com. (5)Department of
Pathology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710004, China. yaofengjin@126.com. (6)Department of Immunology 
and Pathogenic Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong
University Health Science Center, Xi'an 710061, China. yanhongjixian@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to have diverse biological roles in
regulating many biological processes, including osteogenic differentiation. In
the present study, we identified that miR-24 was a critical regulator during
osteogenic differentiation. We found that overexpression of miR-24 significantly 
inhibited osteogenic differentiation, which decreased alkaline phosphatase
activity, matrix mineralization and the expression of osteogenic differentiation 
markers. In contrast, inhibition of miR-24 exhibited an opposite effect.
Furthermore, we delineated that miR-24 regulates post-transcriptionals of T-cell 
factor-1 (Tcf-1) via targeting the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of Tcf-1 mRNA.
MiR-24 was further found to regulate the protein expression of Tcf-1 in the
murine osteoprogenitors cells and bone mesenchymal stem cells. Additionally, the 
positive effect of miR-24 suppression on osteoblast differentiation was
apparently abrogated by Tcf-1 silencing. Taken together, our data suggest that
miR-24 participates in osteogenic differentiation by targeting and regulating
Tcf-1 expression in osteoblastic cells.

PMCID: PMC4463725
PMID: 26006243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2015 May 19;10(5):e0125611. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125611.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic instability of osteosarcoma cell lines in culture: impact on the
prediction of metastasis relevant genes.

Muff R(1), Rath P(2), Ram Kumar RM(1), Husmann K(1), Born W(1), Baudis M(2),
Fuchs B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Orthopedic Research, Balgrist University Hospital, Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma is a rare but highly malignant cancer of the bone. As a 
consequence, the number of established cell lines used for experimental in vitro 
and in vivo osteosarcoma research is limited and the value of these cell lines
relies on their stability during culture. Here we investigated the stability in
gene expression by microarray analysis and array genomic hybridization of three
low metastatic cell lines and derivatives thereof with increased metastatic
potential using cells of different passages.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The osteosarcoma cell lines showed altered gene expression
during in vitro culture, and it was more pronounced in two metastatic cell lines 
compared to the respective parental cells. Chromosomal instability contributed in
part to the altered gene expression in SAOS and LM5 cells with low and high
metastatic potential. To identify metastasis-relevant genes in a background of
passage-dependent altered gene expression, genes involved in "Pathways in cancer"
that were consistently regulated under all passage comparisons were evaluated.
Genes belonging to "Hedgehog signaling pathway" and "Wnt signaling pathway" were 
significantly up-regulated, and IHH, WNT10B and TCF7 were found up-regulated in
all three metastatic compared to the parental cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Considerable instability during culture in terms of gene expression 
and chromosomal aberrations was observed in osteosarcoma cell lines. The use of
cells from different passages and a search for genes consistently regulated in
early and late passages allows the analysis of metastasis-relevant genes despite 
the observed instability in gene expression in osteosarcoma cell lines during
culture.

PMCID: PMC4438062
PMID: 25992885  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS One. 2015 May 15;10(5):e0127038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127038.
eCollection 2015.

Premature expression of foxp3 in double-negative thymocytes.

Barra MM(1), Richards DM(1), Hofer AC(1), Delacher M(1), Feuerer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Tolerance, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Peripheral immune regulation depends on the generation of thymic-derived
regulatory T (tTreg) cells to maintain self-tolerance and to counterbalance
overshooting immune responses. The expression of the Treg lineage defining
transcription factor Foxp3 in developing tTreg cells depends on TCR signaling
during the thymic selection process of these T cells. In this study, we
surprisingly identify Foxp3+ immature thymocytes at the double-negative (DN)
stage in transcription factor 7 (Tcf7)-deficient mice. These Foxp3+ cells did not
express a TCR (ß or <U+03B3>d chains), CD3 or CD5 and therefore these cells were true DN
cells. Further investigation of this phenomenon in a transgenic TCR model showed 
that Foxp3-expressing DN cells could not respond to TCR stimulation in vivo.
These data suggest that Foxp3 expression in these DN cells occurred independently
of TCR signaling. Interestingly, these Foxp3+ DN cells were located in a
transition state between DN1 and DN2 (CD4-CD8-CD3-TCR-CD44highCD25low). Our
results indicate that Tcf7 is involved in preventing the premature expression of 
Foxp3 in DN thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC4433242
PMID: 25978037  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11561-74.

Inhibition of ß-catenin signaling suppresses pancreatic tumor growth by
disrupting nuclear ß-catenin/TCF-1 complex: critical role of STAT-3.

Pramanik KC(1), Fofaria NM(1), Gupta P(1), Ranjan A(1), Kim SH(2), Srivastava
SK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Cancer Biology Center, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA. (2)Cancer Preventive 
Material Development Research Center, College of Korean Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Kyunghee University, Dongdaemun-ku, Seoul 131-701, South Korea.

Aberrant activation of ß-catenin/TCF signaling is related to the invasiveness of 
pancreatic cancer. In the present study, we evaluated the effect of capsaicin on 
ß-catenin/TCF signaling. In a concentration and time-dependent study, we observed
that capsaicin treatment inhibits the activation of dishevelled (Dsh) protein
DvI-1 in L3.6PL, PanC-1 and MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells. Capsaicin
treatment induced GSK-3ß by inhibiting its phosphorylation and further activated 
APC and Axin multicomplex, leading to the proteasomal degradation of ß-catenin.
Expression of TCF-1 and ß-catenin-responsive proteins, c-Myc and cyclin D1 also
decreased in response to capsaicin treatment. Pre-treatment of cells with MG-132 
blocked capsaicin-mediated proteasomal degradation of ß-catenin. To establish the
involvement of ß-catenin in capsaicin-induced apoptosis, cells were treated with 
LiCl or SB415286, inhibitors of GSK-3ß. Our results reveal that capsaicin
treatment suppressed LiCl or SB415286-mediated activation of ß-catenin signaling.
Our results further showed that capsaicin blocked nuclear translocation of
ß-catenin, TCF-1 and p-STAT-3 (Tyr705). The immunoprecipitation results indicated
that capsaicin treatment reduced the interaction of ß-catenin and TCF-1 in the
nucleus. Moreover, capsaicin treatment significantly decreased the
phosphorylation of STAT-3 at Tyr705. Interestingly, STAT-3 over expression or
STAT-3 activation by IL-6, significantly increased the levels of ß-catenin and
attenuated the effects of capsaicin in inhibiting ß-catenin signaling. Finally,
capsaicin mediated inhibition of orthotopic tumor growth was associated with
inhibition of ß-catenin/TCF-1 signaling. Taken together, our results suggest that
capsaicin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells was associated with
inhibition of ß-catenin signaling due to the dissociation of ß-catenin/TCF-1
complex and the process was orchestrated by STAT-3.

PMCID: PMC4484476
PMID: 25869100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):413-25. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.03.003.

The long noncoding RNA lncTCF7 promotes self-renewal of human liver cancer stem
cells through activation of Wnt signaling.

Wang Y(1), He L(2), Du Y(1), Zhu P(1), Huang G(3), Luo J(4), Yan X(1), Ye B(1),
Li C(1), Xia P(1), Zhang G(1), Tian Y(4), Chen R(5), Fan Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (3)CAS Key Laboratory of
Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of RNA Biology, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (5)CAS Key Laboratory of RNA Biology,
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
Electronic address: crs@sun5.ibp.ac.cn. (6)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and
Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
Electronic address: fanz@moon.ibp.ac.cn.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most prevalent subtype of liver cancer, and
it is characterized by a high rate of recurrence and heterogeneity. Liver cancer 
stem cells (CSCs) may well contribute to both of these pathological properties,
but the mechanisms underlying their self-renewal and maintenance are poorly
understood. Here, using transcriptome microarray analysis, we identified a long
noncoding RNA (lncRNA) termed lncTCF7 that is highly expressed in HCC tumors and 
liver CSCs. LncTCF7 is required for liver CSC self-renewal and tumor propagation.
Mechanistically, lncTCF7 recruits the SWI/SNF complex to the promoter of TCF7 to 
regulate its expression, leading to activation of Wnt signaling. Our data suggest
that lncTCF7-mediated Wnt signaling primes liver CSC self-renewal and tumor
propagation. In sum, therefore, we have identified an lncRNA-based Wnt signaling 
regulatory circuit that promotes tumorigenic activity in liver cancer stem cells,
highlighting the role that lncRNAs can play in tumor growth and propagation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25842979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J ECT. 2015 Dec;31(4):234-7. doi: 10.1097/YCT.0000000000000234.

Microarray Analysis of Human Blood During Electroconvulsive Therapy.

Kaneko T(1), Kanazawa T, Nishiguchi M, Kikuyama H, Tsutsumi A, Uenishi H,
Kawabata Y, Kawashige S, Nishizawa Y, Maruyama S, Koh J, Yoneda H.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Neuropsychiatry, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki;
Shin-Abuyama Hospital, Takatsuki and Graduate School of Psychology, Kansai
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is currently regarded as a
significant treatment option for intractable psychiatric disorders, such as
catatonic schizophrenia or treatment-resistant depression; however, the
underlying molecular mechanism for its therapeutic effect remains obscure.
METHODS: Employing microarray analysis (Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array;
Affymetrix, United States) of cDNA derived from the peripheral blood of patients 
with catatonic schizophrenia (n = 5), we detected a significant change in 145
genes (0.68%) before and after modified ECT (mECT). Moreover, we performed
quantitative polymerase chain reaction validation of genes that had previously
been suggested to be functionally related to schizophrenia.
RESULTS: Of 4 genes examined (AKT3, TCF7, PPP3R1, and GADD45B), only TCF7 was
increased during the mECT procedure (P = 0.0025).
DISCUSSION: This study describes the first attempt to uncover the molecular
mechanism of mECT using a microarray assay of mRNA derived from peripheral blood,
and our results suggest that the TCF family may play a role in the functional
mechanism of mECT.

PMCID: PMC4652629
PMID: 25807342  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 13;11(3):e1004740. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004740.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of CD8+ T cell differentiation following SIV<U+0394>nef vaccination by 
transcription factor expression profiling.

Billingsley JM(1), Rajakumar PA(1), Connole MA(2), Salisch NC(3), Adnan S(1),
Kuzmichev YV(2), Hong HS(2), Reeves RK(4), Kang HJ(5), Li W(5), Li Q(6), Haase
AT(7), Johnson RP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes National
Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America. (2)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Crucell Holland
BV, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Division of Immunology, New England Primate
Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Division of Preventive and Behavioral Medicine, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Nebraska
Center for Virology and School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America. (7)University of
Minnesota, Microbiology Department, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America. (8)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1004968.

The onset of protective immunity against pathogenic SIV challenge in
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated macaques is delayed for 15-20 weeks, a process that is related
to qualitative changes in CD8+ T cell responses induced by SIV<U+0394>nef. As a novel
approach to characterize cell differentiation following vaccination, we used
multi-target qPCR to measure transcription factor expression in naïve and memory 
subsets of CD8++ T cells, and in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells obtained from
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated or wild type SIVmac239-infected macaques. Unsupervised
clustering of expression profiles organized naïve and memory CD8+ T cells into
groups concordant with cell surface phenotype. Transcription factor expression
patterns in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells in SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated animals were distinct
from those observed in purified CD8+ T cell subsets obtained from naïve animals, 
and were intermediate to expression profiles of purified central memory and
effector memory T cells. Expression of transcription factors elicited by SIV<U+0394>nef 
vaccination also varied over time: cells obtained at later time points,
temporally associated with greater protection, appeared more central-memory like 
than cells obtained at earlier time points, which appeared more effector
memory-like. Expression of transcription factors associated with effector
differentiation, such as ID2 and RUNX3, were decreased over time, while
expression of transcription factors associated with quiescence or memory
differentiation, such as TCF7, BCOR and EOMES, increased. CD8+ T cells specific
for a more conserved epitope expressed higher levels of TBX21 and BATF, and
appeared more effector-like than cells specific for an escaped epitope,
consistent with continued activation by replicating vaccine virus. These data
suggest transcription factor expression profiling is a novel method that can
provide additional data complementary to the analysis of memory cell
differentiation based on classical phenotypic markers. Additionally, these data
support the hypothesis that ongoing stimulation by SIV<U+0394>nef promotes a distinct
protective balance of CD8+ T cell differentiation and activation states.

PMCID: PMC4358830
PMID: 25768938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Acta Biochim Pol. 2015;62(1):123-6. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Expression of RUNX2 and its signaling partners TCF7, FGFR1/2 in cleidocranial
dysplasia.

Pawlowska E(1), Wójcik KA(2), Synowiec E(2), Szczepanska J(3), Blasiak J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Medical University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland. (3)Department of Pediatric Dentistry,
Medical University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland.

RUNX2 is a member of the PEBP2/CBF transcription factors family controlling the
expression of genes whose products are essential for bone formation. Mutations in
the RUNX2 gene may be associated with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), a rare
skeletal disease characterized by stature aberrations, delayed closure of the
cranial sutures, hypoplastic or aplastic clavicles, and multiple dental
abnormalities. As RUNX2 is involved in many signaling pathways, we hypothesize
that CCD may be associated with their changes. We determined the expression of
RUNX2 and its signaling partners TCF7, involved in canonical Wnt signaling, and
fibroblast growth factor receptors, FGFR1 and FGFR2 in periodontum of CCD
patients and control individuals. We did not observe any differences between the 
level of RUNX2, TCF7 and FGFR1/2 mRNA, determined by real-time PCR, in CDD
patients and controls. Therefore, RUNX2 signaling pathways with their partners
TCF7 and FGFR1/2 may not be involved in CCD pathogenesis.

PMID: 25738174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Annu Rev Immunol. 2015;33:607-42. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-112032.
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Transcriptional regulation of innate and adaptive lymphocyte lineages.

De Obaldia ME(1), Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

The lymphocyte family has expanded significantly in recent years to include not
only the adaptive lymphocytes (T cells, B cells) and NK cells, but also several
additional innate lymphoid cell (ILC) types. ILCs lack clonally distributed
antigen receptors characteristic of adaptive lymphocytes and instead respond
exclusively to signaling via germline-encoded receptors. ILCs resemble T cells
more closely than any other leukocyte lineage at the transcriptome level and
express many elements of the core T cell transcriptional program, including
Notch, Gata3, Tcf7, and Bcl11b. We present our current understanding of the
shared and distinct transcriptional regulatory mechanisms involved in the
development of adaptive T lymphocytes and closely related ILCs. We discuss the
possibility that a core set of transcriptional regulators common to ILCs and T
cells establish enhancers that enable implementation of closely aligned effector 
pathways. Studies of the transcriptional regulation of lymphopoiesis will support
the development of novel therapeutic approaches to correct early lymphoid
developmental defects and aberrant lymphocyte function.

PMID: 25665079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):2216-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419198112. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

TCF1 and LEF1 act as T-cell intrinsic HTLV-1 antagonists by targeting Tax.

Ma G(1), Yasunaga J(2), Akari H(3), Matsuoka M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; and. (2)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus
Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; and
mmatsuok@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp jyasunag@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (3)Center for Human
Evolution Modeling Research, Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University,
Inuyama, Aichi 484-8506, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a delta-type retrovirus that
induces malignant and inflammatory diseases during its long persistence in vivo. 
HTLV-1 can infect various kinds of cells; however, HTLV-1 provirus is
predominantly found in peripheral CD4 T cells in vivo. Here we find that TCF1 and
LEF1, two Wnt transcription factors that are specifically expressed in T cells,
inhibit viral replication through antagonizing Tax functions. TCF1 and LEF1 can
each interact with Tax and inhibit Tax-dependent viral expression and activation 
of NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1. As a result, HTLV-1 replication is suppressed in the presence 
of either TCF1 or LEF1. On the other hand, T-cell activation suppresses the
expression of both TCF1 and LEF1, and this suppression enables Tax to function as
an activator. We analyzed the thymus of a simian T-cell leukemia virus type 1
(STLV-1) infected Japanese macaque, and found a negative correlation between
proviral load and TCF1/LEF1 expression in various T-cell subsets, supporting the 
idea that TCF1 and LEF1 negatively regulate HTLV-1 replication and the
proliferation of infected cells. Thus, this study identified TCF1 and LEF1 as Tax
antagonistic factors in vivo, a fact which may critically influence the
peripheral T-cell tropism of this virus.

PMCID: PMC4343127
PMID: 25646419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;14:26. doi: 10.1186/s12943-014-0285-x.

Genome-wide analyses identify KLF4 as an important negative regulator in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia through directly inhibiting T-cell associated genes.

Li W(1,)(2), Jiang Z(3,)(4), Li T(5,)(6), Wei X(7,)(8), Zheng Y(9,)(10), Wu
D(11,)(12), Yang L(13,)(14), Chen S(15,)(16), Xu B(17), Zhong M(18), Jiang J(19),
Hu Y(20), Su H(21), Zhang M(22), Huang X(23), Geng S(24), Weng J(25), Du X(26),
Liu P(27), Li Y(28,)(29), Liu H(30), Yao Y(31), Li P(32,)(33).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510530, China. li_wei2011@gibh.ac.cn. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China.
li_wei2011@gibh.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. jiang_zhiwu@gibh.ac.cn.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. jiang_zhiwu@gibh.ac.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan
Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China.
li_tianzhong@gibh.ac.cn. (6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and 
Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China. li_tianzhong@gibh.ac.cn. (7)Key
Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510530, China. wei_xinru@gibh.ac.cn. (8)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China.
wei_xinru@gibh.ac.cn. (9)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. zheng_yi@gibh.ac.cn.
(10)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. zheng_yi@gibh.ac.cn. (11)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan
Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. wu_donghai@gibh.ac.cn.
(12)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. wu_donghai@gibh.ac.cn. (13)Institute of Hematology, Medical
College, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnyanglijian@163.com.
(14)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnyanglijian@163.com. (15)Institute of
Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
jnshaohuachen@163.com. (16)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry
of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnshaohuachen@163.com. 
(17)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
510515, Guangzhou, China. xubingzhangjian@126.com. (18)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Nan Fang Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
510515, China. zhongmei@fimmu.com. (19)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. jiang1@hotmail.com. (20)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. yufenghu@hust.edu.cn. (21)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. suhexiu@hust.edu.cn. (22)Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen University
Town, Shenzhen, 518055, China. minjie.zhang@gmail.com. (23)Peking University
People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of Hematology, No. 11 Xizhimen
South St., Beijing, 100044, China. xjhrm@medmail.com.cn. (24)Department of
Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China.
gsx76@126.com. (25)Department of Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's
Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China. wsswjy@sina.com. (26)Department of
Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China.
miyadu@hotmail.com. (27)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10
1HH, England, UK. pl2@sanger.ac.uk. (28)Institute of Hematology, Medical College,
Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. yangqiuli@hotmail.com. (29)Key
Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, 510632, China. yangqiuli@hotmail.com. (30)School of Pharmacy, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road,
Wuhan, 430030, China. hudanliu@hust.edu.cn. (31)Drug Discovery Pipeline,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 
Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China.
yao_yao@gibh.ac.cn. (32)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.
(33)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) induces tumorigenesis or suppresses
tumor growth in a tissue-dependent manner. However, the roles of KLF4 in
hematological malignancies and the mechanisms of action are not fully understood.
METHODS: Inducible KLF4-overexpression Jurkat cell line combined with mouse
models bearing cell-derived xenografts and primary T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) cells from four patients were used to assess the functional role
of KLF4 in T-ALL cells in vitro and in vivo. A genome-wide RNA-seq analysis was
conducted to identify genes regulated by KLF4 in T-ALL cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) PCR was used to determine direct binding sites of KLF4
in T-ALL cells.
RESULTS: Here we reveal that KLF4 induced apoptosis through the BCL2/BCLXL
pathway in human T-ALL cell lines and primary T-ALL specimens. In consistence,
mice engrafted with KLF4-overexpressing T-ALL cells exhibited prolonged survival.
Interestingly, the KLF4-induced apoptosis in T-ALL cells was compromised in
xenografts but the invasion capacity of KLF4-expressing T-ALL cells to hosts was 
dramatically dampened. We found that KLF4 overexpression inhibited T
cell-associated genes including NOTCH1, BCL11B, GATA3, and TCF7. Further
mechanistic studies revealed that KLF4 directly bound to the promoters of NOTCH1,
BCL2, and CXCR4 and suppressed their expression. Additionally, KLF4 induced
SUMOylation and degradation of BCL11B.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that KLF4 as a major transcription factor that
suppresses the expression of T-cell associated genes, thus inhibiting T-ALL
progression.

PMCID: PMC4350611
PMID: 25644173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 23;9(12):e115803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115803.
eCollection 2014.

T cell factor-1 controls the lifetime of CD4+ CD8+ thymocytes in vivo and distal 
T cell receptor a-chain rearrangement required for NKT cell development.

Sharma A(1), Berga-Bolaños R(1), Sen JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Cells and Inflammation Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, 21224, United States of America.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a component of innate and adaptive immune
systems implicated in immune, autoimmune responses and in the control of obesity 
and cancer. NKT cells develop from common CD4+ CD8+ double positive (DP)
thymocyte precursors after the rearrangement and expression of T cell receptor
(TCR) Va14-Ja18 gene. Temporal regulation and late appearance of Va14-Ja18
rearrangement in immature DP thymocytes has been demonstrated. However, the
precise control of lifetime of DP thymocytes in vivo that enables distal
rearrangements remains incompletely defined. Here we demonstrate that T cell
factor (TCF)-1, encoded by the Tcf7 gene, is critical for the extended lifetime
of DP thymocytes. TCF-1-deficient DP thymocytes fail to undergo TCR Va14-Ja18
rearrangement and produce significantly fewer NKT cells. Ectopic expression of
Bcl-xL permits Va14-Ja18 rearrangement and rescues NKT cell development. We
report that TCF-1 regulates expression of ROR<U+03B3>t, which regulates DP thymocyte
survival by controlling expression of Bcl-xL. We posit that TCF-1 along with its 
cofactors controls the lifetime of DP thymocytes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4275257
PMID: 25536344  [PubMed - in process]


30. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):441-57.

MicroRNA-34a regulates WNT/TCF7 signaling and inhibits bone metastasis in
Ras-activated prostate cancer.

Chen WY(1), Liu SY(2), Chang YS(3), Yin JJ(4), Yeh HL(5), Mouhieddine TH(6),
Hadadeh O(6), Abou-Kheir W(6), Liu YN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan. Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Acupuncture and
Manipulation, College of International Education, Tianjin University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China. (3)Graduate Institute of Cancer
Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (5)Institute 
of Information System and Applications, National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiological Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

Aberrant activation of Ras and WNT signaling are key events that have been shown 
to be up-regulated in prostate cancer that has metastasized to the bone. However,
the regulatory mechanism of combinatorial Ras and WNT signaling in advanced
prostate cancer is still unclear. TCF7, a WNT signaling-related gene, has been
implicated as a critical factor in bone metastasis, and here we show that TCF7 is
a direct target of miR-34a. In samples of prostate cancer patients, miR-34a
levels are inversely correlated with TCF7 expression and a WNT dependent gene
signature. Ectopic miR-34a expression inhibited bone metastasis and reduced
cancer cell proliferation in a Ras-dependent xenograft model. We demonstrate that
miR-34a can directly interfere with the gene expression of the anti-proliferative
BIRC5, by targeting BIRC5 3'UTR. Importantly, BIRC5 overexpression was sufficient
to reconstitute anti-apoptotic signaling in cells expressing high levels of
miR-34a. In prostate cancer patients, we found that BIRC5 levels were positively 
correlated with a Ras signaling signature expression. Our data show that the bone
metastasis and anti-apoptotic effects found in Ras signaling-activated prostate
cancer cells require miR-34a deficiency, which in turn aids in cell survival by
activating the WNT and anti-apoptotic signaling pathways thereby inducing TCF7
and BIRC5 expressions.

PMCID: PMC4381606
PMID: 25436980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13615-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1186. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The TCF C-clamp DNA binding domain expands the Wnt transcriptome via alternative 
target recognition.

Hoverter NP(1), Zeller MD(2), McQuade MM(1), Garibaldi A(1), Busch A(1), Selwan
EM(1), Hertel KJ(1), Baldi P(2), Waterman ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (2)Department of Information and Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA
92697, USA marian.waterman@uci.edu.

LEF/TCFs direct the final step in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling by recruiting
ß-catenin to genes for activation of transcription. Ancient, non-vertebrate TCFs 
contain two DNA binding domains, a High Mobility Group box for recognition of the
Wnt Response Element (WRE; 5'-CTTTGWWS-3') and the C-clamp domain for recognition
of the GC-rich Helper motif (5'-RCCGCC-3'). Two vertebrate TCFs (TCF-1/TCF7 and
TCF-4/TCF7L2) use the C-clamp as an alternatively spliced domain to regulate
cell-cycle progression, but how the C-clamp influences TCF binding and activity
genome-wide is not known. Here, we used a doxycycline inducible system with
ChIP-seq to assess how the C-clamp influences human TCF1 binding genome-wide.
Metabolic pulse-labeling of nascent RNA with 4'Thiouridine was used with RNA-seq 
to connect binding to the Wnt transcriptome. We find that the C-clamp enables
targeting to a greater number of gene loci for stronger occupancy and
transcription regulation. The C-clamp uses Helper sites concurrently with WREs
for gene targeting, but it also targets TCF1 to sites that do not have readily
identifiable canonical WREs. The coupled ChIP-seq/4'Thiouridine-seq analysis
identified new Wnt target genes, including additional regulators of cell
proliferation. Thus, C-clamp containing isoforms of TCFs are potent
transcriptional regulators with an expanded transcriptome directed by
C-clamp-Helper site interactions.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267635
PMID: 25414359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Crit Care. 2014 Nov 19;18(6):508. doi: 10.1186/s13054-014-0508-y.

Dynamic gene expressions of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in patients with
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a preliminary study.

Wu X(1), Sun X(2), Chen C(3), Bai C(4), Wang X(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Fenglin Rd. No180, 200032, Shanghai, China. physicianwuxd@126.com. (2)Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University and The First Hospital,
Nanbaixiang, 325000, Wenzhou, China. sunxiaoru@outlook.com. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University and The First Hospital,
Nanbaixiang, 325000, Wenzhou, China. chenchengshui@gmail.com. (4)Shanghai
Institute of Clinical Bioinformatics, Fudan University Center for Clinical
Bioinformatics, Shanghai Respiratory Research Medicine, Fenglin Rd. No 180,
200032, Shanghai, China. bai.chunxue@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (5)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University and The First Hospital,
Nanbaixiang, 325000, Wenzhou, China. xiangdong.wang@clintransmed.org. (6)Shanghai
Institute of Clinical Bioinformatics, Fudan University Center for Clinical
Bioinformatics, Shanghai Respiratory Research Medicine, Fenglin Rd. No 180,
200032, Shanghai, China. xiangdong.wang@clintransmed.org.

INTRODUCTION: Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(AECOPD) is a serious event that is responsible for the progress of the disease, 
increases in medical costs and high mortality.
METHODS: The aim of the present study was to identify AECOPD-specific biomarkers 
by evaluating the dynamic gene expression profiling of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with AECOPD on days 1, 3 and 10 after
hospital admission and to compare the derived data with data from healthy
controls or patients with stable COPD.
RESULTS: We found that 14 genes were co-differentially upregulated and 2
downregulated greater than 10-fold in patients with COPD or AECOPD compared with 
the healthy individuals. Eight co-differentially upregulated genes and six
downregulated genes were identified as a panel of AECOPD-specific genes.
Downregulation of TCF7 in PBMCs was found to be associated with the severity of
COPD. Dynamic changes of Aminolevulinate-delta-synthase 2 and carbonic anhydrase 
I had similar patterns of Digital Evaluation Score System scores and may serve as
potential genes of interest during the course of AECOPD.
CONCLUSION: Thus, our findings indicate a panel of altered gene expression
patterns in PBMCs that can be used as AECOPD-specific dynamic biomarkers to
monitor the course of AECOPD.

PMCID: PMC4305227
PMID: 25407108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e109291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109291.
eCollection 2014.

Systematic analysis of blood cell transcriptome in end-stage chronic respiratory 
diseases.

Chesné J(1), Danger R(2), Botturi K(1), Reynaud-Gaubert M(3), Mussot S(4), Stern 
M(5), Danner-Boucher I(6), Mornex JF(7), Pison C(8), Dromer C(9), Kessler R(10), 
Dahan M(11), Brugière O(12), Le Pavec J(4), Perros F(13), Humbert M(13), Gomez
C(3), Brouard S(2), Magnan A(1); COLT Consortium.

Collaborators: Antoine M, Jougon J, Velly JF, Rozé H, Blanchard E, Dromer C,
Antoine M, Cappello M, Souilamas R, Ruiz M, Sokolow Y, Vanden Eynden F, Van
Nooten G, Barvais L, Berré J, Brimioulle S, De Backer D, Créteur J, Engelman E,
Huybrechts I, Ickx B, Preiser T, Tuna T, Van Obberghe L, Vancutsem N, Vincent JL,
De Vuyst P, Etienne I, Féry F, Jacobs F, Knoop C, Vachiéry JL, Van den Borne P,
Wellemans I, Amand G, Collignon L, Giroux M, Arnaud-Crozat E, Bach V, Brichon PY,
Chaffanjon P, Chavanon O, de Lambert A, Fleury JP, Guigard S, Hireche K, Pirvu A,
Porcu P, Hacini R, Albaladejo P, Allègre C, Anglade D, Bedague D, Bouzat P, Briot
E, Carle O, Casez-Brasseur M, Colas D, Dessertaine G, Durand M, Duret J, Fèvre
MC, Francony G, Gay S, Marino MR, Oummahan B, Protar D, Rehm D, Robin S,
Rossi-Blancher M, Saunier L, Bedouch P, Boignard A, Bouvaist H, Briault A, Camara
B, Chanoine S, Dubuc M, Lantuéjoul S, Quêtant S, Maurizi J, Pavèse P, Pison C,
Saint-Raymond C, Wion N, Chérion C, Grima R, Jegaden O, Maury JM, Tronc F,
Flamens C, Paulus S, Mornex JF, Philit F, Senechal A, Glérant JC, Turquier S,
Gamondes D, Chalabresse L, Thivolet-Bejui F, Barnel C, Dubois C, Tiberghien A, Le
Pimpec-Barthes F, Bel A, Mordant P, Achouh P, Boussaud V, Guillemain R, Méléard
D, Bricourt MO, Cholley B, Pezella V, Adda M, Badier M, Bregeon F, Coltey B,
D'Journo XB, Dizier S, Doddoli C, Dufeu N, Dutau H, Forel JM, Gaubert JY, Gomez
C, Leone M, Nieves A, Orsini B, Papazian L, Picard LC, Reynaud-Gaubert M, Roch A,
Rolain JM, Sampol E, Secq V, Thomas P, Trousse D, Yahyaoui M, Baron O, Lacoste P,
Perigaud C, Roussel JC, Danner I, Haloun A, Magnan A, Tissot A, Lepoivre T,
Treilhaud M, Botturi-Cavaillès K, Brouard S, Danger R, Loy J, Morisset M, Pain M,
Pares S, Reboulleau D, Royer PJ, Dartevelle P, Fadel E, Mussot S, Fabre D,
Mercier O, Viard P, François S, Cerrina J, Hervé P, Le Pavec J, Ladurie F, Lamran
L, Castier Y, Cerceau P, Francis F, Lesèche G, Allou N, Augustin P, Boudinet S,
Desmard M, Dufour G, Montravers P, Brugière O, Dauriat G, Jébrak G, Mal H,
Marceau A, Métivier AC, Thabut G, Ilalne B, Falcoz P, Massard G, Santelmo N, Ajob
G, Collange O, Helms O, Hentz J, Roche A, Bakouboula B, Degot T, Dory A, Hirschi 
S, Ohlmann-Caillard S, Kessler L, Kessler R, Schuller A, Bennedif K, Vargas S,
Bonnette P, Chapelier A, Puyo P, Sage E, Bresson J, Caille V, Cerf C, Devaquet J,
Dumans-Nizard V, Felten ML, Fischler M, Larbi AG, Leguen M, Ley L, Liu N, Trebbia
G, De Miranda S, Douvry B, Gonin F, Grenet D, Hamid AM, Neveu H, Parquin F,
Picard C, Roux A, Stern M, Bouillioud F, Cahen P, Colombat M, Dautricourt C,
Delahousse M, D'Urso B, Gravisse J, Guth A, Hillaire S, Honderlick P, Lequintrec 
M, Longchampt E, Mellot F, Scherrer A, Temagoult L, Tricot L, Vasse M, Veyrie C, 
Zemoura L, Berjaud J, Brouchet L, Dahan M, Le Balle F, Mathe O, Benahoua H,
Didier A, Goin AL, Murris M, Crognier L, Fourcade O.

BACKGROUND: End-stage chronic respiratory diseases (CRD) have systemic
consequences, such as weight loss and susceptibility to infection. However the
mechanisms of such dysfunctions are as yet poorly explained. We hypothesized that
the genes putatively involved in these mechanisms would emerge from a systematic 
analysis of blood mRNA profiles from pre-transplant patients with cystic fibrosis
(CF), pulmonary hypertension (PAH), and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
METHODS: Whole blood was first collected from 13 patients with PAH, 23 patients
with CF, and 28 Healthy Controls (HC). Microarray results were validated by
quantitative PCR on a second and independent group (7PAH, 9CF, and 11HC). Twelve 
pre-transplant COPD patients were added to validate the common signature shared
by patients with CRD for all causes. To further clarify a role for hypoxia in the
candidate gene dysregulation, peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HC were
analysed for their mRNA profile under hypoxia.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering allowed the identification of 3
gene signatures related to CRD. One was common to CF and PAH, another specific to
CF, and the final one was specific to PAH. With the common signature, we
validated T-Cell Factor 7 (TCF-7) and Interleukin 7 Receptor (IL-7R), two genes
related to T lymphocyte activation, as being under-expressed. We showed a strong 
impact of the hypoxia on modulation of TCF-7 and IL-7R expression in PBMCs from
HC under hypoxia or PBMCs from CRD. In addition, we identified and validated
genes upregulated in PAH or CF, including Lectin Galactoside-binding Soluble 3
and Toll Like Receptor 4, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Systematic analysis of blood cell transcriptome in CRD patients
identified common and specific signatures relevant to the systemic pathologies.
TCF-7 and IL-7R were downregulated whatever the cause of CRD and this could play 
a role in the higher susceptibility to infection of these patients.

PMCID: PMC4203719
PMID: 25329529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014 Jul-Aug;10(4):679-83. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2013.12.016.
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Weight loss independent association of TCF7 L2 gene polymorphism with fasting
blood glucose after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in type 2 diabetic patients.

Rouskas K(1), Cauchi S(2), Raverdy V(1), Yengo L(2), Froguel P(3), Pattou F(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. (2)European Genetic
Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord de France, Lille,
France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France. (3)CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.
(4)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France. Electronic address: fpattou@univ-lille2.fr.

BACKGROUND: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery improves glucose control in
most but not all patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2 DM). Transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7 L2) gene variation (rs7903146, C: wild-type allele, T:
risk-allele) is the strongest contributor to T2 DM risk. Until now, there are no 
studies investigating gene interactions with changes of glycemia in obese
patients with T2 DM after RYGB. The objective of this study was to assess the
effect of TCF7 L2 genotype on RYGB-induced changes in glucose homeostasis in 99
obese patients with T2 DM at 1-year follow-up.
METHODS: Body mass index (BMI) and fasting blood glucose (FBG) were measured
before and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after RYGB. Genotyping was performed with
TaqMan technology. The effect of the interaction between TCF7 L2 genotype and
postoperative time on BMI and FBG changes was analyzed with a linear mixed model.
RESULTS: Preoperatively, there was no difference in BMI, FBG, and other diabetes 
associated traits between homozygous (CC) (n = 49) and heterozygous (CT) or
homozygous (TT) T risk-allele carriers (n = 50). One year after RYGB, 48 out of
99 patients had glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1 c) lower than 6.5% in absence of
any antidiabetic medication. BMI decreased similarly in both groups (P = .769,
genotype-time interaction), however, the decrease in FBG over time was lower in T
risk-allele carriers (P = .016, genotype-time interaction). At 1 year, FBG was
6.42 ± 2.98 mmol/L in CT/TT versus 5.36 ± 0.98 mmol/L in CC (P = .022, t test).
CONCLUSION: TCF7 L2 gene variation affected the decrease of FBG after RYGB in
obese patients with T2 DM, independently of weight loss.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25224167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Sep;11(9):517. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2014.128. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Crohn's disease. TCF1 regulates Paneth cell a-defensins.

Patman G.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Sep 1;307(5):G487-98.

PMID: 25048303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Sep 1;307(5):G487-98. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00347.2013. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

TCF-1-mediated Wnt signaling regulates Paneth cell innate immune defense
effectors HD-5 and -6: implications for Crohn's disease.

Beisner J(1), Teltschik Z(1), Ostaff MJ(1), Tiemessen MM(2), Staal FJ(2), Wang
G(1), Gersemann M(3), Perminow G(4), Vatn MH(5), Schwab M(6), Stange EF(7),
Wehkamp J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany; (2)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands; (3)Dr. Margarete
Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany; Department 
of Pediatrics, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål,
Oslo, Norway; (4)Department of Pediatrics, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway; (5)University of Oslo, Epigen,
Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital and Medical Clinic,
Gastroenterology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; and.
(6)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany; University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany; Department of Clinical
Pharmacology, Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany. (7)Department of Gastroenterology,
Robert Bosch Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany; (8)Dr. Margarete
Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany; University 
of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany; Department of Gastroenterology, Robert Bosch
Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany; jan.wehkamp@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Sep;11(9):517.

Wnt signaling regulates small intestinal stem cell maintenance and Paneth cell
differentiation. In patients with ileal Crohn's disease (CD), a decrease of
Paneth cell a-defensins has been observed that is partially caused by impaired
TCF-4 and LRP6 function. Here we show reduced expression of the Wnt signaling
effector TCF-1 (also known as TCF-7) in patients with ileal CD. Reporter gene
assays and in vitro promoter binding analysis revealed that TCF-1 activates
a-defensin HD-5 and HD-6 transcription in cooperation with ß-catenin and that
activation is mediated by three distinct TCF binding sites. EMSA analysis showed 
binding of TCF-1 to the respective motifs. In ileal CD patients, TCF-1 mRNA
expression levels were significantly reduced. Moreover, we found specifically
reduced expression of active TCF-1 mRNA isoforms. Tcf-1 knockout mice exhibited
reduced cryptdin expression in the jejunum, which was not consistently seen at
other small intestinal locations. Our data provide evidence that TCF-1-mediated
Wnt signaling is disturbed in small intestinal CD, which might contribute to the 
observed barrier dysfunction in the disease.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 24994854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):593-4. doi: 10.1038/ni.2927.

New ingredients for brewing CD4(+)T (cells): TCF-1 and LEF-1.

Mookerjee-Basu J(1), Kappes DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):646-56.

PMID: 24940944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:423174. doi: 10.1155/2014/423174. Epub 2014 May 5.

Identification of a 20-gene expression-based risk score as a predictor of
clinical outcome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients.

Bou Samra E(1), Klein B(2), Commes T(3), Moreaux J(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1040, F-34197, Institute of Research in Biotherapy, CHU Montpellier, 
80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34285 Montpellier Cedex, France. (2)INSERM, U1040,
F-34197, Institute of Research in Biotherapy, CHU Montpellier, 80 Avenue Augustin
Fliche, 34285 Montpellier Cedex, France ; CHU Montpellier, Institute of Research 
in Biotherapy, Montpellier, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34285 Montpellier, France 
; Université Montpellier 1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche,
34285 Montpellier, France. (3)INSERM, U1040, F-34197, Institute of Research in
Biotherapy, CHU Montpellier, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34285 Montpellier Cedex, 
France ; Institut de Biologie Computationnelle, Université Montpellier 2, 2 Place
Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

Despite the improvement in treatment options, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
remains an incurable disease and patients show a heterogeneous clinical course
requiring therapy for many of them. In the current work, we have built a 20-gene 
expression (GE)-based risk score predictive for patients overall survival and
improving risk classification using microarray gene expression data. GE-based
risk score allowed identifying a high-risk group associated with a significant
shorter overall survival (OS) and time to treatment (TTT) (P = .01), comprising
19.6% and 13.6% of the patients in two independent cohorts. GE-based risk score, 
and NRIP1 and TCF7 gene expression remained independent prognostic factors using 
multivariate Cox analyses and combination of GE-based risk score together with
NRIP1 and TCF7 gene expression enabled the identification of three clinically
distinct groups of CLL patients. Therefore, this GE-based risk score represents a
powerful tool for risk stratification and outcome prediction of CLL patients and 
could thus be used to guide clinical and therapeutic decisions prospectively.

PMCID: PMC4026849
PMID: 24883311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Histol Histopathol. 2014 Dec;29(12):1557-64. Epub 2014 May 23.

Wnt signaling transcription factors TCF-1 and LEF-1 are upregulated in malignant 
astrocytic brain tumors.

Pecina-laus N(1), Kafka A(2), Tomas D(3), Markovic L(4), Oktajner PK(4), Sukser
V(4), Krulin B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurooncology, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, and
Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
nina@mef.hr. (2)Laboratory of Neurooncology, Croatian Institute for Brain
Research, and Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb,
Zagreb, Croatia. (3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of
Zagreb, and University Hospital "Sisters of Charity", Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Laboratory of Neurooncology, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of 
Medicine University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

Since the discovery of the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors, their
functions have been under intensive investigation in the area of cancer biology. 
The work presented in this paper focused on the changes in TCF-1 and LEF-1
expression levels in a set of astrocytic brain tumors. Protein expression was
detected using immunohistochemistry and then evaluated by Ellipse software
(ViDiTo, Slovakia). Statistical evaluations were performed with the SPSS
statistical package, version 14.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Strong TCF-1 and
LEF-1 expression was observed in 51.6% and 71% of glioblastoma samples.
Statistical analysis confirmed significant differences in protein expression
levels associated to 3 important values, weak expression of TCF-1, weak
expression of LEF-1 and strong expression of LEF-1. Analysis of variances
performed on the total sample also indicated significant differences in the
values of TCF-1 weak (F=2.804; p=0.045), LEF-1 weak (F=4.255; p=0.008) and LEF-1 
strong (F=5.498; p=0.002) with regard to malignancy grade. Thus, glioblastomas
were characterized by -in relative terms- the lowest values for weak expression
of TCF-1 and LEF-1, combined with the highest values of LEF-1 strong expression. 
The F-ratios for two variables (LEF-1 strong and LEF-1 weak) indicated that
differences between astrocytomas (II, III) and glioblastomas were statistically
significant (p<0.02). Discriminant function analysis further showed that strong
LEF-1 expression alone could discriminate between astrocytomas (II, III) and
glioblastomas. Elevated TCF-1 and LEF-1 expression is characteristic of malignant
gliomas. LEF-1, in particular, may serve as a potential marker for malignant
transformation.

PMID: 24858819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):646-56. doi: 10.1038/ni.2897. Epub 2014 May 18.

TCF-1 and LEF-1 act upstream of Th-POK to promote the CD4(+) T cell fate and
interact with Runx3 to silence Cd4 in CD8(+) T cells.

Steinke FC(1), Yu S(2), Zhou X(3), He B(4), Yang W(5), Zhou B(6), Kawamoto H(7), 
Zhu J(5), Tan K(8), Xue HH(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [3]. (2)1] State
Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China. [2]. (3)Insitute of Immunology, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate
Program in Genetics, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA. (5)Developmental Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 
(6)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2]. (7)Department of Immunology, Institute for Frontier
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (8)Department of Internal
Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(9)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):593-4.

The transcription factors TCF-1 and LEF-1 are essential for early T cell
development, but their roles beyond the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) stage
are unknown. By specific ablation of these factors in DP thymocytes, we
demonstrated that deficiency in TCF-1 and LEF-1 diminished the output of CD4(+) T
cells and redirected CD4(+) T cells to a CD8(+) T cell fate. The role of TCF-1
and LEF-1 in the CD4-versus-CD8 lineage 'choice' was mediated in part by direct
positive regulation of the transcription factor Th-POK. Furthermore, loss of
TCF-1 and LEF-1 unexpectedly caused derepression of CD4 expression in T cells
committed to the CD8(+) lineage without affecting the expression of Runx
transcription factors. Instead, TCF-1 physically interacted with Runx3 to
cooperatively silence Cd4. Thus, TCF-1 and LEF-1 adopted distinct genetic
'wiring' to promote the CD4(+) T cell fate and establish CD8(+) T cell identity.

PMCID: PMC4064003
PMID: 24836425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2014 May 15;9(5):e94408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094408. eCollection
2014.

Tcf3 represses Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and maintains neural stem cell population 
during neocortical development.

Kuwahara A(1), Sakai H(1), Xu Y(1), Itoh Y(1), Hirabayashi Y(1), Gotoh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

During mouse neocortical development, the Wnt-ß-catenin signaling pathway plays
essential roles in various phenomena including neuronal differentiation and
proliferation of neural precursor cells (NPCs). Production of the appropriate
number of neurons without depletion of the NPC population requires precise
regulation of the balance between differentiation and maintenance of NPCs.
However, the mechanism that suppresses Wnt signaling to prevent premature
neuronal differentiation of NPCs is poorly understood. We now show that the HMG
box transcription factor Tcf3 (also known as Tcf7l1) contributes to this
mechanism. Tcf3 is highly expressed in undifferentiated NPCs in the mouse
neocortex, and its expression is reduced in intermediate neuronal progenitors
(INPs) committed to the neuronal fate. We found Tcf3 to be a repressor of Wnt
signaling in neocortical NPCs in a reporter gene assay. Tcf3 bound to the
promoter of the proneural bHLH gene Neurogenin1 (Neurog1) and repressed its
expression. Consistent with this, Tcf3 repressed neuronal differentiation and
increased the self-renewal activity of NPCs. We also found that Wnt signal
stimulation reduces the level of Tcf3, and increases those of Tcf1 (also known as
Tcf7) and Lef1, positive mediators of Wnt signaling, in NPCs. Together, these
results suggest that Tcf3 antagonizes Wnt signaling in NPCs, thereby maintaining 
their undifferentiated state in the neocortex and that Wnt signaling promotes the
transition from Tcf3-mediated repression to Tcf1/Lef1-mediated enhancement of Wnt
signaling, constituting a positive feedback loop that facilitates neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4022625
PMID: 24832538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Apr 11;15(4):6224-40. doi: 10.3390/ijms15046224.

Substance P activates the Wnt signal transduction pathway and enhances the
differentiation of mouse preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells.

Mei G(1), Zou Z(2), Fu S(3), Xia L(4), Zhou J(5), Zhang Y(6), Tuo Y(7), Wang
Z(8), Jin D(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou Avenue, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong,
China. meigang622@outlook.com. (2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou Avenue,
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China. qvbghdkk@163.com. (3)Department of
Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
1838 North Guangzhou Avenue, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China.
fusu321789@gmail.com. (4)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou Avenue, Guangzhou
510515, Guangdong, China. smilefish_2009@163.com. (5)Department of Orthopaedics
and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838 North
Guangzhou Avenue, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China. zhoujian321789@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou Avenue, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong,
China. zhaoyan2016@gmail.com. (7)Department of Orthopaedic, Wuzhou Red Cross
Hospital, Wuzhou 543002, Guangxi, China. tyh2150@gmail.com. (8)School of
Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End,
London E1 4NS, UK. ctwz198412@googlemail.com. (9)Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou
Avenue, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China. jindanankle@gmail.com.

Recent experiments have explored the impact of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and
Substance P (SP) on the regulation of osteogenesis. However, the molecular
regulatory mechanisms of SP on the formation of osteoblasts is still unknown. In 
this study, we investigated the impact of SP on the differentiation of MC3T3-E1
cells. The osteogenic effect of SP was observed at different SP concentrations
(ranging from 10<U+207B>¹° to 10<U+207B>8 M). To unravel the underlying mechanism, the MC3T3-E1
cells were treated with SP after the pretreatment by neurokinin-1 (NK1)
antagonists and Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) and gene expression levels of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway components, as well as osteoblast differentiation markers
(collagen type I, alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and Runx2), were measured
using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Furthermore, protein levels
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway were detected using Western blotting and the
effects of SP, NK1 antagonist, and DKK1 on ß-catenin activation were investigated
by immunofluorescence staining. Our data indicated that SP (10<U+207B><U+2079> to 10<U+207B>8 M)
significantly up-regulated the expressions of osteoblastic genes. SP (10<U+207B>8 M)
also elevated the mRNA level of c-myc, cyclin D1, and lymphocyte enhancer
factor-1 (Lef1), as well as c-myc and ß-catenin protein levels, but decreased the
expression of Tcf7 mRNA. Moreover, SP (10-8 M) promoted the transfer of ß-catenin
into nucleus. The effects of SP treatment were inhibited by the NK1 antagonist
and DKK1. These findings suggest that SP may enhance differentiation of MC3T3-E1 
cells via regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4013624
PMID: 24733069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):457-64. doi: 10.1038/ni.2867. Epub 2014 Apr 6.

The AGC kinase SGK1 regulates TH1 and TH2 differentiation downstream of the
mTORC2 complex.

Heikamp EB(1), Patel CH(1), Collins S(2), Waickman A(1), Oh MH(2), Sun IH(1),
Illei P(3), Sharma A(4), Naray-Fejes-Toth A(5), Fejes-Toth G(5), Misra-Sen J(4), 
Horton MR(2), Powell JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (4)Immune Cells and Inflammation
Section, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)Department of Physiology,
Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):411-3.

SGK1 is an AGC kinase that regulates the expression of membrane sodium channels
in renal tubular cells in a manner dependent on the metabolic checkpoint kinase
complex mTORC2. We hypothesized that SGK1 might represent an additional
mTORC2-dependent regulator of the differentiation and function of T cells. Here
we found that after activation by mTORC2, SGK1 promoted T helper type 2 (TH2)
differentiation by negatively regulating degradation of the transcription factor 
JunB mediated by the E3 ligase Nedd4-2. Simultaneously, SGK1 repressed the
production of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) by controlling expression of the long isoform 
of the transcription factor TCF-1. Consistent with those findings, mice with
selective deletion of SGK1 in T cells were resistant to experimentally induced
asthma, generated substantial IFN-<U+03B3> in response to viral infection and more
readily rejected tumors.

PMCID: PMC4267697
PMID: 24705297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Sep;29(9):1960-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2240.

Dlx5 and mef2 regulate a novel runx2 enhancer for osteoblast-specific expression.

Kawane T(1), Komori H, Liu W, Moriishi T, Miyazaki T, Mori M, Matsuo Y, Takada Y,
Izumi S, Jiang Q, Nishimura R, Kawai Y, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. The
expression of Runx2 is the first requisite step for the lineage determination
from mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Although the transcript from Runx2
distal promoter is majorly expressed in osteoblasts, the promoter failed to
direct green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression to osteoblasts. To find the
regulatory region, we generated GFP reporter mice driven by a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) of Runx2 locus, and succeeded in the reproduction of 
endogenous Runx2 expression. By serially deleting it, we identified a 343-bp
enhancer, which directed GFP expression specifically to osteoblasts, about 30<U+2009>kb 
upstream of the distal promoter. The sequence of the 343-bp enhancer was highly
conserved among mouse, human, dog, horse, opossum, and chicken. Dlx5, Mef2c,
Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and Sox6, which localized on the enhancer region in
primary osteoblasts, synergistically upregulated the enhancer activity, whereas
Msx2 downregulated the activity in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Msx2 was
predominantly bound to the enhancer in mouse multipotent mesenchymal C3H10T1/2
cells, whereas Dlx5 was predominantly bound to the enhancer in MC3T3-E1 cells.
Dlx5 and Mef2 directly bound to the enhancer, and the binding sites were required
for the osteoblast-specific expression in mice, whereas the other factors bound
to the enhancer by protein-protein interaction. The enhancer was characterized by
the presence of the histone variant H2A.Z, the enrichment of histone H3 mono- and
dimethylated at Lys4 and acetylated at Lys18 and Lys27, but the depletion of
histone H3 trimethylated at Lys4 in primary osteoblasts. These findings indicated
that the enhancer, which had typical histone modifications for enhancers,
contains sufficient elements to direct Runx2 expression to osteoblasts, and that 
Dlx5 and Mef2, which formed an enhanceosome with Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and
Sox6, play an essential role in the osteoblast-specific activation of the
enhancer. © 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24692107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pathol Int. 2014 Feb;64(2):86-7. doi: 10.1111/pin.12126.

T-cell factor 1 expression in germ cell tumors with trophoblastic
differentiation.

Serman L(1), Nikuseva Martic T, Vranic S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia.

PMID: 24629177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Feb 26;6(225):225ra28. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007607.

ß-Catenin promotes colitis and colon cancer through imprinting of proinflammatory
properties in T cells.

Keerthivasan S(1), Aghajani K, Dose M, Molinero L, Khan MW, Venkateswaran V,
Weber C, Emmanuel AO, Sun T, Bentrem DJ, Mulcahy M, Keshavarzian A, Ramos EM,
Blatner N, Khazaie K, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The density and type of lymphocytes that infiltrate colon tumors are predictive
of the clinical outcome of colon cancer. High densities of T helper 17 (T(H)17)
cells and inflammation predict poor outcome, whereas infiltration by T regulatory
cells (Tregs) that naturally suppress inflammation is associated with longer
patient survival. However, the role of Tregs in cancer remains controversial. We 
recently reported that Tregs in colon cancer patients can become proinflammatory 
and tumor-promoting. These properties were directly linked with their expression 
of ROR<U+03B3>t (retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t), the signature transcription 
factor of T(H)17 cells. We report that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in T cells
promotes expression of ROR<U+03B3>t. Expression of ß-catenin was elevated in T cells,
including Tregs, of patients with colon cancer. Genetically engineered activation
of ß-catenin in mouse T cells resulted in enhanced chromatin accessibility in the
proximity of T cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) binding sites genome-wide, induced
expression of T(H)17 signature genes including ROR<U+03B3>t, and promoted
T(H)17-mediated inflammation. Strikingly, the mice had inflammation of small
intestine and colon and developed lesions indistinguishable from colitis-induced 
cancer. Activation of ß-catenin only in Tregs was sufficient to produce
inflammation and initiate cancer. On the basis of these findings, we conclude
that activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in effector T cells and/or Tregs is
causatively linked with the imprinting of proinflammatory properties and the
promotion of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4020714
PMID: 24574339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 14;9(2):e86990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086990. eCollection
2014.

Multiple tumor suppressor microRNAs regulate telomerase and TCF7, an important
transcriptional regulator of the Wnt pathway.

Hrdlicková R(1), Nehyba J(1), Bargmann W(1), Bose HR Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, College of Natural Sciences, and
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, Texas, United States of America.

The human TERT (hTERT) gene encodes the telomerase catalytic subunit which plays 
a role in telomerase regulation. Telomerase is activated in more than 90% of all 
human malignancies and understanding how telomerase is regulated is necessary for
implementation of successful anti-cancer therapies. microRNAs (miRNAs) are
important regulators of gene expression in eukaryotic cells but evidence of their
role in telomerase regulation has not been documented. To determine whether hTERT
activity is regulated by multiple miRNAs, eight miRNAs which have putative
binding sites in the hTERT 3'UTR together with miR-138-5p were evaluated in
luciferase assays with a reporter containing the hTERT 3'UTR. Six miRNAs
(let-7g*, miR-133a, miR-138-5p, miR-342-5p, miR-491-5p, and miR-541-3p)
specifically inhibited the expression of the reporter luciferase-driven
constructs and let-7g*, miR-133a, miR-138-5p, and miR-491-5p also downregulated
endogenous telomerase activity in cells. Moreover, all six miRNAs significantly
inhibited cell proliferation. miRNAs (miR-133a, miR-138-5p, 342-5p, 491-5p,
541-3p) also have predicted binding sites within the 3'UTR of three genes
involved in Wnt signaling (TCF7, MSI1, and PAX5). These miRNAs inhibited the
expression of the luciferase reporter constructs containing 3'UTRs of these genes
and downregulated protein expression of the TCF7 transcription factor, which
mediates the canonical Wnt pathway. Together, these results suggest the existence
of a miRNA regulatory network involving the hTERT and Wnt pathway.

PMCID: PMC3925088
PMID: 24551047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Jan 17;4:e178. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.75.

Prostaglandin E2 promotes survival of naive UCB T cells via the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway and alters immune reconstitution after UCBT.

Li L(1), Kim HT(2), Nellore A(1), Patsoukis N(1), Petkova V(3), McDonough S(4),
Politikos I(1), Nikiforow S(4), Soiffer R(4), Antin JH(4), Ballen K(5), Cutler
C(4), Ritz J(4), Boussiotis VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology and Cancer Biology,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department
of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

The outcome of umbilical cord blood transplantation (UCBT) is compromised by low 
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) doses leading to prolonged time to engraftment,
delayed immunological reconstitution and late memory T-cell skewing. Exposure of 
UCB to dimethyl-prostaglandin E2 (dmPGE2) increases HSC in vivo. We determined
that exposure of UCB T lymphocytes to dmPGE2 modified Wnt signaling resulting in 
T cell factor (TCF)-mediated transcription. Wnt signaling upregulated interleukin
(IL)-7R and IL-2Rß, resulting in enhanced survival mediated by the homeostatic
cytokines IL-7 and IL-15. dmPGE2 also induced components of the Wnt pathway and
Wnt receptors, thereby priming UCB T cells to receive signals via Wnt ligands in 
vivo. We observed that the Wnt transcription factor TCF7 and its target EOMES
were elevated in the T cells of patients who received PGE2-treated UCBs.
Consistent with the role of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to induce and maintain naive,
memory precursors and long-lived central memory CD8(+) cells, these patients also
had increased fractions of CD8(+)CD45RO(-)CD62L(+) plus CD8(+)CD45RO(+)CD62L(+)
subsets encompassing these T-cell populations. These effects of the
PGE2/Wnt/ß-catenin axis may have significant implications for harnessing immunity
in the context of UCBT, where impaired immune reconstitution is associated with
late memory T-cell skewing.

PMCID: PMC3913944
PMID: 24442207  [PubMed]


49. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Mar;9(3):973-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1889. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

ß-catenin deacetylation is essential for WNT-induced proliferation of breast
cancer cells.

Wang SH(1), Li N(1), Wei Y(1), Li QR(1), Yu ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School of 
Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

Deregulation of the WNT signaling pathway is associated with the development and 
progression of breast cancer. ß-catenin mutations have been found to
constitutively activate ß-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF) signaling in other types of
cancer. ß-catenin acetylation regulates ß-catenin-TCF4 interaction in WNT
signaling, but it remains unknown whether the acetylation of ß-catenin is
involved in WNT-induced proliferation of breast cancer cells. In this study, a
lower level of acetylated ß-catenin (K345) was observed in breast cancer tissues.
WNT3A stimulated the downregulation of ß-catenin acetylation and promoted the
proliferation of MCF7 cells. The K345Q mutation in ß-catenin inhibited
WNT-induced cell growth and axin2/TCF7 upregulation in breast cancer cells. By
contrast, K345R mutants could mimic deacetylated ß-catenin to generate the
WNT-elicited phenotype. Additionally, the acetylation of ß-catenin may prime
ß-catenin for phosphorylation. Further investigation revealed that the
deacetylase HDAC6 was responsible for WNT-induced deacetylation of ß-catenin in
breast cancer cells. In conclusion, the epigenetic modification of ß-catenin may 
be essential for WNT signaling in breast cancer progression, and blocking the
occurrence of ß-catenin acetylation may provide a novel therapeutic approach for 
breast cancer.

PMID: 24401947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):391-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1315752111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 26.

ß-Catenin induces T-cell transformation by promoting genomic instability.

Dose M(1), Emmanuel AO, Chaumeil J, Zhang J, Sun T, Germar K, Aghajani K, Davis
EM, Keerthivasan S, Bredemeyer AL, Sleckman BP, Rosen ST, Skok JA, Le Beau MM,
Georgopoulos K, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.

Deregulated activation of ß-catenin in cancer has been correlated with genomic
instability. During thymocyte development, ß-catenin activates transcription in
partnership with T-cell-specific transcription factor 1 (Tcf-1). We previously
reported that targeted activation of ß-catenin in thymocytes (CAT mice) induces
lymphomas that depend on recombination activating gene (RAG) and myelocytomatosis
oncogene (Myc) activities. Here we show that these lymphomas have recurring
Tcra/Myc translocations that resulted from illegitimate RAG recombination events 
and resembled oncogenic translocations previously described in human T-ALL. We
therefore used the CAT animal model to obtain mechanistic insights into the
transformation process. ChIP-seq analysis uncovered a link between Tcf-1 and RAG2
showing that the two proteins shared binding sites marked by trimethylated
histone-3 lysine-4 (H3K4me3) throughout the genome, including near the
translocation sites. Pretransformed CAT thymocytes had increased DNA damage at
the translocating loci and showed altered repair of RAG-induced DNA double strand
breaks. These cells were able to survive despite DNA damage because activated
ß-catenin promoted an antiapoptosis gene expression profile. Thus, activated
ß-catenin promotes genomic instability that leads to T-cell lymphomas as a
consequence of altered double strand break repair and increased survival of
thymocytes with damaged DNA.

PMCID: PMC3890837
PMID: 24371308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Neurochem. 2014 Feb;128(4):523-35. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12464. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

CaMKII represses transcriptionally active ß-catenin to mediate acute ethanol
neurodegeneration and can phosphorylate ß-catenin.

Flentke GR(1), Garic A, Hernandez M, Smith SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Prenatal ethanol exposure causes persistent neurodevelopmental deficits by
inducing apoptosis within neuronal progenitors including the neural crest. The
cellular signaling events underlying this apoptosis are unclear. Using an
established chick embryo model, we previously identified ethanol's activation of 
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) as a crucial early step in this
pathway. Here, we report that CaMKII is pro-apoptotic because it mediates the
loss of transcriptionally active ß-catenin, which normally provides trophic
support to these cells. ß-catenin over-expression normalized cell survival in
ethanol's presence. CaMKII inhibition similarly restored ß-catenin content and
transcriptional activity within ethanol-treated cells and prevented their cell
death. In contrast, inhibition of alternative effectors known to destabilize
ß-catenin, including glycogen synthase kinase-3ß, Protein Kinase C, JNK, and
calpain, failed to normalize cell survival and ß-catenin activity in ethanol's
presence. Importantly, we found that purified CaMKII can directly phosphorylate
ß-catenin. Using targeted mutagenesis we identified CaMKII phosphorylation sites 
within human ß-catenin at T332, T472, and S552. This is the first demonstration
that ß-catenin is a phosphorylation target of CaMKII and represents a novel
mechanism by which calcium signals could regulate ß-catenin-dependent
transcription. These results inform ethanol's neurotoxicity and offer unexpected 
insights into other neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders having
dysregulated calcium or ß-catenin signaling.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3946158
PMID: 24117889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 15;23(4):942-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt489. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

DNase hypersensitive sites and association with multiple sclerosis.

Disanto G(1), Kjetil Sandve G, Ricigliano VA, Pakpoor J, Berlanga-Taylor AJ,
Handel AE, Kuhle J, Holden L, Watson CT, Giovannoni G, Handunnetthi L,
Ramagopalan SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics and Medical Research Council
Functional Genomics Unit, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PT,
UK.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have shown that approximately 60 genetic 
variants influence the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS). Our aim was to
identify the cell types in which these variants are active. We used available
data on MS-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive sites (DHSs) from 112 different cell types.
Genomic intervals were tested for overlap using the Genomic Hyperbrowser. The
expression profile of the genes located nearby MS-associated SNPs was assessed
using the software GRAIL (Gene Relationships Across Implicated Loci). Genomic
regions associated with MS were significantly enriched for a number of immune
DHSs and in particular T helper (Th) 1, Th17, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, CD19+ B
cells and CD56+ natural killer (NK) cells (enrichment = 2.34, 2.19, 2.27, 2.05
and 1.95, respectively; P < 0.0001 for all of them). Similar results were
obtained when genomic regions with suggestive association with MS and additional 
immune-mediated traits were investigated. Several new candidate MS-associated
genes located within regions of suggestive association were identified by GRAIL
(CARD11, FCRL2, CHST12, SYK, TCF7, SOCS1, NFKBIZ and NPAS1). Genetic data
indicate that Th1, Th17, cytotoxic T, B and NK cells play a prominent role in the
etiology of MS. Regions with confirmed and suggestive association have a similar 
immunological profile, indicating that many SNPs truly influencing the risk of MS
actually fail to reach genome-wide significance. Finally, similar cell types are 
involved in the etiology of other immune-mediated diseases.

PMID: 24092328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Spinal Cord Med. 2013 Nov;36(6):616-22. doi: 10.1179/2045772312Y.0000000020.
Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Anabolic steroids reduce spinal cord injury-related bone loss in rats associated 
with increased Wnt signaling.

Sun L(1), Pan J(2), Peng Y(1), Wu Y(2), Li J(1), Liu X(1), Qin Y(2), Bauman
WA(3), Cardozo C(3), Zaidi M(1), Qin W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Bone Program, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Center of Excellence for the Medical Consequences of SCI, James J. Peters VA
Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA. (3)Center of Excellence for the Medical
Consequences of SCI, James J. Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA;
Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; and
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA. (4)Center of Excellence for the Medical Consequences of SCI, James J.
Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA; and Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spinal cord injury (SCI) causes severe bone loss. At present, there
is no practical treatment to delay or prevent bone loss in individuals with
motor-complete SCI. Hypogonadism is common in men after SCI and may exacerbate
bone loss. The anabolic steroid nandrolone reduces bone loss due to microgravity 
or nerve transection.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether nandrolone reduced bone loss after SCI and, if
so, to explore the mechanisms of nandrolone action.
METHODS: Male rats with complete transection of the spinal cord were administered
nandrolone combined with a physiological replacement dose of testosterone, or
vehicle, beginning on day 29 after SCI and continued for 28 days.
RESULTS: SCI reduced distal femoral and proximal tibial bone mineral density
(BMD) by 25 and 16%, respectively, at 56 days. This bone loss was attenuated by
nandrolone. In ex vivo osteoclasts cultures, SCI increased mRNA levels for
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and calcitonin receptor;
nandrolone-normalized expression levels of these transcripts. In ex vivo
osteoblast cultures, SCI increased receptor activator of NF-kB ligand (RANKL)
mRNA levels but did not alter osteoprotegerin (OPG) mRNA expression;
nandrolone-increased expression of OPG and OPG/RANKL ratio. SCI reduced mRNA
levels of Wnt signaling-related genes Wnt3a, low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5), Fzd5, Tcf7, and ectodermal-neural cortex 1
(ENC1) in osteoblasts, whereas nandrolone increased expression of each of these
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that nandrolone reduces bone loss after SCI.
A potential mechanism is suggested by our findings wherein nandrolone modulates
genes for differentiation and activity of osteoclasts and osteoblasts, at least
in part, through the activation of Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3831322
PMID: 24090150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4383-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301228. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

TCF-1 controls ILC2 and NKp46+ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate lymphocyte differentiation and
protection in intestinal inflammation.

Mielke LA(1), Groom JR, Rankin LC, Seillet C, Masson F, Putoczki T, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia;

Innate lymphocyte populations play a central role in conferring protective
immunity at the mucosal frontier. In this study, we demonstrate that T cell
factor 1 (TCF-1; encoded by Tcf7), a transcription factor also important for NK
and T cell differentiation, is expressed by multiple innate lymphoid cell (ILC)
subsets, including GATA3(+) nuocytes (ILC2) and NKp46(+) ILCs (ILC3), which
confer protection against lung and intestinal inflammation. TCF-1 was
intrinsically required for the differentiation of both ILC2 and NKp46(+) ILC3.
Loss of TCF-1 expression impaired the capacity of these ILC subsets to produce
IL-5, IL-13, and IL-22 and resulted in crippled responses to intestinal infection
with Citrobacter rodentium. Furthermore, a reduction in T-bet expression required
for Notch-2-dependent development of NKp46(+) ILC3 showed a dose-dependent
reduction in TCF-1 expression. Collectively, our findings demonstrate an
essential requirement for TCF-1 in ILC2 differentiation and reveal a link among
Tcf7, Notch, and Tbx21 in NKp46(+) ILC3 development.

PMID: 24038093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.003.
Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Malondialdehyde regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in murine islets
via TCF7L2-dependent Wnt signaling pathway.

Wang X(1), Lei XG, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China; Animal Science Department, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Evidence showed strong relations between malondialdehyde (MDA) levels and
different pathological stages of diabetes. Here, an explicit system with freshly 
isolated islets and precisely controlled MDA gradient was employed to investigate
the physiological effect of MDA on GSIS. Promoter analysis, pathway mapping,
Q-PCR profiling, and siRNA verification were performed to clarify the
intracellular signaling pathways. MDA at a moderately high level (5 and 10µM)
promoted GSIS and accompanied with ATP/ADP ratio, cytosolic Ca(2+) level, and key
regulators (GK, GLUT2, PDX1, and UCP2) changes in islets. Both upstream (PI3K and
p-AKT) and downstream (TCF7L2 and TCF7) factors of Wnt pathway showed greatest
changes. Knockdown of TCF7L2 blocked the MDA-induced GSIS elevation. These
results indicated that MDA acted as a signaling messenger and regulated islet
GSIS mainly through Wnt pathway. Therefore, the elevated MDA level and
up-regulated Wnt signaling pathway could be an etiological factor in the
development of hyperinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Oncol. 2013 Nov;43(5):1517-22. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2087. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Hematein, a casein kinase II inhibitor, inhibits lung cancer tumor growth in a
murine xenograft model.

Hung MS(1), Xu Z, Chen Y, Smith E, Mao JH, Hsieh D, Lin YC, Yang CT, Jablons DM, 
You L.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA.

Casein kinase II (CK2) inhibitors suppress cancer cell growth. In this study, we 
examined the inhibitory effects of a novel CK2 inhibitor, hematein, on tumor
growth in a murine xenograft model. We found that in lung cancer cells, hematein 
inhibited cancer cell growth, Akt/PKB Ser129 phosphorylation, the Wnt/TCF pathway
and increased apoptosis. In a murine xenograft model of lung cancer, hematein
inhibited tumor growth without significant toxicity to the mice tested. Molecular
docking showed that hematein binds to CK2a in durable binding sites.
Collectively, our results suggest that hematein is an allosteric inhibitor of
protein kinase CK2 and has antitumor activity to lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3823374
PMID: 24008396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):286-97. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.013. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

The transcription factor Foxo1 controls central-memory CD8+ T cell responses to
infection.

Kim MV(1), Ouyang W, Liao W, Zhang MQ, Li MO.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.

Memory T cells protect hosts from pathogen reinfection, but how these cells
emerge from a pool of antigen-experienced T cells is unclear. Here, we show that 
mice lacking the transcription factor Foxo1 in activated CD8+ T cells have
defective secondary, but not primary, responses to Listeria monocytogenes
infection. Compared to short-lived effector T cells, memory-precursor T cells
expressed higher amounts of Foxo1, which promoted their generation and
maintenance. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed the transcription 
factor Tcf7 and the chemokine receptor Ccr7 as Foxo1-bound target genes, which
have critical functions in central-memory T cell differentiation and trafficking.
These findings demonstrate that Foxo1 is selectively incorporated into the
genetic program that regulates memory CD8+ T cell responses to infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3809840
PMID: 23932570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cell Biol Int. 2013 Nov;37(11):1225-32. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10158. Epub 2013 Aug
30.

Neuropeptide SP activates the WNT signal transduction pathway and enhances the
proliferation of bone marrow stromal stem cells.

Mei G(1), Xia L, Zhou J, Zhang Y, Tuo Y, Fu S, Zou Z, Wang Z, Jin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, China.

Substance P (SP) mediates multiple activities in various cell types, such as
proliferation, anti-apoptotic response, and inflammation. We have investigated
the effects of SP, NK1 antagonist and DKK1 on proliferation of bone marrow
stromal stem cells (BMSCs), as well as the underlying mechanism. Isolated BMSCs
were exposed to SP (10(-8) <U+2009>M) (group A), SP<U+2009>+<U+2009>NK1 antagonist (1<U+2009>µM) (group B),
SP<U+2009>+<U+2009>DKK1 (0.2<U+2009>µg/mL) (group C), or the same amount of PBS (group D). Expression 
of gene and protein of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling was detected using quantitative
PCR and western blotting. SP (10(-8) <U+2009>M) significantly enhanced the proliferation
of BMSCs and the number of viable cells was reduced by treatment with NK1
antagonist (1<U+2009>µM) or DKK1 (0.2<U+2009>µg/mL). SP also significantly increased the
expression of C-myc mRNA, Lef1, ß-catenin protein and C-myc protein, but
decreased the expression of Tcf7 and p-ß-catenin protein compared to group D.
These roles of SP were inhibited by the NK1 antagonist and DKK1. Expression of
CyclinD1 and ß-catenin mRNAs, however, was not significantly influenced by SP,
NK1 antagonist and DKK1. These findings suggest that SP enhances BMSC
proliferation via regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 23893958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 11;8(7):e69677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069677. Print 2013.

4-1BB signaling activates the t cell factor 1 effector/ß-catenin pathway with
delayed kinetics via ERK signaling and delayed PI3K/AKT activation to promote the
proliferation of CD8+ T Cells.

Lee do Y(1), Choi BK, Lee DG, Kim YH, Kim CH, Lee SJ, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, National Cancer Center, 
Ilsan, Goyang, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

4-1BB (CD137), an inducible costimulatory molecule, strongly enhances the
proliferation and effector function of CD8(+) T cells. Since the serine/threonine
kinase, glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), is involved in a variety of signaling
pathways of cellular proliferation, migration, immune responses, and apoptosis,
we examined whether 4-1BB signaling activates GSK-3/ß-catenin signaling and
downstream transcription factors to enhance the proliferation of CD8(+) T cells. 
4-1BB signaling induces rapid activation of ERK and I<U+03BA>B degradation, and shows
delayed activation of AKT at 24 h post 4-1BB stimulation on anti-CD3 activated T 
cells. ERK and AKT signals were required for sustained ß-catenin levels by
inactivating GSK-3, which was also observed with delayed kinetics after 4-1BB
stimulation. As a transcriptional partner of ß-catenin, 4-1BB signaling decreased
levels of FOXO1 and increased levels of stimulatory TCF1 in CD8(+) T cells at 2-3
days but not at early time points after 4-1BB engagement. The enhanced
proliferation of CD8(+) T cells due to 4-1BB signaling was completely abolished
by treatment with the TCF1/ß-catenin inhibitor quercetin. These results show that
4-1BB signaling enhances the proliferation of activated CD8(+) T cells by
activating the TCF1/ß-catenin axis via the PI3K/AKT/ERK pathway. As effects of
4-1BB on AKT, FOXO1, ß-catenin and GSK-3ß showed delayed kinetics it is likely
that an intervening molecule induced by 4-1BB and ERK signaling in activated T
cells is responsible for these effects. These effects were observed on CD8(+) but
not on CD4(+) T cells. Moreover, 4-1BB appeared to be unique among several TNFRs 
tested in inducing increase in stimulatory over inhibitory TCF-1.

PMCID: PMC3708905
PMID: 23874982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Rep. 2013 Jun 27;3(6):2113-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.015. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

Stage-specific regulation of reprogramming to induced pluripotent stem cells by
Wnt signaling and T cell factor proteins.

Ho R(1), Papp B, Hoffman JA, Merrill BJ, Plath K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Molecular Biology Institute, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California
Los Angeles, 615 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

Wnt signaling is intrinsic to mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Therefore, 
it is surprising that reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs) is not strongly enhanced by Wnt signaling. Here, we demonstrate
that active Wnt signaling inhibits the early stage of reprogramming to iPSCs,
whereas it is required and even stimulating during the late stage.
Mechanistically, this biphasic effect of Wnt signaling is accompanied by a change
in the requirement of all four of its transcriptional effectors: T cell factor 1 
(Tcf1), Lef1, Tcf3, and Tcf4. For example, Tcf3 and Tcf4 are stimulatory early
but inhibitory late in the reprogramming process. Accordingly, ectopic expression
of Tcf3 early in reprogramming combined with its loss of function late enables
efficient reprogramming in the absence of ectopic Sox2. Together, our data
indicate that the stepwise process of reprogramming to iPSCs is critically
dependent on the stage-specific control and action of all four Tcfs and Wnt
signaling.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700671
PMID: 23791530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 25;51(2):211-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.05.013. Epub 2013 
Jun 13.

TRIB2 acts downstream of Wnt/TCF in liver cancer cells to regulate YAP and C/EBPa
function.

Wang J(1), Park JS, Wei Y, Rajurkar M, Cotton JL, Fan Q, Lewis BC, Ji H, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Dysregulation of Wnt signaling is closely associated with human liver
tumorigenesis. However, liver cancer-specific Wnt transcriptional programs and
downstream effectors remain poorly understood. Here, we identify tribbles homolog
2 (TRIB2) as a direct target of Wnt/TCF in liver cancer and demonstrate that
transcription of Wnt target genes, including TRIB2, is coordinated by the TCF and
FoxA transcription factors in liver cancer cells. We show that Wnt-TRIB2
activation is critical for cancer cell survival and transformation.
Mechanistically, TRIB2 promotes protein stabilization of the YAP transcription
coactivator through interaction with the ßTrCP ubiquitin ligase. Furthermore, we 
find that TRIB2 relieves the liver tumor suppressor protein C/EBPa-mediated
inhibition of YAP/TEAD transcriptional activation in liver cancer cells.
Altogether, our study uncovers a regulatory mechanism underlying liver
cancer-specific Wnt transcriptional output, and suggests that TRIB2 functions as 
a signaling nexus to integrate the Wnt/ß-catenin, Hippo/YAP, and C/EBPa pathways 
in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4007693
PMID: 23769673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 1;191(1):187-99. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300331. Epub 2013 Jun
3.

FoxO1 controls effector-to-memory transition and maintenance of functional CD8 T 
cell memory.

Tejera MM(1), Kim EH, Sullivan JA, Plisch EH, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

During a T cell response, naive CD8 T cells differentiate into effector cells.
Subsequently, a subset of effector cells termed memory precursor effector cells
further differentiates into functionally mature memory CD8 T cells. The
transcriptional network underlying this carefully scripted process is not well
understood. In this study, we report that the transcription factor FoxO1 plays an
integral role in facilitating effector-to-memory transition and functional
maturation of memory CD4 and CD8 T cells. We find that FoxO1 is not required for 
differentiation of effector cells, but in the absence of FoxO1, memory CD8 T
cells displayed features of senescence and progressive attrition in
polyfunctionality, which in turn led to impaired recall responses and poor
protective immunity. These data suggest that FoxO1 is essential for maintenance
of functional CD8 T cell memory and protective immunity. Under competing
conditions in bone marrow chimeric mice, FoxO1 deficiency did not perturb clonal 
expansion or effector differentiation. Instead, FoxO1-deficient memory precursor 
effector cells failed to survive and form memory CD8 T cells. Mechanistically,
FoxO1 deficiency perturbed the memory CD8 T cell transcriptome, characterized by 
pronounced alterations in the expression of genes that encode transcription
factors (including Tcf7), effector molecules, cell cycle regulators, and proteins
that regulate fatty acid, purine, and pyramidine metabolism and mitochondrial
functions. We propose that FoxO1 is a key regulator that reprograms and steers
the differentiation of effector cells to functionally competent memory cells.
These findings have provided fundamental insights into the mechanisms that
regulate the quality of CD8 T cell memory to intracellular pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3691324
PMID: 23733882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Exp Med. 2013 Jun 3;210(6):1189-200. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130392. Epub 2013 May
27.

Differentiation of CD8 memory T cells depends on Foxo1.

Hess Michelini R(1), Doedens AL, Goldrath AW, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.

The forkhead O transcription factors (FOXO) integrate a range of extracellular
signals, including growth factor signaling, inflammation, oxidative stress, and
nutrient availability, to substantially alter the program of gene expression and 
modulate cell survival, cell cycle progression, and many yet to be unraveled cell
type-specific responses. Naive antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells undergo a rapid
expansion and arming of effector function within days of pathogen exposure. In
addition, by the peak of expansion, they form precursors to memory T cells
capable of self-renewal and indefinite survival. Using lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus Armstrong to probe the response to infection, we found
that Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells expand normally with no defects in effector
differentiation, but continue to exhibit characteristics of effector T cells long
after antigen clearance. The KLRG1(lo) CD8(+) T cells that are normally enriched 
for memory-precursor cells retain Granzyme B and CD69 expression, and fail to
up-regulate TCF7, EOMES, and other memory signature genes. As a correlate,
Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells were virtually unable to expand upon secondary
infection. Collectively, these results demonstrate an intrinsic role for FOXO1 in
establishing the post-effector memory program that is essential to forming
long-lived memory cells capable of immune reactivation.

PMCID: PMC3674697
PMID: 23712431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Diabetologia. 2013 Aug;56(8):1743-51. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2939-4. Epub 2013
May 15.

Identification of circulating microRNAs in HNF1A-MODY carriers.

Bonner C(1), Nyhan KC, Bacon S, Kyithar MP, Schmid J, Concannon CG, Bray IM,
Stallings RL, Prehn JH, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons,
Dublin, Ireland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: HNF1A-MODY is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by mutations
in the HNF1A gene. Here we identify, for the first time, HNF1A-MODY-associated
microRNAs (miRNAs) that can be detected in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers.
METHODS: An miRNA array was carried out in rat INS-1 insulinoma cells inducibly
expressing the common human Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A frame shift mutation.
Differentially expressed miRNAs were validated by quantitative real-time PCR.
Expression of miRNAs in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>31), MODY-negative 
family members (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10) and individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>17)
was quantified by absolute real-time PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Inducible expression of Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A in INS-1 cells caused a
significant upregulation of three miRNAs (miR-103, miR-224, miR-292-3p). The
differential expression of two miRNAs (miR-103 and miR-224) was validated in
vitro. Strongly elevated levels of miR-103 and miR-224 could be detected in the
serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers compared with MODY-negative family controls. Serum
levels of miR-103 distinguished HNF1A-MODY carriers from HbA1c-matched
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates that the pathophysiology of
HNF1A-MODY is associated with the overexpression of miR-103 and miR-224.
Furthermore, our study demonstrates that these miRNAs can be readily detected in 
the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers.

PMID: 23674172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Blood. 2013 May 9;121(19):4008-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-477349.

TCF-1 mediates repression of Notch pathway in T lineage-committed early
thymocytes.

Yu S, Xue HH.

PMCID: PMC3650711
PMID: 23660861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 26;8(4):e62424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062424. Print 2013.

Components of the canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways are not mis-expressed 
in pituitary tumors.

Colli LM(1), Saggioro F, Serafini LN, Camargo RC, Machado HR, Moreira AC,
Antonini SR, de Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways are involved in the
genesis of multiple tumors; however, their role in pituitary tumorigenesis is
mostly unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated gene and protein expression of Wnt pathways in
pituitary tumors and whether these expression correlate to clinical outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genes of the WNT canonical pathway: activating ligands
(WNT11, WNT4, WNT5A), binding inhibitors (DKK3, sFRP1), ß-catenin (CTNNB1),
ß-catenin degradation complex (APC, AXIN1, GSK3ß), inhibitor of ß-catenin
degradation complex (AKT1), sequester of ß-catenin (CDH1), pathway effectors
(TCF7, MAPK8, NFAT5), pathway mediators (DVL-1, DVL-2, DVL-3, PRICKLE, VANGL1),
target genes (MYB, MYC, WISP2, SPRY1, TP53, CCND1); calcium dependent pathway
(PLCB1, CAMK2A, PRKCA, CHP); and planar cell polarity pathway (PTK7, DAAM1, RHOA)
were evaluated by QPCR, in 19 GH-, 18 ACTH-secreting, 21 non-secreting (NS)
pituitary tumors, and 5 normal pituitaries. Also, the main effectors of canonical
(ß-catenin), planar cell polarity (JNK), and calcium dependent (NFAT5) Wnt
pathways were evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: There are no differences in gene expression of canonical and
non-canonical Wnt pathways between all studied subtypes of pituitary tumors and
normal pituitaries, except for WISP2, which was over-expressed in ACTH-secreting 
tumors compared to normal pituitaries (4.8x; p = 0.02), NS pituitary tumors
(7.7x; p = 0.004) and GH-secreting tumors (5.0x; p = 0.05). ß-catenin, NFAT5 and 
JNK proteins showed no expression in normal pituitaries and in any of the
pituitary tumor subtypes. Furthermore, no association of the studied gene or
protein expression was observed with tumor size, recurrence, and progressive
disease. The hierarchical clustering showed a regular pattern of genes of the
canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways randomly distributed throughout the
dendrogram.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reinforce previous reports suggesting no activation of
canonical Wnt pathway in pituitary tumorigenesis. Moreover, we describe, for the 
first time, evidence that non-canonical Wnt pathways are also not mis-expressed
in the pituitary tumors.

PMCID: PMC3637156
PMID: 23638078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 29;15(2):R36. doi: 10.1186/bcr3419.

Parity induces differentiation and reduces Wnt/Notch signaling ratio and
proliferation potential of basal stem/progenitor cells isolated from mouse
mammary epithelium.

Meier-Abt F, Milani E, Roloff T, Brinkhaus H, Duss S, Meyer DS, Klebba I,
Balwierz PJ, van Nimwegen E, Bentires-Alj M.

INTRODUCTION: Early pregnancy has a strong protective effect against breast
cancer in humans and rodents, but the underlying mechanism is unknown. Because
breast cancers are thought to arise from specific cell subpopulations of mammary 
epithelia, we studied the effect of parity on the transcriptome and the
differentiation/proliferation potential of specific luminal and basal mammary
cells in mice.
METHODS: Mammary epithelial cell subpopulations (luminal Sca1-, luminal Sca1+,
basal stem/progenitor, and basal myoepithelial cells) were isolated by flow
cytometry from parous and age-matched virgin mice and examined by using a
combination of unbiased genomics, bioinformatics, in vitro colony formation, and 
in vivo limiting dilution transplantation assays. Specific findings were further 
investigated with immunohistochemistry in entire glands of parous and age-matched
virgin mice.
RESULTS: Transcriptome analysis revealed an upregulation of differentiation genes
and a marked decrease in the Wnt/Notch signaling ratio in basal stem/progenitor
cells of parous mice. Separate bioinformatics analyses showed reduced activity
for the canonical Wnt transcription factor LEF1/TCF7 and increased activity for
the Wnt repressor TCF3. This finding was specific for basal stem/progenitor cells
and was associated with downregulation of potentially carcinogenic pathways and a
reduction in the proliferation potential of this cell subpopulation in vitro and 
in vivo. As a possible mechanism for decreased Wnt signaling in basal
stem/progenitor cells, we found a more than threefold reduction in the expression
of the secreted Wnt ligand Wnt4 in total mammary cells from parous mice, which
corresponded to a similar decrease in the proportion of Wnt4-secreting and
estrogen/progesterone receptor-positive cells. Because recombinant Wnt4 rescued
the proliferation defect of basal stem/progenitor cells in vitro, reduced Wnt4
secretion appears to be causally related to parity-induced alterations of basal
stem/progenitor cell properties in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: By revealing that parity induces differentiation and downregulates
the Wnt/Notch signaling ratio and the in vitro and in vivo proliferation
potential of basal stem/progenitor cells in mice, our study sheds light on the
long-term consequences of an early pregnancy. Furthermore, it opens the door to
future studies assessing whether inhibitors of the Wnt pathway may be used to
mimic the parity-induced protective effect against breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3672662
PMID: 23621987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Immunity. 2013 Apr 18;38(4):694-704. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.12.003.

T cell factor 1 is required for group 2 innate lymphoid cell generation.

Yang Q(1), Monticelli LA, Saenz SA, Chi AW, Sonnenberg GF, Tang J, De Obaldia ME,
Bailis W, Bryson JL, Toscano K, Huang J, Haczku A, Pear WS, Artis D, Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) are innate lymphocytes that confer
protective type 2 immunity during helminth infection and are also involved in
allergic airway inflammation. Here we report that ILC2 development required
T cell factor 1 (TCF-1, the product of the Tcf7 gene), a transcription factor
also implicated in T cell lineage specification. Tcf7(-/-) mice lack ILC2, and
were unable to mount ILC2-mediated innate type 2 immune responses. Forced
expression of TCF-1 in bone marrow progenitors partially bypassed the requirement
for Notch signaling in the generation of ILC2 in vivo. TCF-1 acted through both
GATA-3-dependent and GATA-3-independent pathways to promote the generation of
ILC2. These results are reminiscent of the critical roles of TCF-1 in early
T cell development. Hence, transcription factors that underlie early steps of
T cell development are also implicated in the development of innate lymphoid
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4029843
PMID: 23601684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Aug;49(2):316-23. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0230OC.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cell gene expression in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Bahr TM(1), Hughes GJ, Armstrong M, Reisdorph R, Coldren CD, Edwards MG, Schnell 
C, Kedl R, LaFlamme DJ, Reisdorph N, Kechris KJ, Bowler RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, University of Colorado at Denver,
Aurora, CO, USA.

Although most cases of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) occur in
smokers, only a fraction of smokers develop the disease. We hypothesized distinct
molecular signatures for COPD and emphysema in the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) of current and former smokers. To test this hypothesis, we
identified and validated PBMC gene expression profiles in smokers with and
without COPD. We generated expression data on 136 subjects from the COPDGene
study, using Affymetrix U133 2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA).
Multiple linear regression with adjustment for covariates (gender, age, body mass
index, family history, smoking status, and pack-years) was used to identify
candidate genes, and ingenuity pathway analysis was used to identify candidate
pathways. Candidate genes were validated in 149 subjects according to multiplex
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, which included 75 subjects not 
previously profiled. Pathways that were differentially expressed in subjects with
COPD and emphysema included those that play a role in the immune system,
inflammatory responses, and sphingolipid (ceramide) metabolism. Twenty-six of the
46 candidate genes (e.g., FOXP1, TCF7, and ASAH1) were validated in the
independent cohort. Plasma metabolomics was used to identify a novel
glycoceramide (galabiosylceramide) as a biomarker of emphysema, supporting the
genomic association between acid ceramidase (ASAH1) and emphysema. COPD is a
systemic disease whose gene expression signatures in PBMCs could serve as novel
diagnostic or therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3824029
PMID: 23590301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Jul;19(3):545-51. doi: 10.1007/s12253-013-9615-3. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

Expression of secreted frizzled-related protein 1 and 3, T-cell factor 1 and
lymphoid enhancer factor 1 in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Nikueva-Martic T(1), Serman L, Zeljko M, Vidas Z, Gaparov S, Zeljko HM, Kosovic
M, Pecina-laus N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, alata 3,
10000 Zagreb, Croatia. tmartic@mef.hr

Frequency and mortality of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) are increasing for decades.
However, the molecular background of RCC tumorigenesis is still poorly
understood. In current study we investigated the expression of TCF/LEF and SFRP
family members (SFRP1 and SFRP3) to gain a better understanding of biological
signaling pathways responsible for epidemiology and clinical parameters of clear 
cell RCC (cRCC). Thirty-six pairs of paraffin-embedded clear cRCC and adjacent
nontumoral tissues samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC) were analyzed and
compared with corresponding clinicopathological parameters. Immunohistochemistry 
indicated statistically significant decreased SFRP3 expression in tumor tissues
but no consistency in SFRP1 expression in analyzed normal and tumor tissue. The
TCF1 expression level was significantly weaker in normal tissue compared to tumor
samples while LEF1 protein levels were significantly weaker in tumor tissue. To
our knowledge, this is the first report on analysis of the expression of
transcription factors TCF1 and LEF1 in clear cell renal cell carcinoma and their 
comparison with Wnt signal pathway antagonists belonging to SFRP family.

PMID: 23572277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4585-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300099. Epub 2013
Mar 27.

Id2-mediated inhibition of E2A represses memory CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Masson F(1), Minnich M, Olshansky M, Bilic I, Mount AM, Kallies A, Speed TP,
Busslinger M, Nutt SL, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia.

The transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)2 modulates T cell fate
decisions, but the molecular mechanism underpinning this regulation is unclear.
In this study we show that loss of Id2 cripples effector differentiation and
instead programs CD8(+) T cells to adopt a memory fate with increased
Eomesodermin and Tcf7 expression. We demonstrate that Id2 restrains CD8(+) T cell
memory differentiation by inhibiting E2A-mediated direct activation of Tcf7 and
that Id2 expression level mirrors T cell memory recall capacity. As a result of
the defective effector differentiation, Id2-deficient CD8(+) T cells fail to
induce sufficient Tbx21 expression to generate short-lived effector CD8(+) T
cells. Our findings reveal that the Id2/E2A axis orchestrates T cell
differentiation through the induction or repression of downstream transcription
factors essential for effector and memory T cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3631715
PMID: 23536629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1647-61. doi: 10.1172/JCI65048. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

WNT signaling determines tumorigenicity and function of ESC-derived retinal
progenitors.

Cui L(1), Guan Y, Qu Z, Zhang J, Liao B, Ma B, Qian J, Li D, Li W, Xu GT, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1422-4.

Tumor formation constitutes a major obstacle to the clinical application of
embryonic stem cell-derived (ESC-derived) cells. In an attempt to find major
extracellular signaling and intrinsic factors controlling tumorigenicity and
therapeutic functionality of transplanted ESC-derived retinal progenitor cells
(ESC-RPCs), we evaluated multiple kinds of ESC-RPCs in a mouse retinal
degeneration model and conducted genome-wide gene expression profiling. We
identified canonical WNT signaling as a critical determinant for the
tumorigenicity and therapeutic function of ESC-RPCs. The function of WNT
signaling is primarily mediated by TCF7, which directly induces expression of
Sox2 and Nestin. Inhibition of WNT signaling, overexpression of dominant-negative
Tcf7, and silencing Tcf7, Sox2, or Nestin all resulted in drastically reduced
tumor formation and substantially improved retinal integration and visual
preservation in mice. These results demonstrate that the WNT signaling cascade
plays a critical role in modulating the tumorigenicity and functionality of
ESC-derived progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3613909
PMID: 23524971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1422-4. doi: 10.1172/JCI69324. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

WNT signaling in stem cell differentiation and tumor formation.

Ouyang H(1), Zhuo Y, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Center and Department of Ophthalmology, State Key 
Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
People's Republic of China.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1647-61.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) hold great therapeutic promise for the regeneration
of functional cell types and clinical applications. However, tumorigenic
potential of stem cells in a transplanted host remains a major obstacle. In this 
issue of the JCI, Cui and colleagues identified TCF7-mediated canonical WNT
signaling as a critical determinant of both the tumorigenicity and therapeutic
function of ESC-derived retinal progenitor cells (ESC-RPCs). Their findings
suggested that addressing key extracellular signaling and related intrinsic
factors will be essential for the successful use of ESC-derived progenitor
transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3613938
PMID: 23524963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 19;433(4):502-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.020. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Rac1 and Cdc42 GTPases regulate shear stress-driven ß-catenin signaling in
osteoblasts.

Wan Q(1), Cho E, Yokota H, Na S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Beta-catenin-dependent TCF/LEF (T-cell factor/lymphocyte enhancing factor) is
known to be mechanosensitive and an important regulator for promoting bone
formation. However, the functional connection between TCF/LEF activity and Rho
family GTPases is not well understood in osteoblasts. Herein we investigated the 
molecular mechanisms underlying oscillatory shear stress-induced TCF/LEF activity
in MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cells using live cell imaging. We employed fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based and green fluorescent protein (GFP)-based 
biosensors, which allowed us to monitor signal transduction in living cells in
real time. Oscillatory (1Hz) shear stress (10 dynes/cm2) increased TCF/LEF
activity and stimulated translocation of ß-catenin to the nucleus with the
distinct activity patterns of Rac1 and Cdc42. The shear stress-induced TCF/LEF
activity was blocked by the inhibition of Rac1 and Cdc42 with their dominant
negative mutants or selective drugs, but not by a dominant negative mutant of
RhoA. In contrast, constitutively active Rac1 and Cdc42 mutants caused a
significant enhancement of TCF/LEF activity. Moreover, activation of Rac1 and
Cdc42 increased the basal level of TCF/LEF activity, while their inhibition
decreased the basal level. Interestingly, disruption of cytoskeletal structures
or inhibition of myosin activity did not significantly affect shear
stress-induced TCF/LEF activity. Although Rac1 is reported to be involved in
ß-catenin in cancer cells, the involvement of Cdc42 in ß-catenin signaling in
osteoblasts has not been identified. Our findings in this study demonstrate that 
both Rac1 and Cdc42 GTPases are critical regulators in shear stress-driven
ß-catenin signaling in osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3648988
PMID: 23524265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Development. 2013 Mar;140(6):1207-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.088559.

Architecture of a lymphomyeloid developmental switch controlled by PU.1, Notch
and Gata3.

Del Real MM(1), Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Hematopoiesis is a classic system with which to study developmental potentials
and to investigate gene regulatory networks that control choices among alternate 
lineages. T-cell progenitors seeding the thymus retain several lineage
potentials. The transcription factor PU.1 is involved in the decision to become a
T cell or a myeloid cell, and the developmental outcome of expressing PU.1 is
dependent on exposure to Notch signaling. PU.1-expressing T-cell progenitors
without Notch signaling often adopt a myeloid program, whereas those exposed to
Notch signals remain in a T-lineage pathway. Here, we show that Notch signaling
does not alter PU.1 transcriptional activity by degradation/alteration of PU.1
protein. Instead, Notch signaling protects against the downregulation of T-cell
factors so that a T-cell transcriptional network is maintained. Using an early
T-cell line, we describe two branches of this network. The first involves
inhibition of E-proteins by PU.1 and the resulting inhibition of Notch signaling 
target genes. Effects of E-protein inhibition can be reversed by exposure to
Notch signaling. The second network is dependent on the ability of PU.1 to
inhibit important T-cell transcription factor genes such as Myb, Tcf7 and Gata3
in the absence of Notch signaling. We show that maintenance of Gata3 protein
levels by Myb and Notch signaling is linked to the ability to retain T-cell
identity in response to PU.1.

PMCID: PMC3585658
PMID: 23444353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Feb 21;4:e500. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.32.

Wnt activation promotes neuronal differentiation of glioblastoma.

Rampazzo E(1), Persano L, Pistollato F, Moro E, Frasson C, Porazzi P, Della Puppa
A, Bresolin S, Battilana G, Indraccolo S, Te Kronnie G, Argenton F, Tiso N, Basso
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Woman and Child Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Dis. 2013;4:e597.

One of the biggest challenges in tumour research is the possibility to reprogram 
cancer cells towards less aggressive phenotypes. In this study, we reprogrammed
primary Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)-derived cells towards a more differentiated
and less oncogenic phenotype by activating the Wnt pathway in a hypoxic
microenvironment. Hypoxia usually correlates with malignant behaviours in cancer 
cells, but it has been recently involved, together with Wnt signalling, in the
differentiation of embryonic and neural stem cells. Here, we demonstrate that
treatment with Wnt ligands, or overexpression of ß-catenin, mediate neuronal
differentiation and halt proliferation in primary GBM cells. An hypoxic
environment cooperates with Wnt-induced differentiation, in line with our finding
that hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is instrumental and required to sustain
the expression of ß-catenin transcriptional partners TCF-1 and LEF-1. In
addition, we also found that Wnt-induced GBM cell differentiation inhibits Notch 
signalling, and thus gain of Wnt and loss of Notch cooperate in the activation of
a pro-neuronal differentiation program. Intriguingly, the GBM sub-population
enriched of cancer stem cells (CD133(+) fraction) is the primary target of the
pro-differentiating effects mediated by the crosstalk between HIF-1a, Wnt, and
Notch signalling. By using zebrafish transgenics and mutants as model systems to 
visualize and manipulate in vivo the Wnt pathway, we confirm that Wnt pathway
activation is able to promote neuronal differentiation and inhibit Notch
signalling of primary human GBM cells also in this in vivo set-up. In conclusion,
these findings shed light on an unsuspected crosstalk between hypoxia, Wnt and
Notch signalling in GBM, and suggest the potential to manipulate these
microenvironmental signals to blunt GBM malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4098797
PMID: 23429286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1613-4. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.354. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Loss of Tcf7 diminishes hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell function.

Huls G, van Es J, Clevers H, de Haan G, van Os R.

PMID: 23212152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Feb;34(2):277-86. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs351. Epub 2012 Nov 
5.

Lycopene synergistically enhances quinacrine action to inhibit Wnt-TCF signaling 
in breast cancer cells through APC.

Preet R(1), Mohapatra P, Das D, Satapathy SR, Choudhuri T, Wyatt MD, Kundu CN.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of KIIT School of Biotechnology,
Campus-11, KIIT University, Patia, Bhubaneswar, Orissa 751024, India.

We previously reported that quinacrine (QC) has anticancer activity against
breast cancer cells. Here, we examine the mechanism of action of QC and its
ability to inhibit Wnt-TCF signaling in two independent breast cancer cell lines.
QC altered Wnt-TCF signaling components by increasing the levels of adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC), DAB2, GSK-3ß and axin and decreasing the levels of
ß-catenin, p-GSK3ß (ser 9) and CK1. QC also reduced the activity of the Wnt
transcription factor TCF/LEF and its downstream targets cyclin D1 and c-MYC.
Using a luciferase-based Wnt-TCF transcription factor assay, it was shown that
APC levels were inversely associated with TCF/LEF activity. Induction of
apoptosis and DNA damage was observed after treatment with QC, which was
associated with increased expression of APC. The effects induced by QC depend on 
APC because the inhibition of Wnt-TCF signaling by QC is lost in APC-knockdown
cells, and consequently, the extent of apoptosis and DNA damage caused by QC is
reduced compared with parental cells. Because we previously showed that QC
inhibits topoisomerase, we examined the effect of another topoisomerase
inhibitor, etoposide, on Wnt signaling. Interestingly, etoposide treatment also
reduced TCF/LEF activity, ß-catenin and cyclin D1 levels commensurate with
induction of DNA damage and apoptosis. Lycopene, a plant-derived antioxidant,
synergistically increased QC activity and inhibited Wnt-TCF signaling in cancer
cells without affecting the MCF-10A normal breast cell line. Collectively, the
data suggest that QC-mediated Wnt-TCF signal inhibition depends on APC and that
the addition of lycopene synergistically increases QC anticancer activity.

PMID: 23129580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Immunity. 2012 Nov 16;37(5):813-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.009. Epub 2012 
Oct 25.

The TCF-1 and LEF-1 transcription factors have cooperative and opposing roles in 
T cell development and malignancy.

Yu S(1), Zhou X, Steinke FC, Liu C, Chen SC, Zagorodna O, Jing X, Yokota Y,
Meyerholz DK, Mullighan CG, Knudson CM, Zhao DM, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2014 Jan 16;40(1):166.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Nov 16;37(5):761-3.

The TCF-1 and LEF-1 transcription factors are known to play critical roles in
normal thymocyte development. Unexpectedly, we found that TCF-1-deficient
(Tcf7(-/-)) mice developed aggressive T cell malignancy, resembling human T cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). LEF-1 was aberrantly upregulated in
premalignant Tcf7(-/-) early thymocytes and lymphoma cells. We further
demonstrated that TCF-1 directly repressed LEF-1 expression in early thymocytes
and that conditional inactivation of Lef1 greatly delayed or prevented T cell
malignancy in Tcf7(-/-) mice. In human T-ALLs, an early thymic progenitor (ETP)
subtype was associated with diminished TCF7 expression, and two of the ETP-ALL
cases harbored TCF7 gene deletions. We also showed that TCF-1 and LEF-1 were
dispensable for T cell lineage commitment but instead were required for early
thymocytes to mature beyond the CD4(-)CD8(-) stage. TCF-1 thus has dual roles,
i.e., acting cooperatively with LEF-1 to promote thymocyte maturation while
restraining LEF-1 expression to prevent malignant transformation of developing
thymocytes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3501598
PMID: 23103132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e45342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045342. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Notch signalling inhibits CD4 expression during initiation and differentiation of
human T cell lineage.

Carlin SM(1), Khoo ML, Ma DD, Moore JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Stem Cells and Cancer Research, St Vincent's Centre for Applied Medical 
Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

The Delta/Notch signal transduction pathway is central to T cell differentiation 
from haemopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Although T cell development is well
characterized using expression of cell surface markers, the detailed mechanisms
driving differentiation have not been established. This issue becomes central
with observations that adult HSCs exhibit poor differentiation towards the T cell
lineage relative to neonatal or embryonic precursors. This study investigates the
contribution of Notch signalling and stromal support cells to differentiation of 
adult and Cord Blood (CB) human HSCs, using the Notch signalling OP9Delta
co-culture system. Co-cultured cells were assayed at weekly intervals during
development for phenotype markers using flow cytometry. Cells were also assayed
for mRNA expression at critical developmental stages. Expression of the central
thymocyte marker CD4 was initiated independently of Notch signalling, while cells
grown with Notch signalling had reduced expression of CD4 mRNA and protein.
Interruption of Notch signalling in partially differentiated cells increased CD4 
mRNA and protein expression, and promoted differentiation to CD4(+) CD8(+) T
cells. We identified a set of genes related to T cell development that were
initiated by Notch signalling, and also a set of genes subsequently altered by
Notch signal interruption. These results demonstrate that while Notch signalling 
is essential for establishment of the T cell lineage, at later stages of
differentiation, its removal late in differentiation promotes more efficient DP
cell generation. Notch signalling adds to signals provided by stromal cells to
allow HSCs to differentiate to T cells via initiation of transcription factors
such as HES1, GATA3 and TCF7. We also identify gene expression profile
differences that may account for low generation of T cells from adult HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3470571
PMID: 23071513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5119-28. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201482. Epub 2012
Oct 15.

p27(Kip1) negatively regulates the magnitude and persistence of CD4 T cell
memory.

Jatzek A(1), Tejera MM, Singh A, Sullivan JA, Plisch EH, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Much is known about the differentiation of naive T cells into distinct lineages
of effector cells, but the molecular mechanisms underlying the generation and
maintenance of CD4 T cell memory are poorly characterized. Our studies ascribe a 
novel role for the cell cycle regulator p27(Kip1) as a prominent negative
regulator of the establishment and long-term maintenance of Th1 CD4 T cell
memory. We demonstrate that p27(Kip1) might restrict the differentiation and
survival of memory precursors by increasing the T-bet/Bcl-6 ratio in effector CD4
T cells. By promoting apoptosis and contraction of effector CD4 T cells by
mechanisms that are at least in part T cell intrinsic, p27(Kip1) markedly limits 
the abundance of memory CD4 T cells. Furthermore, we causally link
p27(Kip1)-dependent apoptosis to the decay of CD4 T cell memory, possibly by
repressing the expression of <U+03B3>-chain receptors and the downstream effector of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, Tcf-1. We extend these findings by showing that 
the antagonistic effects of p27(Kip1) on CD4 T cell memory require its
cyclin-dependent kinase-binding domain. Collectively, these findings provide key 
insights into the mechanisms underlying the governance of peripheral CD4 T cell
homeostasis and identify p27(Kip1) as a target to enhance vaccine-induced CD4 T
cell memory.

PMCID: PMC3504176
PMID: 23071285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 30;428(4):525-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.039. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

MiR-214 inhibits cell growth in hepatocellular carcinoma through suppression of
ß-catenin.

Wang X(1), Chen J, Li F, Lin Y, Zhang X, Lv Z, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.

Mounting evidence has shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) are implicated in
carcinogenesis and can function as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes in human
cancers. Recent profile studies of miRNA expression have documented a
deregulation of miRNA (miR-214) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, its
potential functions and underlying mechanisms in hepatocarcinogenesis remain
largely unknown. Here, we confirmed that miR-214 is significantly downregulated
in HCC cells and specimens. Ectopic overexpression of miR-214 inhibited
proliferation of HCC cells in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo. Further studies
revealed that miR-214 could directly target the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR)
of ß-catenin mRNA and suppress its protein expression. Similar to the restoring
miR-214 expression, ß-catenin downregulation inhibited cell growth, whereas
restoring the ß-catenin expression abolished the function of miR-214. Moreover,
miR-214-mediated reduction of ß-catenin resulted in suppression of several
downstream genes including c-Myc, cyclinD1, TCF-1, and LEF-1. These findings
indicate that miR-214 serves as tumor suppressor and plays substantial roles in
inhibiting the tumorigenesis of HCC through suppression of ß-catenin. Given
these, miR-214 may serve as a useful prognostic or therapeutic target for
treatment of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23068095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMC Genomics. 2012 Sep 25;13:509. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-509.

Transcriptomic analysis of peritoneal cells in a mouse model of sepsis:
confirmatory and novel results in early and late sepsis.

Bhatty M(1), Fan R, Muir WM, Pruett SB, Nanduri B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.

BACKGROUND: The events leading to sepsis start with an invasive infection of a
primary organ of the body followed by an overwhelming systemic response.
Intra-abdominal infections are the second most common cause of sepsis. Peritoneal
fluid is the primary site of infection in these cases. A microarray-based
approach was used to study the temporal changes in cells from the peritoneal
cavity of septic mice and to identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for this subset of sepsis patients.
RESULTS: We conducted microarray analysis of the peritoneal cells of mice
infected with a non-pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli. Differentially
expressed genes were identified at two early (1 h, 2 h) and one late time point
(18 h). A multiplexed bead array analysis was used to confirm protein expression 
for several cytokines which showed differential expression at different time
points based on the microarray data. Gene Ontology based hypothesis testing
identified a positive bias of differentially expressed genes associated with
cellular development and cell death at 2 h and 18 h respectively. Most
differentially expressed genes common to all 3 time points had an immune response
related function, consistent with the observation that a few bacteria are still
present at 18 h.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional regulators like PLAGL2, EBF1, TCF7, KLF10 and SBNO2,
previously not described in sepsis, are differentially expressed at early and
late time points. Expression pattern for key biomarkers in this study is similar 
to that reported in human sepsis, indicating the suitability of this model for
future studies of sepsis, and the observed differences in gene expression suggest
species differences or differences in the response of blood leukocytes and
peritoneal leukocytes.

PMCID: PMC3621573
PMID: 23009705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 1;189(7):3462-71. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

The molecular signature of tissue resident memory CD8 T cells isolated from the
brain.

Wakim LM(1), Woodward-Davis A, Liu R, Hu Y, Villadangos J, Smyth G, Bevan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Tissue resident memory (Trm) CD8 T cells represent a newly described memory T
cell population. We have previously characterized a population of Trm cells that 
persists within the brain after acute virus infection. Although capable of
providing marked protection against a subsequent local challenge, brain Trm cells
do not undergo recall expansion after dissociation from the tissue. Furthermore, 
these Trm cells do not depend on the same survival factors as the circulating
memory T cell pool as assessed either in vivo or in vitro. To gain greater
insight into this population of cells, we compared the gene expression profiles
of Trm cells isolated from the brain with those of circulating memory T cells
isolated from the spleen after an acute virus infection. Trm cells displayed
altered expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, expressed a distinct set of
transcription factors, and overexpressed several inhibitory receptors.
Cumulatively, these data indicate that Trm cells are a distinct memory T cell
population disconnected from the circulating memory T cell pool and display a
unique molecular signature that likely results in optimal survival and function
within their local environment.

PMCID: PMC3884813
PMID: 22922816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2722-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201150. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Cutting edge: generation of memory precursors and functional memory CD8+ T cells 
depends on T cell factor-1 and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1.

Zhou X(1), Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. xinyuan.zhou@gmail.com

T cell factor (TCF)-1 and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF)-1 transcription 
factors have redundant roles in promoting thymocyte maturation. TCF-1 has been
recently shown to critically regulate memory CD8+ T cell differentiation and
persistence. The complete spectra of regulatory roles for TCF-1 and LEF-1 in CD8+
T cell responses are yet unknown. We conditionally targeted LEF-1, and by
combination with germline deletion of TCF-1, we found that loss of both factors
completely abrogated the generation of KLR G1(lo)IL-7Ra+ memory precursors in
effector CD8+ T cell populations in response to Listeria monocytogenes infection.
Whereas CD8+ effectors deficient for TCF-1 and LEF-1 retained the capacity to
express IFN-<U+03B3>, granzyme B, and perforin, they were defective in TNF-a production.
In the memory phase, the Ag-specific CD8+ T cells lacking TCF-1 and LEF-1
exhibited an effector phenotype and were severely impaired in secondary expansion
upon rechallenge. Thus, TCF-1 and LEF-1 cooperatively regulate generation of
memory precursors and protective memory CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC3437003
PMID: 22875805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9455-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks690. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Intrinsic properties of Tcf1 and Tcf4 splice variants determine
cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

Wallmen B(1), Schrempp M, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine and Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Albertstr. 19A, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

T-cell factor (Tcf)/lymphoid-enhancer factor (Lef) proteins are a structurally
diverse family of deoxyribonucleic acid-binding proteins that have essential
nuclear functions in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. Expression of Wnt/ß-catenin target
genes is highly dependent on context, but the precise role of Tcf/Lef family
members in the generation and maintenance of cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin
responses is unknown. Herein, we show that induction of a subset of Wnt/ß-catenin
targets in embryonic stem cells depends on Tcf1 and Tcf4, whereas other
co-expressed Tcf/Lef family members cannot induce these targets. The
Tcf1/Tcf4-dependent gene responses to Wnt are primarily if not exclusively
mediated by C-clamp-containing Tcf1E and Tcf4E splice variants. A combined
knockdown of Tcf1/Tcf4 abrogates Wnt-inducible transcription but does not affect 
the active chromatin conformation of their targets. Thus, the transcriptionally
poised state of Wnt/ß-catenin targets is maintained independent of Tcf/Lef
proteins. Conversely, ectopically overexpressed Tcf1E cannot invade silent
chromatin and fails to initiate expression of inactive Wnt/ß-catenin targets even
if repressive chromatin modifications are abolished. The observed non-redundant
functions of Tcf1/Tcf4 isoforms in acute transcriptional activation demonstrated 
that the cell-type-specific complement of Tcf/Lef proteins is a critical
determinant of context-dependent Wnt/ß-catenin responses. Moreover, the apparent 
inability to cope with chromatin uncovers an intrinsic property of Tcf/Lef
proteins that prevents false ectopic induction and ensures spatiotemporal
stability of Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3479169
PMID: 22859735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):71-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.016. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Visualization and exploration of Tcf/Lef function using a highly responsive
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-reporter transgenic zebrafish.

Shimizu N(1), Kawakami K, Ishitani T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Regulation Systems, Department of Immunobiology and
Neuroscience, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Evolutionarily conserved Tcf/Lef transcription factors (Lef1, Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and
Tcf7l2) mediate gene expression regulated by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has
multiple roles in early embryogenesis, organogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis,
and tissue regeneration. However, the spatiotemporal dynamics of Tcf/Lef activity
during these events remain poorly understood. We generated stable transgenic
zebrafish lines carrying a new Wnt/ß-catenin signaling reporter,
Tcf/Lef-miniP:dGFP. The reporter revealed the transcriptional activities of four 
Tcf/Lef members controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which were expressed in
known Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-active sites during embryogenesis, organ
development and growth, and tissue regeneration. We used the transgenic lines to 
demonstrate the contribution of Tcf/Lef-mediated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to the
development of the anterior lateral line, dorsal and secondary posterior lateral 
lines, and gill filaments. Thus, these reporter lines are highly useful tools for
studying Tcf/Lef-mediated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-dependent processes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(7):e1002771. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002771. Epub 2012 Jul
19.

Tc17 cells mediate vaccine immunity against lethal fungal pneumonia in immune
deficient hosts lacking CD4+ T cells.

Nanjappa SG(1), Heninger E, Wüthrich M, Gasper DJ, Klein BS.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University
of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr;10(4):e1004148.

Vaccines may help reduce the growing incidence of fungal infections in
immune-suppressed patients. We have found that, even in the absence of CD4(+)
T-cell help, vaccine-induced CD8(+) T cells persist and confer resistance against
Blastomyces dermatitidis and Histoplasma capsulatum. Type 1 cytokines contribute 
to that resistance, but they also are dispensable. Although the role of T helper 
17 cells in immunity to fungi is debated, IL-17 producing CD8(+) T cells (Tc17
cells) have not been investigated. Here, we show that Tc17 cells are
indispensable in antifungal vaccine immunity in hosts lacking CD4(+) T cells.
Tc17 cells are induced upon vaccination, recruited to the lung on pulmonary
infection, and act non-redundantly in mediating protection in a manner that
requires neutrophils. Tc17 cells did not influence type I immunity, nor did the
lack of IL-12 signaling augment Tc17 cells, indicating a distinct lineage and
function. IL-6 was required for Tc17 differentiation and immunity, but IL-1R1 and
Dectin-1 signaling was unexpectedly dispensable. Tc17 cells expressed surface
CXCR3 and CCR6, but only the latter was essential in recruitment to the lung.
Although IL-17 producing T cells are believed to be short-lived, effector Tc17
cells expressed low levels of KLRG1 and high levels of the transcription factor
TCF-1, predicting their long-term survival and stem-cell like behavior. Our work 
has implications for designing vaccines against fungal infections in immune
suppressed patients.

PMCID: PMC3400565
PMID: 22829762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3648-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06769-11. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

A WNT/p21 circuit directed by the C-clamp, a sequence-specific DNA binding domain
in TCFs.

Hoverter NP(1), Ting JH, Sundaresh S, Baldi P, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

The lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T cell factor (LEF/TCF) family of transcription
factors are downstream effectors of the WNT signaling pathway, which drives colon
tumorigenesis. LEF/TCFs have a DNA sequence-specific high-mobility group (HMG)
box that binds Wnt response elements (WREs). The "E tail" isoforms of TCFs are
alternatively spliced to include a second DNA binding domain called the C-clamp. 
We show that induction of a dominant negative C-clamp version of TCF1 (dnTCF1E)
induces p21 expression and a stall in the growth of DLD1 colon cancer cells.
Induction of a C-clamp mutant did not efficiently induce p21, nor did it stall
cell growth. Microarray analysis revealed that induction of p21 by wild-type
dnTCF1E (dnTCF1E(WT)) correlated with a decrease in expression of multiple p21
suppressors that act at multiple levels from transcription (SP5, YAP1, and
RUNX1), RNA stability (MSI2), and protein stability (CUL4A). We show that the
C-clamp is a sequence-specific DNA binding domain that can make contacts with
5'-RCCG-3' elements upstream or downstream of WREs. The C-clamp-RCCG interaction 
was critical for TCF1E-mediated transcriptional control of p21-connected target
gene promoters. Our results indicate that a rapid-response WNT/p21 circuit is
driven by C-clamp target gene selection.

PMCID: PMC3430198
PMID: 22778133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Aug;9(8):418-28. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2012.116. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in prostate cancer.

Kypta RM(1), Waxman J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell biology and Stem Cells Unit, Center for Cooperative Research in
Biosciences, CIC bioGUNE, Parque Tecnológico de Vizcaya, Derio 48160, Spain.
(2)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus,
Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK.

The Wnts are secreted cysteine-rich glycoproteins that have important roles in
the developing embryo as well as in tissue homeostasis in adults. Dysregulation
of Wnt signalling can lead to several types of cancer, including prostate cancer.
A hallmark of the signalling pathway is the stabilization of the transcriptional 
co-activator ß-catenin, which not only regulates expression of many genes
implicated in cancer but is also an essential component of cadherin cell adhesion
complexes. ß-catenin regulates gene expression by binding members of the
T-cell-specific transcription factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1
(TCF/LEF-1) family of transcription factors. In addition, ß-catenin associates
with the androgen receptor, a key regulator of prostate growth that drives
prostate cancer progression. Wnt/ß-catenin signalling can be controlled by
secreted Wnt antagonists, many of which are downregulated in cancer. Activation
of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway has effects on prostate cell proliferation,
differentiation and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, which is thought to
regulate the invasive behaviour of tumour cells. However, whether targeting
Wnt/ß-catenin signalling is a good therapeutic option for prostate cancer remains
unclear.

PMID: 22710668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 1;368(1):44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.012. Epub 2012
May 26.

Subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization of vertebrate Lef/Tcf transcription
factors.

Klingel S(1), Morath I, Strietz J, Menzel K, Holstein TW, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. susanne.klingel@kit.edu

Invertebrates express a multitude of Wnt ligands and all Wnt/ß-catenin signaling 
pathways converge to only one nuclear Lef/Tcf. In vertebrates, however, four
distinct Lef/Tcfs, i.e. Tcf-1, Lef, Tcf-3, and Tcf-4 fulfill this function. At
present, it is largely unknown to what extent the various Lef/Tcfs are
functionally similar or diversified in vertebrates. In particular, it is not
known which domains are responsible for the Tcf subtype specific functions. We
investigated the conserved and non-conserved functions of the various Tcfs by
using Xenopus laevis as a model organism and testing Tcfs from Hydra
magnipapillata, Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster. In order to
identify domains relevant for the individual properties we created series of
chimeric constructs consisting of parts of XTcf-3, XTcf-1 and HyTcf. Rescue
experiments in Xenopus morphants revealed that the three invertebrate Tcfs tested
compensated the loss of distinct Xenopus Tcfs: Drosophila Tcf (Pangolin) can
substitute for the loss of XTcf-1, XTcf-3 and XTcf-4. By comparison,
Caenorhabditis Tcf (Pop-1) and Hydra Tcf (HyTcf) can substitute for the loss of
only XTcf-3 and XTcf-4, respectively. The domain, which is responsible for
subtype specific functions is the regulatory CRD domain. A phylogenetic analysis 
separates Tcf-1/Lef-1 from the sister group Tcf-3/4 in the vertebrate lineage. We
propose that the vertebrate specific diversification of Tcfs in vertebrates
resulted in subfunctionalization of a Tcf that already united most of the Lef/Tcf
functions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22641013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Immunogenetics. 2012 Aug;64(8):591-604. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0620-6. Epub 2012
May 13.

Global transcriptional analysis of primitive thymocytes reveals accelerated
dynamics of T cell specification in fetal stages.

Belyaev NN(1), Biró J, Athanasakis D, Fernandez-Reyes D, Potocnik AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research,
London, UK.

T cell development constitutes a multistage process allowing the dissection of
events resulting in cellular commitment and functional specification in a
specialized microenvironment. This process is guided by the appropriate
expression of regulatory genetic factors like transcriptional activators or
repressors which are, in part, dependent on instructive signals of the
microenvironment. To date, it remains unclear whether exactly the same genetic
mechanism acts in adult compared to fetal T cell development. In order to
directly compare T cell commitment during adult and fetal differentiation, we
isolated subsequent stages of intrathymic subpopulations starting with early
canonical T cell progenitors up to irreversibly committed T cell precursors. The 
genome-wide analysis revealed several distinct gene clusters with a specific
pattern of gene regulation for each subset. The largest cluster contained genes
upregulated after transition through the most primitive pool into the next
transitory population with a consistently elevated expression of elements
associated with ongoing T cell fate specification, like Gata3 and Tcf7, in fetal 
progenitors. Furthermore, adult and fetal T cell progenitors occupied distinct
"transcriptional territories" revealing a precise land map of the progression to 
final T cell commitment operating in different developmental windows. The
presence and/or elevated expression of elements associated with an ongoing
establishment of a T cell signature in the most primitive fetal subset is highly 
suggestive for an extrathymic initiation of T cell specification and underlines
the fundamental differences in fetal versus adult lymphopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3395349
PMID: 22581009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;7(4):750-62. doi: 10.1007/s11481-012-9367-y.
Epub 2012 Apr 27.

ß-catenin/TCF-1 pathway in T cell development and differentiation.

Ma J(1), Wang R, Fang X, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

T cells must undergo two critical differentiation processes before they become
competent effectors that can mediate actual immune responses. Progenitor T cells 
undergo defined stages of differentiation in the thymus, which include positive
and negative selection, to generate a repertoire of T cells that will respond to 
foreign but not self antigens. When these immunocompetent T cells first migrate
out of thymus into peripheral lymphoid tissues, they are naïve and are unable to 
mediate immune responses. However, upon antigen encounter, peripheral CD4+ naïve 
T cells undergo another differentiation process to become armed effector T cells 
including Th1, Th2, Th17 or regulatory T cells, all of which are capable of
regulating immune responses. A canonical Wnt/ß-catenin/T cell factor (TCF)
pathway has been shown to regulate T cell differentiation in both the thymus and 
in peripheral lymphoid tissues. Dysfunction of this pathway at any stage of T
cell differentiation could lead to severe autoimmunity including experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis or immune deficiency. Understanding the role played 
by ß-catenin/TCF-1 in T cell differentiation will facilitate our understanding of
the mechanisms that regulate T cell function and assist in identifying novel
therapy targets for treating both autoimmune and immune diseases. Therefore, in
this review, we will focus on the function of ß-catenin/TCF-1 pathway in the
regulation of thymic and peripheral T cell differentiation processes.

PMCID: PMC3582214
PMID: 22535304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3859-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103729.

T cell factor-1 and ß-catenin control the development of memory-like CD8
thymocytes.

Sharma A(1), Chen Q, Nguyen T, Yu Q, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Innate memory-like CD8 thymocytes develop and acquire effector function during
maturation in the absence of encounter with Ags. In this study, we demonstrate
that enhanced function of transcription factors T cell factor (TCF)-1 and
ß-catenin regulate the frequency of promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF)-expressing, IL-4-producing thymocytes that promote the generation of
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes in trans. In contrast,
TCF1-deficient mice do not have PLZF-expressing thymocytes and
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes. Generation of TCF1 and
ß-catenin-dependent memory-like CD8 thymocytes is non-cell-intrinsic and requires
the expression of IL-4 and IL-4R. CD8 memory-like thymocytes migrate to the
peripheral lymphoid organs, and the memory-like CD8 T cells rapidly produce
IFN-<U+03B3>. Thus, TCF1 and ß-catenin regulate the generation of PLZF-expressing
thymocytes and thereby facilitate the generation of memory-like CD8 T cells in
the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3471543
PMID: 22492686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Invest. 2012 May;122(5):1881-94. doi: 10.1172/JCI45661. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Aberrant nuclear localization of EBP50 promotes colorectal carcinogenesis in
xenotransplanted mice by modulating TCF-1 and ß-catenin interactions.

Lin YY(1), Hsu YH, Huang HY, Shann YJ, Huang CY, Wei SC, Chen CL, Jou TS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Taiwan University College
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Dysregulation of canonical Wnt signaling is thought to play a role in colon
carcinogenesis. ß-Catenin, a key mediator of the pathway, is stabilized upon Wnt 
activation and accumulates in the nucleus, where it can interact with the
transcription factor T cell factor (TCF) to transactivate gene expression. Normal
colonic epithelia express a truncated TCF-1 form, called dnTCF-1, that lacks the 
critical ß-catenin-binding domain and behaves as a transcriptional suppressor.
How the cell maintains a balance between the two forms of TCF-1 is unclear. Here,
we show that ERM-binding phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50) modulates the interaction
between ß-catenin and TCF-1. We observed EBP50 localization to the nucleus of
human colorectal carcinoma cell lines at low cell culture densities and human
primary colorectal tumors that manifested a poor clinical outcome. In contrast,
EBP50 was primarily membranous in confluent cell lines. Aberrantly located EBP50 
stabilized conventional ß-catenin/TCF-1 complexes and connected ß-catenin to
dnTCF-1 to form a ternary molecular complex that enhanced Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
events, including the transcription of downstream oncogenes such as c-Myc and
cyclin D1. Genome-wide analysis of the EBP50 occupancy pattern revealed consensus
binding motifs bearing similarity to Wnt-responsive element. Conventional
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that EBP50 bound to genomic
regions highly enriched with TCF/LEF binding motifs. Knockdown of EBP50 in human 
colorectal carcinoma cell lines compromised cell cycle progression,
anchorage-independent growth, and tumorigenesis in nude mice. We therefore
suggest that nuclear EBP50 facilitates colon tumorigenesis by modulating the
interaction between ß-catenin and TCF-1.

PMCID: PMC3336969
PMID: 22466651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Phytomedicine. 2012 Jun 15;19(8-9):756-62. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2012.02.014.
Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Triptolide inhibits colon-rectal cancer cells proliferation by induction of G1
phase arrest through upregulation of p21.

Liu J(1), Shen M, Yue Z, Yang Z, Wang M, Li C, Xin C, Wang Y, Mei Q, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica of
the State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Department of
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China.

Triptolide, a diterpene triepoxide compound extracted from the traditional
Chinese medicine herb Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F., is a potential cancer
chemotherapeutic for tumors. However, the mechanism of anti-proliferative
mechanism of triptolide in colon cancer cells is not entirely clear. Triptolide
markedly inhibited HT29 and SW480 cells proliferation in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Triptolide decreased ERK and AKT phosphorylation, and
GABPa expression in colon cancer cells. Beta-catenin expression and
phosphorylation were not altered by incubation of triptolide. However, we found
that triptolide repressed expression of LEF/TCF. Although it did not
significantly affect cells apoptosis, triptolide induced G1 phase arrest
dose-dependently. Further detection for the expression of cell cycle-related
proteins suggesting that triptolide stimulate expression of p21 and repress
cyclin A1. Increased p21 binded to CDK4/CDK6, therefore blocked function of
CDK4/CDK6, and subsequently contribute to the G1 arrest. These data suggested
that triptolide is a potential agent for treatment of colon cancer, and its
anti-proliferation effect mainly occur through G1 phase arrest.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002565. Epub 2012 Mar 
8.

Tcf7 is an important regulator of the switch of self-renewal and differentiation 
in a multipotential hematopoietic cell line.

Wu JQ(1), Seay M, Schulz VP, Hariharan M, Tuck D, Lian J, Du J, Shi M, Ye Z,
Gerstein M, Snyder MP, Weissman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America. Jiaqian2009.wu@gmail.com

A critical problem in biology is understanding how cells choose between
self-renewal and differentiation. To generate a comprehensive view of the
mechanisms controlling early hematopoietic precursor self-renewal and
differentiation, we used systems-based approaches and murine EML multipotential
hematopoietic precursor cells as a primary model. EML cells give rise to a
mixture of self-renewing Lin-SCA+CD34+ cells and partially differentiated
non-renewing Lin-SCA-CD34- cells in a cell autonomous fashion. We identified and 
validated the HMG box protein TCF7 as a regulator in this
self-renewal/differentiation switch that operates in the absence of autocrine Wnt
signaling. We found that Tcf7 is the most down-regulated transcription factor
when CD34+ cells switch into CD34- cells, using RNA-Seq. We subsequently
identified the target genes bound by TCF7, using ChIP-Seq. We show that TCF7 and 
RUNX1 (AML1) bind to each other's promoter regions and that TCF7 is necessary for
the production of the short isoforms, but not the long isoforms of RUNX1,
suggesting that TCF7 and the short isoforms of RUNX1 function coordinately in
regulation. Tcf7 knock-down experiments and Gene Set Enrichment Analyses suggest 
that TCF7 plays a dual role in promoting the expression of genes characteristic
of self-renewing CD34+ cells while repressing genes activated in partially
differentiated CD34- state. Finally a network of up-regulated transcription
factors of CD34+ cells was constructed. Factors that control hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) establishment and development, cell growth, and multipotency were
identified. These studies in EML cells demonstrate fundamental cell-intrinsic
properties of the switch between self-renewal and differentiation, and yield
valuable insights for manipulating HSCs and other differentiating systems.

PMCID: PMC3297581
PMID: 22412390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(10):1918-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06288-11. Epub 2012 Mar 
5.

A critical role for the Wnt effector Tcf4 in adult intestinal homeostatic
self-renewal.

van Es JH(1), Haegebarth A, Kujala P, Itzkovitz S, Koo BK, Boj SF, Korving J, van
den Born M, van Oudenaarden A, Robine S, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research &
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Throughout life, intestinal Lgr5+ stem cells give rise to proliferating transient
amplifying cells in crypts, which subsequently differentiate into one of the five
main cell types and migrate along the crypt-villus axis. These dynamic processes 
are coordinated by a relatively small number of evolutionarily conserved
signaling pathways, which includes the Wnt signaling pathway. The DNA-binding
proteins of the T-cell factor family, Tcf1/Tcf7, Lef, Tcf3/Tcf7l1, and
Tcf4/Tcf7l2, constitute the downstream effectors of the Wnt signaling pathway.
While Tcf4 is the major member active during embryogenesis, the role of these Wnt
effectors in the homeostasis of the adult mouse intestinal epithelium is
unresolved. Using Tcf1-/-, Tcf3(flox), and novel Tcf4(flox) mice, we demonstrate 
an essential role for Tcf4 during homeostasis of the adult mouse intestine.

PMCID: PMC3347420
PMID: 22393260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Bone. 2012 May;50(5):1081-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.02.013. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Microarray expression analysis of genes and pathways involved in growth plate
cartilage injury responses and bony repair.

Macsai CE(1), Georgiou KR, Foster BK, Zannettino AC, Xian CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sansom Institute for Health Research, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences,
University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia.

The injured growth plate cartilage is often repaired by a bone bridge which
causes bone growth deformities. Whilst previous studies have identified
sequential inflammatory, fibrogenic, osteogenic and bone remodelling responses
involved in the repair process, the molecular pathways which regulated these
cellular events remain unknown. In a rat growth plate injury model, tissue from
the injury site was collected across the time-course of bone bridge formation
using laser capture microdissection and was subjected to Affymetrix microarray
gene expression analysis. Real Time PCR and immunohistochemical analyses were
used to confirm changes in levels of expression of some genes identified in
microarray. Four major functional groupings of differentially expressed genes
with known roles in skeletal development were identified across the time-course
of bone bridge formation, including Wnt signalling (SFRP1, SFRP4, ß-catenin,
Csnk2a1, Tcf7, Lef1, Fzd1, Fzd2, Wisp1 and Cpz), BMP signalling (BMP-2, BMP-6,
BMP-7, Chrd, Chrdl2 and Id1), osteoblast differentiation (BMP-2, BMP-6, Chrd,
Hgn, Spp1, Axin2, ß-catenin, Bglap2) and skeletal development (Chrd, Mmp9, BMP-1,
BMP-6, Spp1, Fgfr1 and Traf6). These studies provide insight into the molecular
pathways which act cooperatively to regulate bone formation following growth
plate cartilage injury and highlight potential therapeutic targets to limit bone 
bridge formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22387305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031887. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Acute response of peripheral blood cell to autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation in type 1 diabetic patient.

Zhang X(1), Ye L, Hu J, Tang W, Liu R, Yang M, Hong J, Wang W, Ning G, Gu W.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Endocrine Tumors, Shanghai Clinical Center for
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Institute of Endocrine and Metabolic
Diseases, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(AHST) was the first therapeutic approach that can improve ß cell function in
type 1 diabetic (T1D) patients. This study was designed to investigate the
potential mechanisms involved.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We applied AHST to nine T1D patients diagnosed within six
months and analyzed the acute responses in peripheral blood for lymphocyte
subpopulation as well as for genomic expression profiling at the six-month
follow-up.
RESULTS: We found six patients obtained insulin free (IF group) and three
remained insulin dependent (ID group); C-peptide production was significantly
higher in IF group compared to ID group. The acute responses in lymphocytes at
six-month follow-up include declined CD3(+)CD4(+), CD3(+)CD8(+) T cell population
and recovered B cell, NK cell population in both groups but with no significant
differences between the two groups; most immune-related genes and pathways were
up-regulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) of both groups while
none of transcription factors for immune regulatory component were significantly 
changed; the IF group demonstrated more AHST-modified genetic events than the ID 
group and distinct pattern of top pathways, co-expression network as well as
'hub' genes (eg, TCF7 and GZMA) were associated with each group.
CONCLUSIONS: AHST could improve the islet function in newly diagnosed T1D
patients and elimination of the islet specific autoreactive T cells might be one 
of the mechanisms involved; T1D patients responded differently to AHST possibly
due to the distinct transcriptional events occurring in PBMC.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00807651.

PMCID: PMC3285188
PMID: 22384093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(7):1312-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06222-11. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

The chromatin-remodeling enzymes BRG1 and CHD4 antagonistically regulate vascular
Wnt signaling.

Curtis CD(1), Griffin CT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Canonical Wnt signaling plays an important role in embryonic and postnatal blood 
vessel development. We previously reported that the chromatin-remodeling enzyme
BRG1 promotes vascular Wnt signaling. Vascular deletion of Brg1 results in
aberrant yolk sac blood vessel morphology, which is rescued by pharmacological
stimulation of Wnt signaling with lithium chloride (LiCl). We have now generated 
embryos lacking the chromatin-remodeling enzyme Chd4 in vascular endothelial
cells. Unlike Brg1 mutants, Chd4 mutant embryos had normal yolk sac vascular
morphology. However, concomitant deletion of Chd4 and Brg1 rescued vascular
abnormalities seen in Brg1 mutant yolk sacs to the same extent as LiCl treatment.
We hypothesized that Wnt signaling was upregulated in Chd4 mutant yolk sac
vasculature. Indeed, we found that Chd4 deletion resulted in upregulation of the 
Wnt-responsive transcription factor Tcf7 and an increase in Wnt target gene
expression in endothelial cells. Furthermore, we identified one Wnt target gene, 
Pitx2, that was downregulated in Brg1 mutant endothelial cells but was rescued
following LiCl treatment and in Brg1 Chd4 double mutant vasculature, suggesting
that PITX2 helps to mediate the restoration of yolk sac vascular remodeling under
both conditions. We conclude that BRG1 and CHD4 antagonistically modulate Wnt
signaling in developing yolk sac vessels to mediate normal vascular remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3302445
PMID: 22290435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 2012 Oct 11;31(41):4472-83. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.623. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

DNAJB6 chaperones PP2A mediated dephosphorylation of GSK3ß to downregulate
ß-catenin transcription target, osteopontin.

Mitra A(1), Menezes ME, Pannell LK, Mulekar MS, Honkanen RE, Shevde LA, Samant
RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.

Elevated levels of the oncoprotein, osteopontin (OPN), are associated with poor
outcome of several types of cancers including melanoma. We have previously
reported an important involvement of DNAJB6, a member of heat-shock protein 40
(HSP40) family, in negatively impacting tumor growth. The current study was
prompted by our observations reported here which revealed a reciprocal
relationship between DNAJB6 and OPN in melanoma specimens. The 'J domain' is the 
most conserved domain of HSP40 family of proteins. Hence, we assessed the
functional role of the J domain in activities of DNAJB6. We report that the J
domain of DNAJB6 is involved in mediating OPN suppression. Deletion of the J
domain renders DNAJB6 incapable of impeding malignancy and suppressing OPN. Our
mechanistic investigations reveal that DNAJB6 binds HSPA8 (heat-shock cognate
protein, HSC70) and causes dephosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK3ß) at Ser 9 by recruiting protein phosphatase, PP2A. This dephosphorylation 
activates GSK3ß, leading to degradation of ß-catenin and subsequent loss of
TCF/LEF (T cell factor1/lymphoid enhancer factor1) activity. Deletion of the J
domain abrogates assembly of this multiprotein complex and renders GSK3ß
inactive, thus, stabilizing ß-catenin, a transcription co-activator for OPN
expression. Our in-vitro and in-vivo functional analyses show that silencing OPN 
expression in the background of deletion of the J domain renders the resultant
tumor cells less malignant despite the presence of stabilized ß-catenin. Thus, we
have uncovered a new mechanism for regulation of GSK3ß activity leading to
inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3717376
PMID: 22266849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Curr Opin Immunol. 2012 Apr;24(2):132-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2011.12.012. Epub
2012 Jan 19.

Transcriptional drivers of the T-cell lineage program.

Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. evroth@its.caltech.edu

The T-cell development program is specifically triggered by Notch-Delta
signaling, but most transcription factors needed to establish T-cell lineage
identity also have crossover roles in other hematopoietic lineages. This factor
sharing complicates full definition of the core gene regulatory circuits required
for T-cell specification. But new advances illuminate the roles of three of the
most T-cell specific transcription factors. Commitment to the T-cell lineage is
now shown to depend on Bcl11b, while initiation of the T-cell differentiation
program begins earlier with the induction of TCF-1 (Tcf7 gene product) and
GATA-3. Several reports now reveal how TCF-1 and GATA-3 are mobilized in early T 
cells and the pathways for their T-lineage specific effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319509
PMID: 22264928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029175. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

IQSeq: integrated isoform quantification analysis based on next-generation
sequencing.

Du J(1), Leng J, Habegger L, Sboner A, McDermott D, Gerstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut,
United States of America.

With the recent advances in high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), biologists 
are able to measure transcription with unprecedented precision. One problem that 
can now be tackled is that of isoform quantification: here one tries to
reconstruct the abundances of isoforms of a gene. We have developed a statistical
solution for this problem, based on analyzing a set of RNA-Seq reads, and a
practical implementation, available from
archive.gersteinlab.org/proj/rnaseq/IQSeq, in a tool we call IQSeq (Isoform
Quantification in next-generation Sequencing). Here, we present theoretical
results which IQSeq is based on, and then use both simulated and real datasets to
illustrate various applications of the tool. In order to measure the accuracy of 
an isoform-quantification result, one would try to estimate the average variance 
of the estimated isoform abundances for each gene (based on resampling the
RNA-seq reads), and IQSeq has a particularly fast algorithm (based on the Fisher 
Information Matrix) for calculating this, achieving a speedup of ~ 500 times
compared to brute-force resampling. IQSeq also calculates an information
theoretic measure of overall transcriptome complexity to describe isoform
abundance for a whole experiment. IQSeq has many features that are particularly
useful in RNA-Seq experimental design, allowing one to optimally model the
integration of different sequencing technologies in a cost-effective way. In
particular, the IQSeq formalism integrates the analysis of different sample (i.e.
read) sets generated from different technologies within the same statistical
framework. It also supports a generalized statistical partial-sample-generation
function to model the sequencing process. This allows one to have a modular,
"plugin-able" read-generation function to support the particularities of the many
evolving sequencing technologies.

PMCID: PMC3253133
PMID: 22238592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 2012 Feb;139(3):514-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.071746. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling directly regulates Foxj1 expression and ciliogenesis in
zebrafish Kupffer's vesicle.

Caron A(1), Xu X, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Cilia are essential for normal development. The composition and assembly of cilia
has been well characterized, but the signaling and transcriptional pathways that 
govern ciliogenesis remain poorly studied. Here, we report that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling directly regulates ciliogenic transcription factor foxj1a expression
and ciliogenesis in zebrafish Kupffer's vesicle (KV). We show that Wnt signaling 
acts temporally and KV cell-autonomously to control left-right (LR) axis
determination and ciliogenesis. Specifically, reduction of Wnt signaling leads to
a disruption of LR patterning, shorter and fewer cilia, a loss of cilia motility 
and a downregulation of foxj1a expression. However, these phenotypes can be
rescued by KV-targeted overexpression of foxj1a. In comparison to the FGF pathway
that has been previously implicated in the control of ciliogenesis, our epistatic
studies suggest a more downstream function of Wnt signaling in the regulation of 
foxj1a expression and ciliogenesis in KV. Importantly, enhancer analysis reveals 
that KV-specific expression of foxj1a requires the presence of putative Lef1/Tcf 
binding sites, indicating that Wnt signaling activates foxj1a transcription
directly. We also find that impaired Wnt signaling leads to kidney cysts and
otolith disorganization, which can be attributed to a loss of foxj1 expression
and disrupted ciliogenesis in the developing pronephric ducts and otic vesicles. 
Together, our data reveal a novel role of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling upstream of
ciliogenesis, which might be a general developmental mechanism beyond KV.
Moreover, our results also prompt a hypothesis that certain developmental effects
of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway are due to the activation of Foxj1 and cilia
formation.

PMCID: PMC4074261
PMID: 22190638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 1;11(1):39-47. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.1.18759. Epub 2012 Jan 1.

Regulation of self-renewal and reprogramming by TCF factors.

Ombrato L(1), Lluis F, Cosma MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Wnt/ß-catenin canonical pathway has very important roles both in the regulation
of self-renewal and lineage differentiation of pluripotent stem cells, as well as
in the reprogramming of somatic cells. In the absence of Wnt stimulation, the
target genes of the pathway are repressed or down-regulated. Conversely, when
ß-catenin is stabilized there is an accumulation of cytoplasmic and nuclear
ß-catenin that allows up-regulation of its target genes. However, the molecular
mechanisms downstream of ß-catenin that regulate self-renewal of embryonic stem
cells remain unclear. It has been proposed that ß-catenin acts through members of
the T-cell factor (TCF) family. Recent studies have confirmed the role of Tcf3
(Tcf7l1) as a transcriptional repressor in embryonic stem cells, and they have
also proposed a new mechanistic view as to how activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway can overcome this repression.

PMID: 22186782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Immunity. 2011 Dec 23;35(6):972-85. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.019. Epub 2011 
Dec 15.

Th17 cells are long lived and retain a stem cell-like molecular signature.

Muranski P(1), Borman ZA, Kerkar SP, Klebanoff CA, Ji Y, Sanchez-Perez L, Sukumar
M, Reger RN, Yu Z, Kern SJ, Roychoudhuri R, Ferreyra GA, Shen W, Durum SK,
Feigenbaum L, Palmer DC, Antony PA, Chan CC, Laurence A, Danner RL, Gattinoni L, 
Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Feb 3;10(2):107-8.

Th17 cells have been described as short lived, but this view is at odds with
their capacity to trigger protracted damage to normal and transformed tissues. We
report that Th17 cells, despite displaying low expression of CD27 and other
phenotypic markers of terminal differentiation, efficiently eradicated tumors and
caused autoimmunity, were long lived, and maintained a core molecular signature
resembling early memory CD8(+) cells with stem cell-like properties. In addition,
we found that Th17 cells had high expression of Tcf7, a direct target of the Wnt 
and ß-catenin signaling axis, and accumulated ß-catenin, a feature observed in
stem cells. In vivo, Th17 cells gave rise to Th1-like effector cell progeny and
also self-renewed and persisted as IL-17A-secreting cells. Multipotency was
required for Th17 cell-mediated tumor eradication because effector cells
deficient in IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-17A had impaired activity. Thus, Th17 cells are not
always short lived and are a less-differentiated subset capable of superior
persistence and functionality.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246082
PMID: 22177921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Periodontal Res. 2012 Jun;47(3):309-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2011.01433.x. 
Epub 2011 Dec 11.

Wnt/ß-catenin pathway regulates bone morphogenetic protein (BMP2)-mediated
differentiation of dental follicle cells.

Silvério KG(1), Davidson KC, James RG, Adams AM, Foster BL, Nociti FH Jr,
Somerman MJ, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. kgsilverio@fop.unicamp.br

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2)-induced osteogenic 
differentiation has been shown to occur through the canonical Wnt/ßcatenin
pathway, whereas factors promoting canonical Wnt signaling in cementoblasts
inhibit cell differentiation and promote cell proliferation in vitro. The aim of 
this study was to investigate whether putative precursor cells of cementoblasts, 
dental follicle cells (murine SVF4 cells), when stimulated with BMP2, would
exhibit changes in genes/proteins associated with the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: SVF4 cells were stimulated with BMP2, and the following
assays were carried out: (i) Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activation assessed by western
blotting, ß-catenin/transcription factor (TCF) reporter assays and expression of 
the lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1 (Lef1), transcription factor 7 (Tcf7), Wnt
inhibitor factor 1 (Wif1) and Axin2 (Axin2) genes; and (ii)
cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation assessed by mineralization in vitro, and 
by the mRNA levels of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osterix (Osx),
alkaline phosphatase (Alp), osteocalcin (Ocn) and bone sialoprotein (Bsp),
determined by quantitative PCR after treatment with wingless-type MMTV
integration site family, member 3A (WNT3A) and knockdown of ß-catenin.
RESULTS: WNT3A induced ß-catenin nuclear translocation and up-regulated the
transcriptional activity of a canonical Wnt-responsive reporter, suggesting that 
the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway functions in SVF4 cells. Activation of Wnt signaling
with WNT3A suppressed BMP2-mediated induction of cementoblast/osteoblast
maturation of SVF4 cells. However, ß-catenin knockdown showed that the
BMP2-induced expression of cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation markers
requires endogenous ß-catenin. WNT3A down-regulated transcripts for Runx2, Alp
and Ocn in SVF4 cells compared with untreated cells. In contrast, BMP2 induction 
of Bsp transcripts occurred independently of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that stabilization of ß-catenin by WNT3A inhibits 
BMP2-mediated induction of cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation in SVF4 cells,
although BMP2 requires endogenous Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to promote cell
maturation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3865600
PMID: 22150562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Sex Dev. 2011;5(6):318-29. doi: 10.1159/000334515. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Expression profiling of Wnt signaling genes during gonadal differentiation and
gametogenesis in rainbow trout.

Nicol B(1), Guiguen Y.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1037 SCRIBE, IFR140, Ouest-Genopole, Rennes, France.

Wnt signaling plays major roles in various processes, including ovarian
differentiation and development in mammals. In order to explore its potential
implication during gonadal development in a nonmammalian vertebrate species,
expression of Wnt signaling genes was investigated in rainbow trout during
gonadal differentiation and gametogenesis. Multiple Wnt pathway genes were
expressed and exhibited distinct expression patterns. In ovary, tcf7 was highly
expressed during early differentiation, whereas no sexually dimorphic expression 
of rspo1 was detected. During later ovarian development, wnt11 was highly
expressed in granulosa cells and oocytes suggesting an implication in
folliculogenesis and oogenesis, whereas wnt9b was principally detected in
granulosa cells. In testis, Wnt pathway genes were mostly expressed during early 
spermatogenesis. Overall, these present results suggest that Wnt signaling is
implicated in multiple processes of male and female gonadal development and
provide basis for future studies on Wnt signaling functions in teleost fish
gonads.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22116193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2011;21(3):207-36.

Cell-context dependent TCF/LEF expression and function: alternative tales of
repression, de-repression and activation potentials.

Mao CD(1), Byers SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Markey Cancer 
Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. cdmao2@uky.edu

Wnt signaling controls cell specification and fate during development and adult
tissue homeostasis by converging on a small family of DNA binding factors, the
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) family. In response to Wnt
signals, TCF/LEF members undergo a transcriptional switch from repression to
activation mediated in part by nuclear ß-catenin binding and recruitment of
co-activator complexes. In mammals, the specificity and fine tuning of this
transcriptional switch is also achieved by the cell-context-dependent expression 
of four members (TCF7, TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and LEF1) and numerous variants, which
display differential DNA binding affinity and specificity, repression strength,
activation potential, and regulators. TCF7/LEF1 variants are generated by
alternative promoters, alternative exon cassettes, and alternative donor/acceptor
splicing sites, allowing combinatorial insertion/exclusion of modular functional 
and regulatory domains. In this review we present mounting evidence for the
interdependency of TCF7/LEF1 variant expression and functions with cell lineage
and cell state. We also illustrate how the p53 and nuclear receptor family of
transcription factors, known to control cell fate and to inhibit Wnt signaling,
may participate in the fine tuning of TCF7/LEF1 repression/activation potentials.

PMCID: PMC3434703
PMID: 22111711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 13;108(50):20060-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1110230108. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

T-cell factor 1 is a gatekeeper for T-cell specification in response to Notch
signaling.

Germar K(1), Dose M, Konstantinou T, Zhang J, Wang H, Lobry C, Arnett KL,
Blacklow SC, Aifantis I, Aster JC, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Although transcriptional programs associated with T-cell specification and
commitment have been described, the functional hierarchy and the roles of key
regulators in structuring/orchestrating these programs remain unclear. Activation
of Notch signaling in uncommitted precursors by the thymic stroma initiates the
T-cell differentiation program. One regulator first induced in these precursors
is the DNA-binding protein T-cell factor 1 (Tcf-1), a T-cell-specific mediator of
Wnt signaling. However, the specific contribution of Tcf-1 to early T-cell
development and the signals inducing it in these cells remain unclear. Here we
assign functional significance to Tcf-1 as a gatekeeper of T-cell fate and show
that Tcf-1 is directly activated by Notch signals. Tcf-1 is required at the
earliest phase of T-cell determination for progression beyond the early thymic
progenitor stage. The global expression profile of Tcf-1-deficient progenitors
indicates that basic processes of DNA metabolism are down-regulated in its
absence, and the blocked T-cell progenitors become abortive and die by apoptosis.
Our data thus add an important functional relationship to the roadmap of T-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3250146
PMID: 22109558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027425. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Novel common integration sites targeted by mouse mammary tumor virus insertion in
mammary tumors have oncogenic activity.

Kim HH(1), van den Heuvel AP, Schmidt JW, Ross SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
of America.

Non-acute transforming retroviruses like mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) cause
cancer, at least in part, through integration near cellular genes involved in
growth control, thereby de-regulating their expression. It is well-established
that MMTV commonly integrates near and activates expression of members of the Wnt
and Fgf pathways in mammary tumors. However, there are a significant number of
tumors for which the proviral integration sites have not been identified. Here,
we used high through-put screening to identify common integration sites (CISs) in
MMTV-induced tumors from C3H/HeN and BALB/c mice. As expected, members of both
the Wnt and Fgf families were identified in this screen. In addition, a number of
novel CISs were found, including Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and Arhgap18. We show here 
that expression of these three putative oncogenes in normal murine mammary gland 
cells altered their growth kinetics and caused their morphological transformation
when grown in three dimensional cultures. Additionally, expression of Tcf7l2 and 
Antxr1/Tem8 sensitized cells to exogenous WNT ligand. As Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and
Arhgap18 have been associated with human breast and other cancers, these data
demonstrate that MMTV-induced insertional mutation remains an important means for
identifying genes involved in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3210173
PMID: 22087314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5964-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101205. Epub 2011
Oct 28.

T cell factor 1 regulates thymocyte survival via a ROR<U+03B3>t-dependent pathway.

Wang R(1), Xie H, Huang Z, Ma J, Fang X, Ding Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

Survival of CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes plays a critical role in
shaping the peripheral T cell repertoire. However, the mechanisms responsible for
the regulation of DP thymocyte lifespan remain poorly understood. In this work,
we demonstrate that T cell factor (TCF)-1 regulates DP thymocyte survival by
upregulating ROR<U+03B3>t. Microarray analysis revealed that ROR<U+03B3>t was significantly
downregulated in TCF-1(-/-) thymocytes that underwent accelerated apoptosis,
whereas ROR<U+03B3>t was greatly upregulated in thymocytes that had enhanced survival
due to transgenic expression of a stabilized ß-catenin (ß-cat(Tg)), a TCF-1
activator. Both TCF-1(-/-) and ROR<U+03B3>t(-/-) DP thymocytes underwent similar
accelerated apoptosis. Forced expression of ROR<U+03B3>t successfully rescued TCF-1(-/-)
DP thymocytes from apoptosis, whereas ectopically expressed TCF-1 was not able to
rescue the defective T cell development because of the lack of ROR<U+03B3>t-supported
survival. Furthermore, activation of TCF-1 by stabilized ß-catenin was able to
enhance DP thymocyte survival only in the presence of ROR<U+03B3>t, indicating that
ROR<U+03B3>t acts downstream of TCF-1 in the regulation of DP thymocyte survival.
Moreover, ß-catenin/TCF-1 directly interacted with the ROR<U+03B3>t promoter region and 
stimulated its activity. Therefore, our data demonstrated that TCF-1 enhances DP 
thymocyte survival through transcriptional upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>t, which we
previously showed is an essential prosurvival molecule for DP thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC3221934
PMID: 22039299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024768. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Critical role of TCF-1 in repression of the IL-17 gene.

Ma J(1), Wang R, Fang X, Ding Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, California, United States of America.

Overwhelming activation of IL-17, a gene involved in inflammation, leads to
exaggerated Th17 responses associated with numerous autoimmune conditions, such
as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Here we show that TCF-1 is a 
critical factor to repress IL-17 gene locus by chromatin modifications during T
cell development. Deletion of TCF-1 resulted in increased IL-17 gene expression
both in thymus and peripheral T cells, which led to enhanced Th17
differentiation. As a result, TCF-1(-/-) mice were susceptible to Th17-dependent 
EAE induction. Rag1(-/-) mice reconstituted with TCF-1(-/-) T cells were also
susceptible to EAE, indicating TCF-1 is intrinsically required to repress IL-17. 
However, expression of wild-type TCF-1 or dominant negative TCF-1 did not
interfere with Th17 differentiation in mature T cells. Furthermore, expression of
TCF-1 in TCF-1(-/-) T cells could not restore Th17 differentiation to wild-type
levels, indicating that TCF-1 cannot affect IL-17 production at the mature T cell
stage. This is also supported by the normal up-regulation or activation in mature
TCF-1(-/-) T cells of factors known to regulate Th17 differentiation, including
ROR<U+03B3>t and Stat3. We observed hyperacetylation together with trimethylation of
Lys-4 at the IL-17 locus in TCF-1(-/-) thymocytes, two epigenetic modifications
indicating an open active state of the gene. Such epigenetic modifications were
preserved even when TCF-1(-/-) T cells migrated out of thymus. Therefore, TCF-1
mediates an active process to repress IL-17 gene expression via epigenetic
modifications during T cell development. This TCF-1-mediated repression of IL-17 
is critical for peripheral T cells to generate balanced immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3173465
PMID: 21935461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Ann Hematol. 2012 Mar;91(3):353-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-011-1314-0. Epub 2011 Sep 
1.

Tcf-1 gene silence suppresses downstream gene expression in CD4(+) T cells from
bone marrow of aplastic anemia patients.

Zheng M(1), Zheng K, Zhou J, Sun H, Huang L, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

CD4(+) T cells play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of acquired aplastic
anemia (AA). Tcf-1 gene regulates T cell development and function, and it is
significantly upregulated in the bone marrow CD4(+) T cells from patients with
acquired AA. To explore the role of Tcf-1 in the pathogenesis of AA, we knocked
down Tcf-1 gene in CD4(+) T cells of AA patients and studied the effects of Tcf-1
silencing on its downstream gene expression. Upon transfection of psiRNA into
marrow CD4(+) T cells from bone marrow of aplastic anemia patients, the
expression of Tcf-1 was significantly knocked down; consequently, expressions of 
c-Myc and CD44 were also significantly reduced. Our results suggest that Tcf-1
may contribute to pathogenesis of AA by regulating downstream gene expression
such as c-myc and CD44.

PMID: 21881822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2011 Sep;138(18):3921-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.062554.

Lef1 is required for progenitor cell identity in the zebrafish lateral line
primordium.

McGraw HF(1), Drerup CM, Culbertson MD, Linbo T, Raible DW, Nechiporuk AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

The zebrafish posterior lateral line (pLL) is a sensory system that comprises
clusters of mechanosensory organs called neuromasts (NMs) that are
stereotypically positioned along the surface of the trunk. The NMs are deposited 
by a migrating pLL primordium, which is organized into polarized rosettes
(proto-NMs). During migration, mature proto-NMs are deposited from the trailing
part of the primordium, while progenitor cells in the leading part give rise to
new proto-NMs. Wnt signaling is active in the leading zone of the primordium and 
global Wnt inactivation leads to dramatic disorganization of the primordium and a
loss of proto-NM formation. However, the exact cellular events that are regulated
by the Wnt pathway are not known. We identified a mutant strain, lef1(nl2), that 
contains a lesion in the Wnt effector gene lef1. lef1(nl2) mutants lack posterior
NMs and live imaging reveals that rosette renewal fails during later stages of
migration. Surprisingly, the overall primordium patterning, as assayed by the
expression of various markers, appears unaltered in lef1(nl2) mutants. Lineage
tracing and mosaic analyses revealed that the leading cells (presumptive
progenitors) move out of the primordium and are incorporated into NMs; this
results in a decrease in the number of proliferating progenitor cells and
eventual primordium disorganization. We concluded that Lef1 function is not
required for initial primordium organization or migration, but is necessary for
proto-NM renewal during later stages of pLL formation. These findings revealed a 
novel role for the Wnt signaling pathway during mechanosensory organ formation in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC3160089
PMID: 21862556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Oct;96(10):3106-14. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0363. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

Wnt/beta-catenin pathway deregulation in childhood adrenocortical tumors.

Leal LF(1), Mermejo LM, Ramalho LZ, Martinelli CE Jr, Yunes JA, Seidinger AL,
Mastellaro MJ, Cardinalli IA, Brandalise SR, Moreira AC, Tone LG, Scrideli CA,
Castro M, Antonini SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University of 
Sao Paulo, 14049-900 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

CONTEXT: CTNNB1/ß-catenin mutations and activation of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway are
frequent in adult adrenocortical tumors (ACT), but data on childhood ACT are
lacking.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the presence of Wnt/ß-catenin 
pathway abnormalities in childhood ACT.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Clinicopathological findings and outcome of 62 childhood
ACT patients were analyzed regarding CTNNB1 mutations and the expression of
Wnt-related genes (CTNNB1; WNT4, a Wnt ligand; SFRP1, DKK3, and AXIN1, Wnt
inhibitors; TCF7, a transcription factor; and MYC and WISP2, target genes) by
quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CTNNB1-activating mutations were found in only four of 62 ACT (6%), all 
of them harboring TP53 mutation. There was association between the presence of
CTNNB1 mutations and death (P = 0.02). Diffuse ß-catenin accumulation was found
in 71% of ACT, even in ACT without CTNNB1 mutations. Compared to normal adrenals,
ACT presented increased expression of CTNNB1 (P = 0.008) and underexpression of
Wnt inhibitor genes: DKK3 (P < 0.0001), SFRP1 (P = 0.05), and AXIN1 (P = 0.04).
With regard to Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, ACT presented increased expression of 
WISP2 but lower expression of MYC. Higher overall survival was associated with
underexpression of SFRP1 (P = 0.01), WNT4 (P = 0.004), and TCF7 (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: CTNNB1 mutations are not common in childhood ACT but appear to
associate with poor prognosis. Nevertheless, most ACT exhibit increased
expression of ß-catenin and WISP2 and reduced expression of Wnt inhibitor genes
(DKK3, SFRP1, and AXIN1). Thus, in addition to CTNNB1 mutations, other genetic
events affecting the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway may be involved in childhood
adrenocortical tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21849527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nature. 2011 Aug 3;476(7358):63-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10279.

A critical role for TCF-1 in T-lineage specification and differentiation.

Weber BN(1), Chi AW, Chavez A, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Yang Q, Shestova O, Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The vertebrate thymus provides an inductive environment for T-cell development.
Within the mouse thymus, Notch signals are indispensable for imposing the T-cell 
fate on multipotential haematopoietic progenitors, but the downstream effectors
that impart T-lineage specification and commitment are not well understood. Here 
we show that a transcription factor, T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1; also known as
transcription factor 7, T-cell specific, TCF7), is a critical regulator in T-cell
specification. TCF-1 is highly expressed in the earliest thymic progenitors, and 
its expression is upregulated by Notch signals. Most importantly, when TCF-1 is
forcibly expressed in bone marrow (BM) progenitors, it drives the development of 
T-lineage cells in the absence of T-inductive Notch1 signals. Further
characterization of these TCF-1-induced cells revealed expression of many
T-lineage genes, including T-cell-specific transcription factors Gata3 and
Bcl11b, and components of the T-cell receptor. Our data suggest a model where
Notch signals induce TCF-1, and TCF-1 in turn imprints the T-cell fate by
upregulating expression of T-cell essential genes.

PMCID: PMC3156435
PMID: 21814277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. BMC Biochem. 2011 Jun 30;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-33.

All Dact (Dapper/Frodo) scaffold proteins dimerize and exhibit conserved
interactions with Vangl, Dvl, and serine/threonine kinases.

Kivimäe S(1), Yang XY, Cheyette BN.

Author information: 
(1)The Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th St, San Francisco CA
94158-2324, USA. bc@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: The Dact family of scaffold proteins was discovered by virtue of
binding to Dvl proteins central to Wnt and Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) signaling. 
Subsequently Dact proteins have been linked to a growing list of potential
partners implicated in ß-catenin-dependent and ß-catenin-independent forms of Wnt
and other signaling. To clarify conserved and non-conserved roles for this
protein family, we systematically compared molecular interactions of all three
murine Dact paralogs by co-immunoprecipitation of proteins recombinantly
expressed in cultured human embryonic kidney cells.
RESULTS: Every Dact paralog readily formed complexes with the Vangl, Dvl, and
CK1d/e proteins of species ranging from fruit flies to humans, as well as with
PKA and PKC. Dact proteins also formed complexes with themselves and with each
other; their conserved N-terminal leucine-zipper domains, which have no known
binding partners, were necessary and sufficient for this interaction, suggesting 
that it reflects leucine-zipper-mediated homo- and hetero-dimerization. We also
found weaker, though conserved, interactions of all three Dact paralogs with the 
catenin superfamily member p120ctn. Complex formation with other previously
proposed partners including most other catenins, GSK3, LEF/TCF, HDAC1, and TGFß
receptors was paralog-specific, comparatively weak, and/or more sensitive to
empirical conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined with published functional evidence from targeted knock-out 
mice, these data support a conserved role for Dact proteins in kinase-regulated
biochemistry involving Vangl and Dvl. This strongly suggests that a principal
role for all Dact family members is in the PCP pathway or a molecularly related
signaling cascade in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3141656
PMID: 21718540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):707-18, 718.e1-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.051. Epub 2011 May 4.

Wnt-ß-catenin signaling protects against hepatic ischemia and reperfusion injury 
in mice.

Lehwald N(1), Tao GZ, Jang KY, Sorkin M, Knoefel WT, Sylvester KG.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5148, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Ischemia and reperfusion injury are common causes of oxidative
tissue damage associated with many liver diseases and hepatic surgery. The
Wnt-ß-catenin signaling pathway is an important regulator of hepatic development,
regeneration, and carcinogenesis. However, the role of Wnt signaling in the
hepatocellular response to ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury has not been
determined.
METHODS: Hepatic injury following ischemia or I/R was investigated in
hepatocyte-specific, ß-catenin-deficient mice, as well as Wnt1-overexpressing and
wild-type (control) mice.
RESULTS: Wnt-ß-catenin signaling was affected by the cellular redox balance in
hepatocytes. Following ischemia or I/R, mice with ß-catenin-deficient hepatocytes
were significantly more susceptible to liver injury. Conversely, mice that
overexpressed Wnt1 in hepatocytes were resistant to hepatic I/R injury. Hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF)-1a signaling was reduced in ß-catenin-deficient liver but 
increased in hepatocytes that overexpressed Wnt1 under hypoxia and following I/R,
indicating an interaction between ß-catenin and HIF-1a signaling in the liver.
The mechanism by which Wnt signaling protects against liver injury involves the
role of ß-catenin as a transcriptional coactivator of HIF-1a signaling, which
promotes hepatocyte survival under hypoxic conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Cellular redox balance affects Wnt-ß-catenin signaling, which
protects against hypoxia and I/R injury. These findings might be used to develop 
strategies for protection of hepatocytes, regeneration of liver, and inhibition
of carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4084974
PMID: 21679710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. BMC Cancer. 2011 May 17;11:175. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-175.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 mediates Tazarotene-induced gene 1-induced
growth suppression of human colon cancer cells.

Wu CC(1), Tsai FM, Shyu RY, Tsai YM, Wang CH, Jiang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, Sec 2, Taipei, 114
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Tazarotene-induced gene 1 (TIG1) is a retinoid-inducible type II
tumour suppressor gene. The B isoform of TIG1 (TIG1B) inhibits growth and
invasion of cancer cells. Expression of TIG1B is frequently downregulated in
various cancer tissues; however, the expression and activities of the TIG1A
isoform are yet to be reported. Therefore, this study investigated the effects of
the TIG1A and TIG1B isoforms on cell growth and gene expression profiles using
colon cancer cells.
METHODS: TIG1A and TIG1B stable clones derived from HCT116 and SW620 colon cancer
cells were established using the GeneSwitch system; TIG1 isoform expression was
induced by mifepristone treatment. Cell growth was assessed using the WST-1 cell 
proliferation and colony formation assays. RNA interference was used to examine
the TIG1 mediating changes in cell growth. Gene expression profiles were
determined using microarray and validated using real-time polymerase chain
reaction, and Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: Both TIG1 isoforms were expressed at high levels in normal prostate and 
colon tissues and were downregulated in colon cancer cell lines. Both TIG1
isoforms significantly inhibited the growth of transiently transfected HCT116
cells and stably expressing TIG1A and TIG1B HCT116 and SW620 cells. Expression of
129 and 55 genes was altered upon induction of TIG1A and TIG1B expression,
respectively, in stably expressing HCT116 cells. Of the genes analysed, 23 and 6 
genes were upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in both TIG1A and TIG1B
expressing cells. Upregulation of the G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) 
was confirmed using real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses
in both TIG1 stable cell lines. Silencing of TIG1A or GRK5 expression
significantly decreased TIG1A-mediated cell growth suppression.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of both TIG1 isoforms was observed in normal prostate and
colon tissues and was downregulated in colon cancer cell lines. Both TIG1
isoforms suppressed cell growth and stimulated GRK5 expression in HCT116 and
SW620 cells. Knockdown of GRK5 expression alleviated TIG1A-induced growth
suppression of HCT116 cells, suggesting that GRK5 mediates cell growth
suppression by TIG1A. Thus, TIG1 may participate in the downregulation of
G-protein coupled signaling by upregulating GRK5 expression.

PMCID: PMC3112162
PMID: 21575264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Jul;23(7):623-7. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347964d.

New monoallelic (partial tandem duplication) mutation of HNF1a gene in steatotic 
hepatocellular adenoma.

Sakellariou S(1), Morgan Y, Heaton N, Portmann B, Quaglia A, Tobal K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
stratigoula.sakellariou@nhs.net

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) containing inactivating HNF1a mutations correspond
to a homogenous group of tumors with marked steatosis and no cytological
abnormalities or inflammatory infiltrates. We report a case of a 60-year-old
woman who was referred with a 13-cm mass in the left lobe of the liver with no
history of oral contraception use and no family history of note. Histology
revealed a severely steatotic HCA. Immunohistochemistry showed no nuclear
staining for ß-catenin, limited glutamine synthetase positivity, and slightly
attenuated liver-fatty acid binding protein staining. Serum amyloid A2 antibodies
produced a coarse granular staining. Mutational screening detected monoallelic
partial tandem duplication within exon 4 of TCF1 in tumoral tissue. No mutations 
in the ß-catenin and IL6ST genes were detected. Quantitative reverse
transcription PCR showed lower expression levels of FABP1 and uridine
glycosyltransferase 2B7 and higher levels of serum amyloid A2 in tumor than in
normal hepatocytes. Clinicopathological and molecular investigation of HCA cases 
with unique features could result in a better understanding of HCAs pathogenesis.

PMID: 21566527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncogene. 2011 Oct 27;30(43):4437-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.145. Epub 2011 May 2.

FZD7 has a critical role in cell proliferation in triple negative breast cancer.

Yang L(1), Wu X, Wang Y, Zhang K, Wu J, Yuan YC, Deng X, Chen L, Kim CC, Lau S,
Somlo G, Yen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Breast cancer is genetically and clinically heterogeneous. Triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer that is usually associated with poor 
outcome and lack of benefit from targeted therapy. We used microarray analysis to
perform a pathway analysis of TNBC compared with non-triple negative breast
cancer (non-TNBC). Overexpression of several Wnt pathway genes, such as frizzled 
homolog 7 (FZD7), low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 and
transcription factor 7 (TCF7) was observed in TNBC, and we directed our focus to 
the Wnt pathway receptor, FZD7. To validate the function of FZD7, FZD7shRNA was
used to knock down FZD7 expression. Notably, reduced cell proliferation and
suppressed invasiveness and colony formation were observed in TNBC MDA-MB-231 and
BT-20 cells. Study of the possible mechanism indicated that these effects
occurred through silencing of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, as evidenced
by loss of nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin and decreased transcriptional
activity of TCF7. In vivo studies revealed that FZD7shRNA significantly
suppressed tumor formation, through reduced cell proliferation, in mice bearing
xenografts without FZD7 expression. Our findings suggest that FZD7-involved
canonical Wnt signaling pathway is essential for tumorigenesis of TNBC, and thus,
FZD7 shows promise as a biomarker and a potential therapeutic target for TNBC.

PMID: 21532620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Exp Med. 2011 May 9;208(5):1001-13. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102144. Epub 2011 Apr
25.

The lineage-defining factors T-bet and Bcl-6 collaborate to regulate Th1 gene
expression patterns.

Oestreich KJ(1), Huang AC, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is important for the differentiation of
naive CD4(+) T helper cells (Th cells) into the Th1 phenotype. Much is known
about T-bet's role as a transcriptional activator, but less is known about the
mechanisms by which T-bet functionally represses alternative Th cell genetic
programs. In this study, we first identify Socs1, Socs3, and Tcf7 (TCF-1) as gene
targets that are negatively regulated by T-bet. Significantly, T-bet's role in
the repression of these genes is through a direct interaction with their
promoters. Consistent with this, we identified two T-bet DNA-binding elements in 
the Socs1 promoter that are functionally used to down-regulate transcription in
primary Th1 cells. Importantly, T-bet's novel role in transcriptional repression 
is because of its ability to physically associate with, and functionally recruit,
the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 to a subset of promoters. Furthermore, T-bet 
functionally recruits Bcl-6 to the Ifng locus in late stages of Th1
differentiation to repress its activity, possibly to prevent the overproduction
of IFN-<U+03B3>, which could result in autoimmunity. Collectively, these data establish 
a novel mechanism for T-bet-mediated gene repression in which two
lineage-defining transcription factors, one a classical activator and one a
repressor, collaborate to promote and properly regulate Th1 development.

PMCID: PMC3092354
PMID: 21518797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Bone. 2011 Aug;49(2):217-24. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2011.04.002. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Molecular mechanisms involved in the mitogenic effect of lactoferrin in
osteoblasts.

Naot D(1), Chhana A, Matthews BG, Callon KE, Tong PC, Lin JM, Costa JL, Watson M,
Grey AB, Cornish J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
d.naot@auckland.ac.nz

Lactoferrin, an iron-binding glycoprotein present in milk and other exocrine
secretions in mammals, is anabolic to bone at physiological concentrations.
Lactoferrin stimulates the proliferation, differentiation and survival of
osteoblasts, as well as potently inhibiting osteoclastogenesis in bone marrow
cultures. In the current study we further investigated the mechanism of action of
lactoferrin in osteoblasts. We used low-density arrays to measure the level of
expression of 45 genes in MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells treated with
lactoferrin, and identified transient, dose-dependent increases in the
transcription levels of interleukin-6, of the pro-inflammatory factor
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (Ptgs2), and of the transcription factor
nuclear factor of activated T cells (Nfatc1). We demonstrated similar changes in 
primary osteoblast cultures from human and rat. Levels of prostaglandin E2 were
increased in conditioned media collected from osteoblasts treated with
lactoferrin, indicating that the activity of the enzyme cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), 
which is encoded by Ptgs2, was also up-regulated. Using a luciferase reporter
construct we showed that lactoferrin induced transcription from the NFAT
consensus sequence. We found that inhibiting either COX2 or NFATc1 activity
blocked the mitogenic effect of lactoferrin in osteoblasts and that inhibition of
NFATc1 activity partially blocked the transcriptional activation of Ptgs2. Our
study has provided the first evidence that COX2 and NFATc1 activities are
increased by lactoferrin, and demonstrated a role for each of these molecules as 
mediators of the mitogenic effects of lactoferrin in osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21515435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jun 6;339(1-2):114-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.003.
Epub 2011 Apr 8.

AMP-activated protein kinase attenuates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in human
osteoblastic Saos-2 cells.

Takatani T(1), Minagawa M, Takatani R, Kinoshita K, Kohno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. ttgjun@yahoo.co.jp

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key sensor of cellular energetic
conditions. Recent studies suggest that AMPK affects osteoblast differentiation, 
although its role and mechanism are not fully understood. One of the most
important signals in osteoblast differentiation is the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
which induces T-cell transcription factor 1 (TCF)-dependent transcription. Using 
human osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells, we determined whether AMPK modulates
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in osteoblasts. Chemical activators of AMPK (AICAR
[5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside], metformin) suppressed Wnt3a-induced
TCF-dependent transcriptional activity. Transactivation by Wnt was potentiated by
inhibiting ß-catenin degradation with lithium chloride (LiCl). LiCl-induced Wnt
transactivation was suppressed by addition of metformin. Metformin increased the 
phosphorylation of ß-catenin and decreased ß-catenin protein levels leading to
suppression of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Our present study showed that AMPK
attenuates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by reducing ß-catenin protein levels in
osteoblast-like cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol. 2011 Apr 1;186(7):3946-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003497. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

T cell factor-1 negatively regulates expression of IL-17 family of cytokines and 
protects mice from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Yu Q(1), Sharma A, Ghosh A, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Unit, Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology,
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, 
USA.

Activated CD4 T cells are associated with protective immunity and autoimmunity.
The manner in which the inflammatory potential of T cells and resultant
autoimmunity is restrained is poorly understood. In this article, we demonstrate 
that T cell factor-1 (TCF1) negatively regulates the expression of IL-17 and
related cytokines in activated CD4 T cells. We show that TCF1 does not affect
cytokine signals and expression of transcription factors that have been shown to 
regulate Th17 differentiation. Instead, TCF1 regulates IL-17 expression, in part,
by binding to the regulatory regions of the Il17 gene. Moreover, TCF1-deficient
Th17 CD4 T cells express higher levels of IL-7Ra, which potentially promotes
their survival and expansion in vivo. Accordingly, TCF1-deficient mice are
hyperresponsive to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Thus, TCF1, a
constitutively expressed T cell-specific transcription factor, is a critical
negative regulator of the inflammatory potential of TCR-activated T cells and
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3158594
PMID: 21339363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Mar;112(3):750-5. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22994.

Signaling networks in RUNX2-dependent bone development.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.
komorit@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

RUNX2 is an essential transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation and
chondrocyte maturation. SP7, another transcription factor, is required for
osteoblast differentiation. Major signaling pathways, including FGF, Wnt, and
IHH, also play important roles in skeletal development. RUNX2 regulates Sp7
expression at an early stage of osteoblast differentiation. FGF2 upregulates
Runx2 expression and activates RUNX2, and gain-of-function mutations of FGFRs
cause craniosynostosis and limb defect with upregulation of Runx2 expression. Wnt
signaling upregulates Runx2 expression and activates RUNX2, and RUNX2 induces
Tcf7 expression. IHH is required for Runx2 expression in osteoprogenitor cells
during endochondral bone development, and RUNX2 directly regulates Ihh expression
in chondrocytes. Thus, RUNX2 regulates osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte
maturation through the network with SP7 and with FGF, Wnt, and IHH signaling
pathways during skeletal development.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21328448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 31;6(1):e16515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016515.

Activation of the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in ATF3-induced mammary tumors.

Yan L(1), Della Coletta L, Powell KL, Shen J, Thames H, Aldaz CM, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas, United States of America.

Female transgenic mice that constitutively overexpress the transcription factor
ATF3 in the basal epithelium of the mammary gland develop mammary carcinomas with
high frequency, but only if allowed to mate and raise pups early in life. This
transgenic mouse model system reproduces some features of human breast cancer in 
that about 20% of human breast tumor specimens exhibit overexpression of ATF3 in 
the tumor cells. The ATF3-induced mouse tumors are phenotypically similar to
mammary tumors induced by overexpression of activating Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
genes. We now show that the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is indeed activated in
ATF3-induced tumors. ß-catenin is transcriptionally up-regulated in the tumors,
and high levels of nuclear ß-catenin are seen in tumor cells. A reporter gene for
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activity, TOPGAL, is up-regulated in the tumors and several
downstream targets of Wnt signaling, including Ccnd1, Jun, Axin2 and Dkk4, are
also expressed at higher levels in ATF3-induced tumors compared to mammary glands
of transgenic females. Several positive-acting ligands for this pathway,
including Wnt3, Wnt3a, Wnt7b, and Wnt5a, are significantly overexpressed in tumor
tissue, and mRNA for Wnt3 is about 5-fold more abundant in transgenic mammary
tissue than in non-transgenic mammary tissue. Two known transcriptional targets
of ATF3, Snai1 and Snai2, are also overexpressed in the tumors, and Snail and
Slug proteins are found to be located primarily in the nuclei of tumor cells. In 
vitro knockdown of Atf3 expression results in significant decreases in expression
of Wnt7b, Tcf7, Snai2 and Jun, suggesting that these genes may be direct
transcriptional targets of ATF3 protein. By chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis, both ATF3 and JUN proteins appear to bind to a particular subclass of
AP-1 sites upstream of the transcriptional start sites of each of these genes.

PMCID: PMC3031586
PMID: 21304988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Feb 4;8(2):214-27. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.12.010.

ß-catenin enhances Oct-4 activity and reinforces pluripotency through a
TCF-independent mechanism.

Kelly KF(1), Ng DY, Jayakumaran G, Wood GA, Koide H, Doble BW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

Understanding the mechanisms regulating pluripotency in embryonic and induced
pluripotent stem cells is required to ensure their safe use in clinical
applications. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) has emerged as an important
regulator of pluripotency, based primarily on studies with small-molecule GSK-3
inhibitors. Here, we use mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) lacking GSK-3 to
demonstrate that a single GSK-3 substrate, ß-catenin, controls the ability of
ESCs to exit the pluripotent state and to differentiate into neurectoderm.
Unexpectedly, the effects of ß-catenin on pluripotency do not appear to be
dependent on TCF-mediated signaling, based on experiments utilizing a ß-catenin
C-terminal truncation mutant or highly efficient dominant-negative TCF
strategies. Alternatively, we find that stabilized ß-catenin forms a complex with
and enhances the activity of Oct-4, a core component of the transcriptional
network regulating pluripotency. Collectively, our data suggest previously
underappreciated, divergent TCF-dependent and TCF-independent roles for ß-catenin
in ESCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3465368
PMID: 21295277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12093-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.185280. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Phosphorylation of TCF proteins by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2.

Hikasa H(1), Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Wnt pathways play essential roles in cell proliferation, morphogenesis, and cell 
fate specification during embryonic development. According to the consensus view,
the Wnt pathway prevents the degradation of the key signaling component ß-catenin
by the protein complex containing the negative regulators Axin and glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). Stabilized ß-catenin associates with TCF proteins and
enters the nucleus to promote target gene expression. This study examines the
involvement of HIPK2 (homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2) in the regulation
of different TCF proteins in Xenopus embryos in vivo. We show that the TCF family
members LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 are phosphorylated in embryonic ectoderm after Wnt8 
stimulation and HIPK2 overexpression. We also find that TCF3 phosphorylation is
triggered by canonical Wnt ligands, LRP6, and dominant negative mutants for Axin 
and GSK3, indicating that this process shares the same upstream regulators with
ß-catenin stabilization. HIPK2-dependent phosphorylation caused the dissociation 
of LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 from a target promoter in vivo. This result provides a
mechanistic explanation for the context-dependent function of HIPK2 in Wnt
signaling; HIPK2 up-regulates transcription by phosphorylating TCF3, a
transcriptional repressor, but inhibits transcription by phosphorylating LEF1, a 
transcriptional activator. Finally, we show that upon HIPK2-mediated
phosphorylation, TCF3 is replaced with positively acting TCF1 at a target
promoter. These observations emphasize a critical role for Wnt/HIPK2-dependent
TCF phosphorylation and suggest that TCF switching is an important mechanism of
Wnt target gene activation in vertebrate embryos.

PMCID: PMC3069413
PMID: 21285352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Genet. 2010 Nov 18;6(11):e1001212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001212.

Altered DNA methylation in leukocytes with trisomy 21.

Kerkel K(1), Schupf N, Hatta K, Pang D, Salas M, Kratz A, Minden M, Murty V,
Zigman WB, Mayeux RP, Jenkins EC, Torkamani A, Schork NJ, Silverman W, Croy BA,
Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA.

The primary abnormality in Down syndrome (DS), trisomy 21, is well known; but how
this chromosomal gain produces the complex DS phenotype, including immune system 
defects, is not well understood. We profiled DNA methylation in total peripheral 
blood leukocytes (PBL) and T-lymphocytes from adults with DS and normal controls 
and found gene-specific abnormalities of CpG methylation in DS, with many of the 
differentially methylated genes having known or predicted roles in lymphocyte
development and function. Validation of the microarray data by bisulfite
sequencing and methylation-sensitive Pyrosequencing (MS-Pyroseq) confirmed strong
differences in methylation (p<0.0001) for each of 8 genes tested: TMEM131, TCF7, 
CD3Z/CD247, SH3BP2, EIF4E, PLD6, SUMO3, and CPT1B, in DS versus control PBL. In
addition, we validated differential methylation of NOD2/CARD15 by bisulfite
sequencing in DS versus control T-cells. The differentially methylated genes were
found on various autosomes, with no enrichment on chromosome 21. Differences in
methylation were generally stable in a given individual, remained significant
after adjusting for age, and were not due to altered cell counts. Some but not
all of the differentially methylated genes showed different mean mRNA expression 
in DS versus control PBL; and the altered expression of 5 of these genes,
TMEM131, TCF7, CD3Z, NOD2, and NPDC1, was recapitulated by exposing normal
lymphocytes to the demethylating drug 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine (5aza-dC) plus
mitogens. We conclude that altered gene-specific DNA methylation is a recurrent
and functionally relevant downstream response to trisomy 21 in human cells.

PMCID: PMC2987931
PMID: 21124956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):919-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144949. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Inhibition of suppressive T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) isoforms in naive CD4+ T cells 
is mediated by IL-4/STAT6 signaling.

Maier E(1), Hebenstreit D, Posselt G, Hammerl P, Duschl A, Horejs-Hoeck J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Wnt pathway transcription factor T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) plays essential
roles in the control of several developmental processes, including T cell
development in the thymus. Although previously regarded as being required only
during early T cell development, recent studies demonstrate an important role for
TCF-1 in T helper 2 (Th2) cell polarization. TCF-1 was shown to activate
expression of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) and
thus to promote the development of IL-4-producing Th2 cells independent of STAT6 
signaling. In this study, we show that TCF-1 is down-regulated in human naive
CD4(+) T cells cultured under Th2-polarizing conditions. The down-regulation is
largely due to the polarizing cytokine IL-4 because IL-4 alone is sufficient to
substantially inhibit TCF-1 expression. The IL-4-induced suppression of TCF-1 is 
mediated by STAT6, as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and STAT6 knockdown experiments. Moreover, we found that
IL-4/STAT6 predominantly inhibits the shorter, dominant-negative TCF-1 isoforms, 
which were reported to inhibit IL-4 transcription. Thus, this study provides a
model for an IL-4/STAT6-dependent fine tuning mechanism of TCF-1-driven T helper 
cell polarization.

PMCID: PMC3019123
PMID: 20980261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 May;29(3):291-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-010-0222-z. Epub
2010 Oct 2.

Regulation of Tcf7 by Runx2 in chondrocyte maturation and proliferation.

Mikasa M(1), Rokutanda S, Komori H, Ito K, Tsang YS, Date Y, Yoshida CA, Komori
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8588, Japan.

Runx2 plays important roles in the regulation of chondrocyte differentiation and 
proliferation; however, the Runx2 target molecules still remain to be
investigated. We searched the genes upregulated by the introduction of Runx2 into
Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes using microarray and found that Tcf7 is upregulated by
Runx2. Thus, we examined the functions of Runx2 in the regulation of the Tcf/Lef 
family of transcription factors. Runx2 induced Tcf7 and Lef1 strongly, but Tcf7l1
and Tcf7l2 only slightly in Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes; the expressions of Tcf7 and 
Tcf7l2 were reduced in Runx2(-/-) cartilaginous skeletons and calvaria, and Tcf7 
showed a similar expression pattern to Runx2. In reporter assays, Runx2 mildly
activated the 8.6 and 1.8 kb Tcf7 promoter constructs. The reporter assays using 
the deletion constructs of the 1.8-kb fragment showed that the 0.3-kb promoter
region is responsible for the Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. To
investigate the function of Tcf7 in skeletal development, we generated
dominant-negative (dn) Tcf7 transgenic mice using the Col2a1 promoter. Dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos showed dwarfism, and mineralization was retarded in limbs,
ribs, and vertebrae in a manner dependent on the expression levels of the
transgene. In situ hybridization analysis showed that endochondral ossification
is retarded in dn-Tcf7 transgenic embryos due to the decelerated chondrocyte
maturation. Further, BrdU labeling showed a reduction in chondrocyte
proliferation in the proliferating layer of the growth plate in dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos. These findings indicate that Runx2 regulates chondrocyte
maturation and proliferation at least partly through the induction of Tcf7.

PMID: 20890621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;12(10):1007-13. doi: 10.1038/ncb2102. Epub 2010 Sep 19.

O2 regulates stem cells through Wnt/ß-catenin signalling.

Mazumdar J(1), O'Brien WT, Johnson RS, LaManna JC, Chavez JC, Klein PS, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;12(10):926-7.

Stem cells reside in specialized microenvironments or 'niches' that regulate
their function. In vitro studies using hypoxic culture conditions (<5% O2) have
revealed strong regulatory links between O2 availability and functions of stem
and precursor cells. Although some stem cells are perivascular, others may occupy
hypoxic niches and be regulated by O2 gradients. However, the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show that hypoxia inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a), a principal mediator of hypoxic adaptations, modulates Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling in hypoxic embryonic stem (ES) cells by enhancing ß-catenin activation
and expression of the downstream effectors LEF-1 and TCF-1. This regulation
extends to primary cells, including isolated neural stem cells (NSCs), and is not
observed in differentiated cells. In vivo, Wnt/ß-catenin activity is closely
associated with low O2 regions in the subgranular zone of the hippocampus, a key 
NSC niche. Hif-1a deletion impairs hippocampal Wnt-dependent processes, including
NSC proliferation, differentiation and neuronal maturation. This decline
correlates with reduced Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the subgranular zone. O2
availability, therefore, may have a direct role in stem cell regulation through
HIF-1a modulation of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling.

PMCID: PMC3144143
PMID: 20852629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.08.002.

Differentiation and persistence of memory CD8(+) T cells depend on T cell factor 
1.

Zhou X(1), Yu S, Zhao DM, Harty JT, Badovinac VP, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):145-7.

T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) is a transcription factor known to act downstream of the 
canonical Wnt pathway and is essential for normal T cell development. However,
its physiological roles in mature CD8(+) T cell responses are unknown. Here we
showed that TCF-1 deficiency limited proliferation of CD8(+) effector T cells and
impaired their differentiation toward a central memory phenotype. Moreover,
TCF-1-deficient memory CD8(+) T cells were progressively lost over time,
exhibiting reduced expression of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and
interleukin-2 receptor beta chain and diminished IL-15-driven proliferation.
TCF-1 was directly associated with the Eomes allele and the Wnt-TCF-1 pathway was
necessary and sufficient for optimal Eomes expression in naive and memory CD8(+) 
T cells. Importantly, forced expression of Eomes partly protected TCF-1-deficient
memory CD8(+) T cells from time-dependent attrition. Our studies thus identify
TCF-1 as a critical player in a transcriptional program that regulates memory CD8
differentiation and longevity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2928475
PMID: 20727791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;207(1):77-86. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0044. Epub 2010 Jul 30.

Insulin treatment and high-fat diet feeding reduces the expression of three Tcf
genes in rodent pancreas.

Columbus J(1), Chiang Y, Shao W, Zhang N, Wang D, Gaisano HY, Wang Q, Irwin DM,
Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms in intronic regions of human TCF7L2 are 
associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Whether Tcf7l2 is
expressed in pancreatic islets of rodent species at a considerable level,
however, remains controversial. We used RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR to examine
Tcf7l2 expression in rodent gut, pancreas, isolated pancreatic islets, and
cultured cell lines. The expression level of Tcf7l2 was relatively lower in the
pancreas compared to the gut or the pancreatic ß-cell line Ins-1. Immunostaining 
did not detect a Tcf7l2 signal in mouse pancreatic islets. Endogenous canonical
Wnt activity was not appreciable in the pancreas of TOPGAL transgenic mice. Both 
Tcf7 and Tcf7l1, but not Lef1, were expressed in the pancreas. The expression of 
the three Tcf genes (Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and Tcf7l2) in the pancreas was reduced by
treatment with insulin or high-fat diet feeding, in contrast to the stimulation
of Tcf7l2 expression by insulin in the gut. We suggest that hyperinsulinemia
represses Tcf gene expression in the pancreas. Whether and how this reduction
alters the function of pancreatic ß cells during hyperinsulinemia deserves
further investigation.

PMID: 20675304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 20;399(2):245-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.062. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

The balance of TCF7L2 variants with differential activities in Wnt-signaling is
regulated by lithium in a GSK3beta-independent manner.

Struewing I(1), Boyechko T, Barnett C, Beildeck M, Byers SW, Mao CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.

TCF7L2 transcription factor is a downstream effector of the canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which controls cell fate and homeostasis. However,
the complexity of TCF7L2 expression with numerous mRNA isoforms coding for
proteins with distinct N- and C-termini allows variability in TCF7L2 functions
and regulations. Here, we show that although TCF7L2 mRNA isoforms distinguish
fetal, immortalized and adult differentiated endothelial cells (EC), they cannot 
explain the lack of significant beta-catenin/TCF7 activities in ECs. Lithium, a
Wnt-signaling activator, increases TCF7L2 mRNA levels and induces an RNA isoform 
switch favoring the expression of TCF7L2-short forms lacking the C-termini
domains. Although the latter occurs in different cell types, its extent depends
on the overall increase of TCF7L2 transcription, which correlates with cell
responsiveness to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. While GSK3beta down-regulation
increases TCF7L2 expression, there is no concomitant change in TCF7L2 mRNA
isoforms, which demonstrate the dual effects of lithium on TCF7L2 expression via 
a GSK3beta-dependent up-regulation and a GSK3beta-independent modulation of RNA
splicing. TCF7L2E-long forms display a repressor activity on TCF7L2-promoter
reporters and lithium induces a decrease of the endogenous TCF7L2 forms bound to 
native TCF7L2-promoter chromatin at two novel distal TCF7-binding sites.
Altogether our data reveal a lithium-induced RNA switch favoring the expression
of TCF7L2-short forms, which results in a transcriptional de-repression of
lithium target genes negatively regulated by TCF7L2-long forms, like TCF7L2, and 
thus to an amplification of Wnt-signaling in responsive cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2926262
PMID: 20654575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Menopause. 2010 Sep-Oct;17(5):1064-70. doi: 10.1097/gme.0b013e3181da4da3.

Association between polymorphisms in Wnt signaling pathway genes and bone mineral
density in postmenopausal Korean women.

Lee DY(1), Kim H, Ku SY, Kim SH, Choi YM, Kim JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the association between
single nucleotide polymorphisms in Wnt signal pathway genes and circulating
osteoprotegerin (OPG), soluble receptor activator of the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B ligand
(sRANKL) levels, bone turnover markers, and bone mineral density (BMD) in
postmenopausal Korean women.
METHODS: Wnt9a c256G>A; low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) 5 
c266A>G, c2245C>G, c3893C>T, and c4099G>A; secreted frizzled-related protein
(sFRP) 4 c1019G>A; axin II c148C>T and c1615G>A; glycogen synthase kinase binding
protein (GBP) c455C>A; ß-catenin c94G>T and c101G>T; T-cell factor 1 c663G>T,
c734C>T, and c766G>A; and adenomatous polyposis coli c5465T>A polymorphisms were 
analyzed in 392 postmenopausal Korean women. Serum levels of OPG, sRANKL, and
bone turnover markers were measured, and BMDs at the lumbar spine and femoral
neck were examined.
RESULTS: Wnt9a c256G>A, LRP5 c2245C>G and c4099G>A, axin II c1615G>A, GBP
c455C>A, ß-catenin c94G>T and c101G>T, and T-cell factor 1 c663G>T and c734C>T
single nucleotide polymorphisms were not observed. Among the genes showing
polymorphisms, only the sFRP4 c1019G>A polymorphism was associated with BMD. The 
AA genotype in the sFRP4 c1019G>A polymorphism showed significantly lower lumbar 
spine BMD and a higher serum bone alkaline phosphatase level than did the GG
genotype and showed a 6.39 times higher risk for osteoporosis at the lumbar spine
compared with the GG genotype. No significant differences in bone turnover
markers, OPG, and sRANKL were detected among the other single genotypes or the
LRP haplotype genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the sFRP4 c1019G>A polymorphism may be one 
of the genetic factors affecting lumbar spine BMD in postmenopausal Korean women.

PMID: 20613673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2010 Jun;89(3):188-200. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20241.

A systems-based approach to investigate dose- and time-dependent
methylmercury-induced gene expression response in C57BL/6 mouse embryos
undergoing neurulation.

Robinson JF(1), Guerrette Z, Yu X, Hong S, Faustman EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98105, USA.

BACKGROUND: Aberrations during neurulation due to genetic and/or environmental
factors underlie a variety of adverse developmental outcomes, including neural
tube defects (NTDs). Methylmercury (MeHg) is a developmental neurotoxicant and
teratogen that perturbs a wide range of biological processes/pathways in animal
models, including those involved in early gestation (e.g., cell cycle, cell
differentiation). Yet, the relationship between these MeHg-linked effects and
changes in gestational development remains unresolved. Specifically, current
information lacks mechanistic comparisons across dose or time for MeHg exposure
during neurulation. These detailed investigations are crucial for identifying
sensitive indicators of toxicity and for risk assessment applications.
METHODS: Using a systems-based toxicogenomic approach, we examined dose- and
time-dependent effects of MeHg on gene expression in C57BL/6 mouse embryos during
cranial neural tube closure, assessing for significantly altered genes and
associated Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes. Using the GO-based
application GO-Quant, we quantitatively assessed dose- and time-dependent effects
on gene expression within enriched GO biological processes impacted by MeHg.
RESULTS: We observed MeHg to significantly alter expression of 883 genes,
including several genes (e.g., Vangl2, Celsr1, Ptk7, Twist, Tcf7) previously
characterized to be crucial for neural tube development. Significantly altered
genes were associated with development cell adhesion, cell cycle, and cell
differentiation-related GO biological processes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that MeHg-induced impacts within these
biological processes during gestational development may underlie MeHg-induced
teratogenic and neurodevelopmental toxicity outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3726008
PMID: 20540155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9777-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0914127107. Epub 2010 May 10.

Essential role of the Wnt pathway effector Tcf-1 for the establishment of
functional CD8 T cell memory.

Jeannet G(1), Boudousquié C, Gardiol N, Kang J, Huelsken J, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., Lausanne Branch and University of
Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

Immune protection from intracellular pathogens depends on the generation of
terminally differentiated effector and of multipotent memory precursor CD8 T
cells, which rapidly regenerate effector and memory cells during recurrent
infection. The identification of factors and pathways involved in CD8 T cell
differentiation is of obvious importance to improve vaccination strategies. Here,
we show that mice lacking T cell factor 1 (Tcf-1), a nuclear effector of the
canonical Wingless/Integration 1 (Wnt) signaling pathway, mount normal effector
and effector memory CD8 T cell responses to infection with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). However, Tcf-1-deficient CD8 T cells are
selectively impaired in their ability to expand upon secondary challenge and to
protect from recurrent virus infection. Tcf-1-deficient mice essentially lack CD8
memory precursor T cells, which is evident already at the peak of the primary
response, suggesting that Tcf-1 programs CD8 memory cell fate. The function of
Tcf-1 to establish CD8 T cell memory is dependent on the catenin-binding domain
in Tcf-1 and requires the Tcf-1 coactivators and Wnt signaling intermediates
beta-catenin and gamma-catenin. These findings demonstrate that the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway plays an essential role for CD8 central memory T cell
differentiation under physiological conditions in vivo. They raise the
possibility that modulation of Wnt signaling may be exploited to improve the
generation of CD8 memory T cells during vaccination or for therapies designed to 
promote sustained cytotoxic CD8 T cell responses against tumors.

PMCID: PMC2906901
PMID: 20457902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Lett. 2010 Oct 1;296(1):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.04.001. Epub
2010 May 10.

beta-Catenin/TCF pathway plays a vital role in selenium induced-growth inhibition
and apoptosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells.

Zhang W(1), Yan S, Liu M, Zhang G, Yang S, He S, Bai J, Quan L, Zhu H, Dong Y, Xu
N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology & State Key Laboratory of Molecular
Oncology, Cancer Institute & Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
& Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

Epidemiological and experimental studies have indicated selenium could reduce the
risk of some cancers. In our present study, growth inhibition and apoptosis were 
detected upon methylseleninic acid (MSA) treatment in human esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma cell lines EC9706 and KYSE150. MSA reduced beta-catenin protein
levels, while there was no significant change observed on transcriptional levels.
Moreover, we found MSA accelerated the degradation of beta-catenin and activated 
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta). Some targets of beta-catenin/TCF
pathway and apoptosis-related genes altered after MSA treatment. Notably,
utilizing the inducible 293-TR/beta-catenin cell line, we found the apoptotic
phenotypes induced by MSA were partially reversed by the overexpression of
beta-catenin. Overall, our data indicate the effects induced by MSA in ESCC cells
may act on the inhibition of beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20457486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 23;395(1):146-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.161. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) cross-talks with canonical Wnt signaling via 
phosphorylation of beta-catenin at Ser 552.

Zhao J(1), Yue W, Zhu MJ, Sreejayan N, Du M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Group, Department of Animal Science, College of
Agriculture, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key regulator of energy metabolism; its 
activity is regulated by a plethora of physiological conditions, exercises and
many anti-diabetic drugs. Recent studies show that AMPK involves in cell
differentiation but the underlying mechanism remains undefined. Wingless Int-1
(Wnt)/beta-catenin signaling pathway regulates the differentiation of mesenchymal
stem cells through enhancing beta-catenin/T-cell transcription factor 1 (TCF)
mediated transcription. The objective of this study was to determine whether AMPK
cross-talks with Wnt/beta-catenin signaling through phosphorylation of
beta-catenin. C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cells were used. Chemical inhibition of AMPK 
and the expression of a dominant negative AMPK decreased phosphorylation of
beta-catenin at Ser 552. The beta-catenin/TCF mediated transcription was
correlated with AMPK activity. In vitro, pure AMPK phosphorylated beta-catenin at
Ser 552 and the mutation of Ser 552 to Ala prevented such phosphorylation, which 
was further confirmed using [gamma-(32)P]ATP autoradiography. In conclusion, AMPK
phosphorylates beta-catenin at Ser 552, which stabilizes beta-catenin, enhances
beta-catenin/TCF mediated transcription, expanding AMPK from regulation of energy
metabolism to cell differentiation and development via cross-talking with the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2864303
PMID: 20361929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Mar;8(3):433-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0345. Epub
2010 Mar 9.

Activation of Wnt signaling pathway by human papillomavirus E6 and E7 oncogenes
in HPV16-positive oropharyngeal squamous carcinoma cells.

Rampias T(1), Boutati E, Pectasides E, Sasaki C, Kountourakis P, Weinberger P,
Psyrri A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

We sought to determine the role of human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 oncogenes
in nuclear beta-catenin accumulation, a hallmark of activated canonical Wnt
signaling pathway. We used HPV16-positive oropharyngeal cancer cell lines 147T
and 090, HPV-negative cell line 040T, and cervical cell lines SiHa (bearing
integrated HPV16) and HeLa (bearing integrated HPV18) to measure the cytoplasmic 
and nuclear beta-catenin levels and the beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity
before and after E6/E7 gene silencing. Repression of HPV E6 and E7 genes induced 
a substantial reduction in nuclear beta-catenin levels. Luciferase assay showed
that transcriptional activation of Tcf promoter by beta-catenin was lower after
silencing. The protein levels of beta-catenin are tightly regulated by the
ubiquitin/proteasome system. We therefore performed expression analysis of
regulators of beta-catenin degradation and nuclear transport and showed that
seven in absentia homologue (Siah-1) mRNA and protein levels were substantially
upregulated after E6/E7 repression. Siah-1 protein promotes the degradation of
beta-catenin through the ubiquitin/proteasome system. To determine whether Siah-1
is important for the proteasomal degradation of beta-catenin in HPV16-positive
oropharyngeal cancer cells, we introduced a Siah-1 expression vector into 147T
and 090 cells and found substantial reduction of endogenous beta-catenin in these
cells. Thus, E6 and E7 are involved in beta-catenin nuclear accumulation and
activation of Wnt signaling in HPV-induced cancers. In addition, we show the
significance of the endogenous Siah-1-dependent ubiquitin/proteasome pathway for 
beta-catenin degradation and its regulation by E6/E7 viral oncoproteins in
HPV16-positive oropharyngeal cancer cells.

PMID: 20215420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biofactors. 2010 Jan-Feb;36(1):25-32. doi: 10.1002/biof.72.

Regulation of gene expression in osteoblasts.

Jensen ED(1), Gopalakrishnan R, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55905, USA.

In recent years, much progress has been made in understanding the factors that
regulate the gene expression program that underlies the induction, proliferation,
differentiation, and maturation of osteoblasts. A large and growing number of
transcription factors make important contributions to the precise control of
osteoblast formation and function. It has become increasingly clear that these
diverse transcription factors and the signals that regulate their activity cannot
be viewed as discrete, separate signaling pathways. Rather, they form a highly
interconnected, cooperative network that permits gene expression to be closely
regulated. There has also been a substantial increase in our understanding of the
mechanistic control of gene expression by cofactors such as acetyltransferases
and histone deacetylases. The purpose of this review is to highlight recent
progress in understanding the major transcription factors and epigenetic
coregulators, including histone deacetylases and microRNAs, involved in
osteoblastogenesis and the mechanisms that determine their functions as
regulators of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2820584
PMID: 20087883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Immunol Res. 2010 Jul;47(1-3):45-55. doi: 10.1007/s12026-009-8137-2.

TCF1 and beta-catenin regulate T cell development and function.

Yu Q(1), Sharma A, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, BRC Building, 8C218, Baltimore, MD 21224,
USA.

T cell factor-1 (TCF1) critically regulates T cell development. However, signals 
that control TCF1 function in developing and mature T cells remain unknown. TCF1 
along with beta-catenin activates gene transcription and in cooperation with
Groucho family of proteins mediates gene repression. It has been established that
the beta-catenin-dependent gene expression is often downstream of the canonical
Wnt signaling pathway. We have genetically manipulated the beta-catenin gene and 
generated mutant mice that have shown an essential role for beta-catenin and TCF1
during pre-T cell receptor (TCR) and TCR-dependent stages of T cell development. 
We have also demonstrated a function for TCF1 and beta-catenin downstream of TCR 
signaling in the differentiation of mature CD4 T cells into T helper lineages.

PMCID: PMC2891409
PMID: 20082155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):507-18. doi: 10.1242/dev.043257.

Insights into the organization of dorsal spinal cord pathways from an
evolutionarily conserved raldh2 intronic enhancer.

Castillo HA(1), Cravo RM, Azambuja AP, Simões-Costa MS, Sura-Trueba S, Gonzalez
J, Slonimsky E, Almeida K, Abreu JG, de Almeida MA, Sobreira TP, de Oliveira SH, 
de Oliveira PS, Signore IA, Colombo A, Concha ML, Spengler TS, Bronner-Fraser M, 
Nobrega M, Rosenthal N, Xavier-Neto J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética e Cardiologia Molecular, InCor-FMUSP, 05403-000, São
Paulo, Brazil.

Comparative studies of the tetrapod raldh2 (aldh1a2) gene, which encodes a
retinoic acid (RA) synthesis enzyme, have led to the identification of a dorsal
spinal cord enhancer. Enhancer activity is directed dorsally to the roof plate
and dorsal-most (dI1) interneurons through predicted Tcf- and Cdx-homeodomain
binding sites and is repressed ventrally via predicted Tgif homeobox and ventral 
Lim-homeodomain binding sites. Raldh2 and Math1/Cath1 expression in mouse and
chicken highlights a novel, transient, endogenous Raldh2 expression domain in dI1
interneurons, which give rise to ascending circuits and intraspinal commissural
interneurons, suggesting roles for RA in the ontogeny of spinocerebellar and
intraspinal proprioceptive circuits. Consistent with expression of raldh2 in the 
dorsal interneurons of tetrapods, we also found that raldh2 is expressed in
dorsal interneurons throughout the agnathan spinal cord, suggesting ancestral
roles for RA signaling in the ontogenesis of intraspinal proprioception.

PMCID: PMC4074295
PMID: 20081195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cells. 2010 Jan;29(1):63-9. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0017-z. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

Downregulation of Wnt-mediated ROS generation is causally implicated in
leprechaunism.

Park JW(1), Kuehn HS, Kim SY, Chung KM, Choi H, Kim M, Kim J, Lee SY, Bae DS, Jin
DK, Bae YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, 120-750, Korea.

Although mutations in the insulin receptor have been causally implicated with
leprechaunism, the full pathophysiology of the syndrome cannot be accounted for
by malfunction of this gene alone. We sought to characterize a connection between
Wnt-mediated cell signaling and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
which revealed a novel mechanistic basis for understanding the pathogenesis of
leprechaunism. To identify candidate genes involved in this process, a PCR-based 
subtractive hybridization was performed. Candidate genes were examined for
interaction with the Wnt signaling pathway and ROS generation. We found that
Dickkopf 1 (Dkk1), a Wnt inhibitor, is overexpressed in skin fibroblast cells
derived from three leprechaunism patients and that the cells showed an impaired
response to Wnt2 in terms of beta-catenin-Tcf activation. Knockdown of Dkk1 in
the patient cell lines rescued Wnt2-mediated Tcf activation. Concerted action of 
Wnt2 and knockdown of Dkk1 resulted in enhanced Nox4 expression and PDGF-induced 
ROS generation compared to parental patient cells. Furthermore, we found that
NFATc2 was activated in response to Wnt2 stimulation and directly activates Nox4 
expression. These data show a crosstalk between Wnt and ROS pathways which in
turn provides new mechanistic insights at the molecular level into the
pathogenesis of leprechaunism.

PMID: 20033851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1191-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901199. Epub 2009 Dec
21.

Constitutive activation of Wnt signaling favors generation of memory CD8 T cells.

Zhao DM(1), Yu S, Zhou X, Haring JS, Held W, Badovinac VP, Harty JT, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1, the effector
transcription factors of the canonical Wnt pathway, are known to be critical for 
normal thymocyte development. However, it is largely unknown if it has a role in 
regulating mature T cell activation and T cell-mediated immune responses. In this
study, we demonstrate that, like IL-7Ralpha and CD62L, TCF-1 and lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor 1 exhibit dynamic expression changes during T cell
responses, being highly expressed in naive T cells, downregulated in effector T
cells, and upregulated again in memory T cells. Enforced expression of a p45
TCF-1 isoform limited the expansion of Ag-specific CD8 T cells in response to
Listeria monocytogenes infection. However, when the p45 transgene was coupled
with ectopic expression of stabilized beta-catenin, more Ag-specific memory CD8 T
cells were generated, with enhanced ability to produce IL-2. Moreover, these
memory CD8 T cells expanded to a larger number of secondary effectors and cleared
bacteria faster when the immunized mice were rechallenged with virulent L.
monocytogenes. Furthermore, in response to vaccinia virus or lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus infection, more Ag-specific memory CD8 T cells were
generated in the presence of p45 and stabilized beta-catenin transgenes. Although
activated Wnt signaling also resulted in larger numbers of Ag-specific memory CD4
T cells, their functional attributes and expansion after the secondary infection 
were not improved. Thus, constitutive activation of the canonical Wnt pathway
favors memory CD8 T cell formation during initial immunization, resulting in
enhanced immunity upon second encounter with the same pathogen.

PMCID: PMC2809813
PMID: 20026746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):394-401. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp317. Epub 2009 Dec
17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic protein inhibits expression of the Wnt inhibitor
DICKKOPF-1 gene and antagonizes beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Navarro D(1), Agra N, Pestaña A, Alonso J, González-Sancho JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, E-28029, Madrid, Spain.

Tumours of the Ewing family, which comprise Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours, are highly aggressive and mostly affect
children and adolescents. They are characterized by chromosomal translocations
leading to the generation of fusion proteins between EWS (or very rarely FUS) and
members of the E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors that are
capable of transforming cells. EWS/FLI1, the most frequent fusion, is thought to 
cause transformation through activation or repression of specific target genes.
We present evidence demonstrating that the Wnt inhibitor and beta-catenin/T-cell 
factor (TCF)-responsive gene DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) is a transcriptional target of
EWS/FLI1, which can inhibit both basal and beta-catenin-induced transactivation
of the DKK-1 promoter. Moreover, our data indicate that EWS/FLI1 has a more
general effect on beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription since it can block
transactivation of a consensus beta-catenin/TCF reporter construct. Consistently,
Ewing tumour cells expressing different EWS/ETS translocations cannot engage
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, whereas silencing of EWS/FLI1 restores 
beta-catenin responsiveness in A673 and RD-ES Ewing tumour cells. Accordingly,
gene set enrichment analysis shows that beta-catenin/TCF target genes are
significantly enriched among genes downregulated by EWS/FLI1 in the Ewing cell
line A673. Mechanistically, the inhibitory effect of EWS/FLI1 can be overcome by 
a constitutively active TCF4 protein (TCF4-VP16). Moreover, EWS/FLI1 binds
lymphoid enhancer factor 1, a TCF family member, and interferes with its binding 
to beta-catenin, which could explain its negative effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. Our results show that EWS/FLI1 inhibits 
both DKK-1 expression as well as beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, which 
could contribute to progression of tumours of the Ewing family.

PMID: 20019092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Genes Immun. 2009 Dec;10 Suppl 1:S121-7. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.99.

The Type I Diabetes Genetics Consortium 'Rapid Response' family-based candidate
gene study: strategy, genes selection, and main outcome.

Julier C(1), Akolkar B, Concannon P, Morahan G, Nierras C, Pugliese A; Type I
Diabetes Genetics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U958, Centre National de Génotypage, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, Evry,
France. cjulier@cng.fr

Candidate gene studies have long been the principal method for identification of 
susceptibility genes for type I diabetes (T1D), resulting in the discovery of
HLA, INS, PTPN22, CTLA4, and IL2RA. However, many of the initial studies that
relied on this strategy were largely underpowered, because of the limitations in 
genomic information and genotyping technology, as well as the limited size of
available cohorts. The Type I Diabetes Genetic Consortium (T1DGC) has established
resources to re-evaluate earlier reported genes associated with T1D, using its
collection of 2298 Caucasian affected sib-pair families (with 11 159
individuals). A total of 382 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in 21
T1D candidate genes were selected for this study and genotyped in duplicate on
two platforms, Illumina and Sequenom. The genes were chosen based on published
literature as having been either 'confirmed' (replicated) or not (candidates).
This study showed several important features of genetic association studies.
First, it showed the major impact of small rates of genotyping errors on
association statistics. Second, it confirmed associations at INS, PTPN22, IL2RA, 
IFIH1 (earlier confirmed genes), and CTLA4 (earlier confirmed, with distinct
SNPs) loci. Third, it did not find evidence for an association with T1D at SUMO4,
despite confirmed association in Asian populations, suggesting the potential for 
population-specific gene effects. Fourth, at PTPN22, there was evidence for a
novel contribution to T1D risk, independent of the replicated effect of the R620W
variant. Fifth, among the candidate genes selected for replication, the
association of TCF7-P19T with T1D was newly replicated in this study. In summary,
this study was able to replicate some genetic effects, reject others, and provide
suggestions of association with several of the other candidate genes in
stratified analyses (age at onset, HLA status, population of origin). These
results have generated additional interesting functional hypotheses that will
require further replication in independent cohorts.

PMCID: PMC2805447
PMID: 19956109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Genes Immun. 2009 Dec;10 Suppl 1:S54-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.92.

Evidence for association of the TCF7 locus with type I diabetes.

Erlich HA(1), Valdes AM, Julier C, Mirel D, Noble JA; Type I Diabetes Genetics
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Discovery Research, Roche Molecular Systems
Inc., 4300 Hacienda Drive, Pleasanton, CA 94588, USA. Henry.Erlich@roche.com

The Type I Diabetes Genetics Consortium (T1DGC) has collected thousands of
multiplex and simplex families with type I diabetes (T1D) with the goal of
identifying genes involved in T1D susceptibility. These families have been
genotyped for the HLA class I and class II loci and, recently, for a genome-wide 
panel of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In addition, multiple SNPs in
specific candidate genes have been genotyped in these families in an attempt to
evaluate previously reported T1D associations, including the C883A (Pro-Thr)
polymorphism in exon 2 of TCF7, a T-cell transcription factor. The TCF7 883A
allele was associated with T1D in subjects with T1D not carrying the high-risk
HLA genotype DR3/DR4. A panel of 11 SNPs in TCF7 was genotyped in 2092 families
from 9 cohorts of the T1DGC. SNPs at two positions in TCF7 were associated with
T1D. One associated SNP, C883A (rs5742913), was reported earlier to have a T1D
association. A second SNP, rs17653687, represents a novel T1D susceptibility
allele in TCF7. After stratification on the high T1D risk DR3/DR4 genotype, the
variant (A) allele of C883A was significantly associated with T1D among
non-DR3/DR4 cases (transmission=55.8%, P=0.004; OR=1.26) but was not
significantly associated in the DR3/DR4 patient subgroup, replicating the earlier
report. The reference A allele of intronic SNP rs17653687 was modestly associated
with T1D in both DR3/DR4 strata (transmission=54.4% in DR3/DR4; P=0.03;
transmission=52.9% in non-DR3/DR4; P=0.03). These results support the previously 
reported association of the non-synonymous Pro-Thr SNP in TCF7 with T1D, and
suggest that other alleles at this locus may also confer risk.

PMCID: PMC2804262
PMID: 19956102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):102-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.010298. Epub 2009
Nov 30.

Gene expression factors as predictors of genetic risk and survival in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Kienle D(1), Benner A, Läufle C, Winkler D, Schneider C, Bühler A, Zenz T,
Habermann A, Jäger U, Lichter P, Dalla-Favera R, Döhner H, Stilgenbauer S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 
23, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):12-5.

BACKGROUND: A variety of surrogate markers for genetic features and outcome have 
been described in chronic lymphocytic leukemia based on gene expression analyses.
Previous studies mostly focused on individual markers and selected disease
characteristics, which makes it difficult to estimate the relative value of the
novel markers. Therefore, in the present study a comprehensive approach was
chosen investigating 18 promising, partly novel expression markers in a well
characterized cohort of patients with long clinical follow-up and full genetic
information (IGHV status, genomic abnormalities).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Expression markers were evaluated using real-time
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in CD19(+)-purified 
samples from 151 patients. Multivariate analyses were performed to test the
markers' ability to identify patients at genetic risk and as prognostic markers
in the context of established prognostic factors.
RESULTS: For individual markers, ZAP70 expression provided the highest rate (81%)
of correct assignment of patients at genetic risk (IGHV unmutated, V3-21 usage,
11q- or 17p-), followed by LPL and TCF7 (76% both). The assignment rate was
improved to 88% by information from a four-gene combination (ZAP70, TCF7, DMD,
ATM). In multivariate analysis of treatment-free survival, IGHV mutation status
and expression of ADAM29 were of independent prognostic value besides disease
stage. With regards to overall survival, expression of ATM, ADAM29, TCL1, and
SEPT10 provided prognostic information in addition to that derived from clinical 
and genetic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression markers are suitable for screening but not as
surrogates for the information from genetic risk factors. While many individual
markers may be associated with outcome, only a few are of independent prognostic 
significance. With regard to prognosis estimation, the genetic prognostic factors
cannot be replaced by the expression markers.

PMCID: PMC2805743
PMID: 19951976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Immunol Methods. 2010 Jan 31;352(1-2):153-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2009.11.016.
Epub 2009 Nov 26.

Detection of endogenous LRP6 expressed on human cells by monoclonal antibodies
specific for the native conformation.

Yasui N(1), Mihara E, Nampo M, Tamura-Kawakami K, Unno H, Matsumoto K, Takagi J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Protein Synthesis and Expression, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

LRP6 is a cell surface molecule that plays a critical role in the Wnt signaling
pathway, and is implicated in numerous human diseases. Studies of cellular
signaling mediated by LRP6 have relied on overexpression experiments, due to the 
lack of good monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) reactive with native LRP6 ectodomain.
By using native recombinant LRP6 ectodomain fragment produced in mammalian
expression system, we succeeded in developing a panel of anti-human LRP6 mAbs.
Selected mAbs were capable of staining endogenous LRP6 on cell surface by using
flow cytometry and immunofluorescence microscopy, and enriching
detergent-solubilized LRP6 from cell lysate by immunoprecipitation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19945460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Cell Sci. 2009 Dec 15;122(Pt 24):4439-51. doi: 10.1242/jcs.051847. Epub 2009
Nov 17.

Dishevelled-2 docks and activates Src in a Wnt-dependent manner.

Yokoyama N(1), Malbon CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Health Sciences Center, State University of New
York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651, USA. noriko@pharm.stonybrook.edu

Wnt3a activates the ;canonical' signaling pathway, stimulating the nuclear
accumulation of beta-catenin and activation of Lef/Tcf-sensitive transcription of
developmentally important genes. Using totipotent mouse F9 teratocarcinoma cells 
expressing frizzled-1 (Fz1), we investigated roles of tyrosine kinase activity in
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Treatment with either genistein or Src family kinase 
inhibitor PP2 attenuates Wnt3a-stimulated Lef/Tcf transcription activation and
primitive endoderm formation. siRNA-induced knockdown of Src likewise attenuates 
Lef/Tcf transcription and primitive endoderm formation in response to Wnt3a,
implicating Src as a positive regulator of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. We
discovered that Src binds dishevelled-2 (Dvl2), a key phosphoprotein in Wnt
signaling, at two positions: an SH3-binding domain and a C-terminal domain. The
Y18F mutant of Dvl2 attenuates the Wnt3a-stimulated Lef/Tcf-sensitive
transcriptional response. Wnt3a stimulates Src docking to Dvl2 and activation of 
this tyrosine kinase. Activated Src, in turn, enhances Wnt activation of the
canonical pathway. We show that Dvl2 and beta-catenin are crucially important
substrates for tyrosine phosphorylation in the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2787458
PMID: 19920076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Adv Cancer Res. 2009;105:115-32. doi: 10.1016/S0065-230X(09)05007-6.

Regulation of CLU gene expression by oncogenes and epigenetic factors
implications for tumorigenesis.

Sala A(1), Bettuzzi S, Pucci S, Chayka O, Dews M, Thomas-Tikhonenko A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, United Kingdom.

In no other field has the function of clusterin (CLU) been more controversial
than in cancer genetics. After more than 20 years of research, there is still
uncertainty with regard to the role of CLU in human cancers. Some investigators
believe CLU to be an oncogene, others-an inhibitor of tumorigenesis. However,
owing to the recent efforts of several laboratories, the role of CLU in important
cellular processes like proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and
transformation is beginning to emerge. The "enigmatic" CLU is becoming less so.
In this chapter, we will review the work of research teams interested in
understanding how CLU is regulated by oncogenic signaling. We will discuss how
and under what circumstances oncogenes and epigenetic factors modify CLU
expression, with important consequences for mammalian tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3426299
PMID: 19879426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cancer Lett. 2010 Mar 28;289(2):195-207. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.08.019. Epub 
2009 Oct 7.

MSX1 induces the Wnt pathway antagonist genes DKK1, DKK2, DKK3, and SFRP1 in
neuroblastoma cells, but does not block Wnt3 and Wnt5A signalling to DVL3.

Revet I(1), Huizenga G, Koster J, Volckmann R, van Sluis P, Versteeg R, Geerts D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Neuroblastoma is the most common extra-cranial solid childhood cancer; it arises 
from neural crest-derived cells of the sympathetic nervous system. The anomalous 
regulation of embryonic developmental pathways like Delta-Notch and Wnt has been 
implicated in aberrant cell growth and differentiation in many (childhood)
tumours. We have previously found regulation of Delta-Notch pathway genes by the 
MSX1 neural crest development gene in a neuroblastoma cell line, and significant 
correlations between these genes in neuroblastic tumours. However, a clear role
for the Wnt pathway in neuroblastic tumours has not yet been determined. We now
analyze the complete spectrum of genes regulated by inducible expression of MSX1 
in the SJNB8 neuroblastoma cell line using Affymetrix expression profiling. We
show that MSX1 induces the expression of four different Wnt pathway inhibitor
genes: Dickkopf 1-3 (DKK1-3) and secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), and
provide evidence that high expression of two of these genes correlates with good 
prognosis. We were able to demonstrate that both the canonical Wnt3 and the
alternative Wnt5A ligands are highly expressed in neuroblastic tumours and cell
lines, and specifically activate the DVL3 Wnt co-receptor protein in SJNB8
neuroblastoma cells. These results suggest involvement of MSX1 in Wnt signalling 
and demonstrate activity of the more upstream Wnt pathway in neuroblastic cells.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19815336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 26;28(47):4133-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.271. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

A Wnt kinase network alters nuclear localization of TCF-1 in colon cancer.

Najdi R(1), Syed A, Arce L, Theisen H, Ting JH, Atcha F, Nguyen AV, Martinez M,
Holcombe RF, Edwards RA, Marsh JL, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Constitutive activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has been implicated as
the primary cause of colon cancer. However, the major transducers of Wnt
signaling in the intestine, T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1) and TCF-4, have opposing
functions. Knockout of TCF-4 suppresses growth and maintenance of crypt stem
cells, whereas knockout of TCF-1 leads to adenomas. These phenotypes suggest that
TCF-4 is Wnt-promoting, whereas TCF-1 acts like a tumor suppressor. Our study of 
TCF expression in human colon crypts reveals a mechanistic basis for this
paradox. In normal colon cells, a dominant-negative isoform of TCF-1 (dnTCF-1) is
expressed that is equally distributed between nuclear and cytoplasmic
compartments. In colon cancer cells, TCF-1 is predominantly cytoplasmic.
Localization is because of active nuclear export and is directed by an
autocrine-acting Wnt ligand that requires Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase II
(CaMKII) activity for secretion and a downstream step in the export pathway.
TCF-4 remains nuclear; its unopposed activity is accompanied by downregulation of
dnTCF-1 and increased expression of full-length isoforms. Thus, the dnTCF-1 and
TCF-4 balance is corrupted in cancer by two mechanisms, a Wnt/CaMKII kinase
signal for nuclear export and decreased dnTCF-1 expression. We propose that
dnTCF-1 provides homeostatic regulation of Wnt signaling and growth in normal
colon, and the alterations in nuclear export and promoter usage contribute to
aberrant Wnt activity in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2787979
PMID: 19749792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur J Cancer. 2009 Nov;45(16):2759-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.08.003. Epub 2009
Sep 2.

Targeting the WNT/beta-catenin/TCF/LEF1 axis in solid and haematological cancers:
Multiplicity of therapeutic options.

Gehrke I(1), Gandhirajan RK, Kreuzer KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, University at Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62,
Cologne 50937, Germany.

Among aberrantly regulated signalling pathways in cancer the WNT/beta-catenin
pathway plays an outstanding role, since it was shown to be critically involved
in a wide range of neoplasias. While the underlying mechanisms vary,
overexpression of WNTs was found to mediate active signalling in some of these
diseases. Other cancers show a mutation in pathway members further downstream,
such as APC, Axin or beta-catenin, leading to aberrant signalling activation.
Another mechanism initiating activation of WNT/beta-catenin signalling is the
silencing of expression of negative WNT/beta-catenin regulators, such as DKK and 
WIF1, by, for example, promoter hypermethylation. All these mechanisms result in 
a common consequence, the activation of TCF/LEF1 transcription factors and
subsequent target gene expression. Several target genes are known to be key
players in tumourigenesis, such as c-myc, cyclin D1 or survivin. The variety of
possible underlying mechanisms leading to beta-catenin/TCF/LEF1 activation offers
multiple options to target the aberrantly activated pathway in order to prevent
target gene expression and/or their gene products to exert their tumourigenic
function. Here, we summarise the physiological role of WNT/beta-catenin
signalling and the consequences of its aberrant activation during tumourigenesis.
Furthermore, we discuss the possible strategies to target this pathway and their 
potential importance in cancer treatment.

PMID: 19729298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 15;183(6):3873-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901369. Epub 2009
Aug 28.

Beta-catenin/Tcf determines the outcome of thymic selection in response to
alphabetaTCR signaling.

Kovalovsky D(1), Yu Y, Dose M, Emmanouilidou A, Konstantinou T, Germar K,
Aghajani K, Guo Z, Mandal M, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Thymic maturation of T cells depends on the intracellular interpretation of
alphabetaTCR signals by processes that are poorly understood. In this study, we
report that beta-catenin/Tcf signaling was activated in double-positive
thymocytes in response to alphabetaTCR engagement and impacted thymocyte
selection. TCR engagement combined with activation of beta-catenin signaled
thymocyte deletion, whereas Tcf-1 deficiency rescued from negative selection.
Survival/apoptotis mediators including Bim, Bcl-2, and Bcl-x(L) were
alternatively influenced by stabilization of beta-catenin or ablation of Tcf-1,
and Bim-mediated beta-catenin induced thymocyte deletion. TCR activation in
double-positive cells with stabilized beta-catenin triggered signaling associated
with negative selection, including sustained overactivation of Lat and Jnk and a 
transient activation of Erk. These observations are consistent with
beta-catenin/Tcf signaling acting as a switch that determines the outcome of
thymic selection downstream the alphabetaTCR cascade.

PMCID: PMC4695211
PMID: 19717519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Immunol. 2009 Sep;10(9):992-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.1762. Epub 2009 Aug 2.

T cell factor 1 initiates the T helper type 2 fate by inducing the transcription 
factor GATA-3 and repressing interferon-gamma.

Yu Q(1), Sharma A, Oh SY, Moon HG, Hossain MZ, Salay TM, Leeds KE, Du H, Wu B,
Waterman ML, Zhu Z, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The differentiation of activated CD4(+) T cells into the T helper type 1 (T(H)1) 
or T(H)2 fate is regulated by cytokines and the transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3. Whereas interleukin 12 (IL-12) produced by antigen-presenting cells
initiates the T(H)1 fate, signals that initiate the T(H)2 fate are not completely
characterized. Here we show that early GATA-3 expression, required for T(H)2
differentiation, was induced by T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) and its cofactor
beta-catenin, mainly from the proximal Gata3 promoter upstream of exon 1b. This
activity was induced after T cell antigen receptor (TCR) stimulation and was
independent of IL-4 receptor signaling through the transcription factor STAT6.
Furthermore, TCF-1 blocked T(H)1 fate by negatively regulating interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) expression independently of beta-catenin. Thus, TCF-1 initiates T(H)2
differentiation of activated CD4(+) T cells by promoting GATA-3 expression and
suppressing IFN-gamma expression.

PMCID: PMC2824257
PMID: 19648923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biomol Screen. 2009 Sep;14(8):970-9. doi: 10.1177/1087057109341406. Epub 2009
Jul 29.

Novel in vitro protein fragment complementation assay applicable to
high-throughput screening in a 1536-well format.

Hashimoto J(1), Watanabe T, Seki T, Karasawa S, Izumikawa M, Seki T, Iemura S,
Natsume T, Nomura N, Goshima N, Miyawaki A, Takagi M, Shin-Ya K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicinal Information Research Center (BIRC), Japan Biological Informatics 
Consortium (JBIC), Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) play key roles in all cellular processes and 
hence are useful as potential targets for new drug development. To facilitate the
screening of PPI inhibitors as anticancer drugs, the authors have developed a
high-throughput screening (HTS) system using an in vitro protein fragment
complementation assay (PCA) with monomeric Kusabira-Green fluorescent protein
(mKG). The in vitro PCA system was established by the topological formation of a 
functional complex between 2 split inactive mKG fragments fused to target
proteins, which fluoresces when 2 target proteins interact to allow
complementation of the mKG fragments. Using this assay system, the authors
screened inhibitors for TCF7/beta-catenin, PAC1/PAC2, and PAC3 homodimer PPIs
from 123,599 samples in their natural product library. Compound TB1 was
identified as a specific inhibitor for PPI of PAC3 homodimer. TB1 strongly
inhibited the PPI of PAC3 homodimer with an IC(50) value of 0.020 microM and did 
not inhibit PPI between TCF7/beta-catenin and PAC1/PAC2 even at a concentration
of 250 microM. The authors thus demonstrated that this in vitro PCA system
applicable to HTS in a 1536-well format is capable of screening for PPI
inhibitors from a huge natural product library.

PMID: 19641222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 1;315(16):2690-704. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.06.021. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Genomic response to Wnt signalling is highly context-dependent--evidence from DNA
microarray and chromatin immunoprecipitation screens of Wnt/TCF targets.

Railo A(1), Pajunen A, Itäranta P, Naillat F, Vuoristo J, Kilpeläinen P, Vainio
S.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Centre for Cell Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology and Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, FIN-90014, University of Oulu, P. O. Box 5000, Finland.

Wnt proteins are important regulators of embryonic development, and dysregulated 
Wnt signalling is involved in the oncogenesis of several human cancers. Our
knowledge of the downstream target genes is limited, however. We used a chromatin
immunoprecipitation-based assay to isolate and characterize the actual gene
segments through which Wnt-activatable transcription factors, TCFs, regulate
transcription and an Affymetrix microarray analysis to study the global
transcriptional response to the Wnt3a ligand. The anti-beta-catenin
immunoprecipitation of DNA-protein complexes from mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts
expressing a fusion protein of beta-catenin and TCF7 resulted in the
identification of 92 genes as putative TCF targets. GeneChip assays of gene
expression performed on NIH3T3 cells and the rat pheochromocytoma cell line PC12 
revealed 355 genes in NIH3T3 and 129 genes in the PC12 cells with marked changes 
in expression after Wnt3a stimulus. Only 2 Wnt-regulated genes were shared by
both cell lines. Surprisingly, Disabled-2 was the only gene identified by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation approach that displayed a marked change in
expression in the GeneChip assay. Taken together, our approaches give an insight 
into the complex context-dependent nature of Wnt pathway transcriptional
responses and identify Disabled-2 as a potential new direct target for Wnt
signalling.

PMID: 19563800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Immunother. 2009 Sep;32(7):726-36. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181ad4071.

Genetic modification of T cells with IL-21 enhances antigen presentation and
generation of central memory tumor-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocytes.

Kaka AS(1), Shaffer DR, Hartmaier R, Leen AM, Lu A, Bear A, Rooney CM, Foster AE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, The Methodist
Hospital and Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunother. 2009 Nov-Dec;32(9):919. Hartmeier, Ryan [corrected to Hartmaier,
Ryan].

An optimized antigen-presenting cell for tumor immunotherapy should produce a
robust antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) response to
tumor-associated antigens, which can persist in vivo and expand on antigen
reencounter. Interleukin (IL)-21 synergizes with other gamma-chain cytokines to
enhance the frequency and cytotoxicity of antigen-specific CTL. As T cells
themselves may serve as effective antigen-presenting cells (T antigen-presenting 
cells; TAPC) and may be useful in vivo as cellular vaccines, we examined whether 
CD8(+) T cells genetically modified to produce IL-21 could induce immune
responses to tumor associated antigen peptides in healthy human leukocyte
antigen-A2(+) donors. We found that IL-21 modified TAPC enhanced both the
proliferation and survival of MART-1 specific CD8(+) T cells, which were enriched
by >8-fold over cultures with control nontransgenic TAPC. MART-1-specific CTL
produced interferon-gamma in response to cognate peptide antigen and killed
primary tumor cells expressing MART-1 in a major histocompatibility complex
restricted manner. IL-21 modified TAPC similarly enhanced generation of
functional CTL against melanoma antigen gp100 and the B-cell chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia associated RHAMM antigen. Antigen-specific CTL generated using IL-21
gene-modified TAPC had a central memory phenotype characterized by CD45RA(-),
CD44(high), CD27(high), CD28(high), CD62L(high), and IL-7 receptor-alpha(high),
contrasting with the terminal effector phenotype of CTL generated in the absence 
of IL-21. Thus, TAPC stimulation in the presences of IL-21 enhances proliferation
of tumor antigen-specific T cells and favors induction of a central memory
phenotype, which may improve proliferation, survival, and efficacy of T-cell
based therapies for the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2790367
PMID: 19561536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):808-13. doi: 10.1038/nm.1982. Epub 2009 Jun 14.

Wnt signaling arrests effector T cell differentiation and generates CD8+ memory
stem cells.

Gattinoni L(1), Zhong XS, Palmer DC, Ji Y, Hinrichs CS, Yu Z, Wrzesinski C, Boni 
A, Cassard L, Garvin LM, Paulos CM, Muranski P, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, US National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. gattinol@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 May;16(5):513-4; author reply 514-5.
    Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):731-2.

Self-renewing cell populations such as hematopoietic stem cells and memory B and 
T lymphocytes might be regulated by shared signaling pathways. The
Wnt-beta-catenin pathway is an evolutionarily conserved pathway that promotes
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and multipotency by limiting stem cell
proliferation and differentiation, but its role in the generation and maintenance
of memory T cells is unknown. We found that induction of Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling by inhibitors of glycogen sythase kinase-3beta or the Wnt protein
family member Wnt3a arrested CD8(+) T cell development into effector cells. By
blocking T cell differentiation, Wnt signaling promoted the generation of
CD44(low)CD62L(high)Sca-1(high)CD122(high)Bcl-2(high) self-renewing multipotent
CD8(+) memory stem cells with proliferative and antitumor capacities exceeding
those of central and effector memory T cell subsets. These findings reveal a key 
role for Wnt signaling in the maintenance of 'stemness' in mature memory CD8(+) T
cells and have major implications for the design of new vaccination strategies
and adoptive immunotherapies.

PMCID: PMC2707501
PMID: 19525962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Oct;50(10):4794-806. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3567.
Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Conditional mutations of beta-catenin and APC reveal roles for canonical Wnt
signaling in lens differentiation.

Martinez G(1), Wijesinghe M, Turner K, Abud HE, Taketo MM, Noda T, Robinson ML,
de Iongh RU.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Development Laboratory, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

PURPOSE: Previous studies indicate that the Wnt/beta-catenin-signaling pathway is
active and functional during murine lens development. In this study, the
consequences of constitutively activating the pathway in lens during development 
were investigated.
METHODS: To activate Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, beta-catenin (Catnb) and
adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) genes were conditionally mutated in two Cre
lines that are active in whole lens (MLR10) or only in differentiated fibers
(MLR39), from E13.5. Lens phenotype in mutant lenses was investigated by
histology, immunohistochemistry, BrdU labeling, quantitative RT-PCR arrays, and
TUNEL.
RESULTS: Only intercrosses with MLR10 resulted in ocular phenotypes, indicating
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling functions in lens epithelium and during early fiber
differentiation. Mutant lenses were characterized by increased progression of
epithelial cells through the cell cycle, as shown by BrdU labeling, and
phosphohistone 3 and cyclin D1 labeling, and maintenance of epithelial phenotype 
(E-cadherin and Pax6 expression) in the fiber compartment. Fiber cell
differentiation was delayed as shown by reduced expression of c-maf and
beta-crystallin and delay in expression of the CDKI, p57(kip2). From E13.5, there
were numerous cells undergoing apoptosis, and by E15.5, there was evidence of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition with numerous cells expressing alpha-smooth
muscle actin. Quantitative PCR analyses revealed large changes in expression of
Wnt target genes (Lef1, Tcf7, T (Brachyury), and Ccnd1), Wnt inhibitors (Wif1,
Dkk1, Nkd1, and Frzb) and also several Wnts (Wnt6, Wnt10a, Wnt8b, and Wnt11).
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays key
roles in regulating proliferation of lens stem/progenitor cells during early
stages of fiber cell differentiation.

PMID: 19515997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Zebrafish. 2009 Mar;6(1):59-68. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2009.0580.

T-cell factor 4 (tcf7l2) is the main effector of Wnt signaling during zebrafish
intestine organogenesis.

Faro A(1), Boj SF, Ambrósio R, van den Broek O, Korving J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.

The Wnt pathway orchestrates cell fate decisions during embryonic development,
organogenesis, and adult tissues homeostasis. T-cell factor (Tcf )/lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors are the downstream effectors 
of canonical Wnt signaling. Upon Wnt signal activation, beta-catenin stabilizes
and translocates to the nucleus, where it interacts with Tcfs activating the
transcription of Wnt target genes. In the absence of Wnt, levels of stable
beta-catenin are reduced by the action of adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) and
other cytoplasmic proteins. Mutations in Apc cause constitutive accumulation of
beta-catenin and inappropriate activation of the Wnt pathway. apc(mcr/mcr) fish
embryos show absence of expression of tissue-specific differentiation markers in 
the intestine, suggesting that inappropriate activation of Wnt signaling
abrogates gut organogenesis. Which Tcf transcription factor mediates Wnt
signaling during zebrafish gut organogenesis remains unclear. We studied the
combined effect of loss of Tcf family members and Apc in the developing embryo.
Tcf4 (tcf7l2) loss rescues the apc(mcr/mcr) phenotype in the intestine. Single
depletion of Tcf1 (tcf7) and Tcf3 (tcf7l1a) function in an Apc mutant background 
had no effect on endoderm development. This study reveals that Tcf4 (tcf7l2) is
the major effector of Wnt signaling in the intestine during zebrafish
organogenesis.

PMID: 19374549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2328-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp165. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Systems biology of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
computational identification of gene expression pathways and integrated
regulatory networks.

Song X(1), Di Giovanni V, He N, Wang K, Ingram A, Rosenblum ND, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

To elucidate the molecular pathways that modulate renal cyst growth in ADPKD, we 
performed global gene profiling on cysts of different size (<1 ml, n = 5; 10-20
ml, n = 5; >50 ml, n = 3) and minimally cystic tissue (MCT, n = 5) from five PKD1
human polycystic kidneys using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We used gene
set enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented signaling pathways and key
transcription factors (TFs) between cysts and MCT. We found down-regulation of
kidney epithelial restricted genes (e.g. nephron segment-specific markers and
cilia-associated cystic genes such as HNF1B, PKHD1, IFT88 and CYS1) in the renal 
cysts. On the other hand, PKD1 cysts displayed a rich profile of gene sets
associated with renal development, mitogen-mediated proliferation, cell cycle
progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, aging and
immune/inflammatory responses. Notably, our data suggest that up-regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin, pleiotropic growth factor/receptor tyrosine kinase (e.g.
IGF/IGF1R, FGF/FGFR, EGF/EGFR, VEGF/VEGFR), G-protein-coupled receptor (e.g.
PTGER2) signaling was associated with renal cystic growth. By integrating these
pathways with a number of dysregulated networks of TFs (e.g. SRF, MYC, E2F1,
CREB1, LEF1, TCF7, HNF1B/ HNF1A and HNF4A), our data suggest that epithelial
dedifferentiation accompanied by aberrant activation and cross-talk of specific
signaling pathways may be required for PKD1 cyst growth and disease progression. 
Pharmacological modulation of some of these signaling pathways may provide a
potential therapeutic strategy for ADPKD.

PMID: 19346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 May;46(5):621-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.01.005. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Transcriptional regulation of SM22alpha by Wnt3a: convergence with
TGFbeta(1)/Smad signaling at a novel regulatory element.

Shafer SL(1), Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
Internal Medicine/BMD, Campus Box 8301, 660 South Euclid Ave, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA.

The role of canonical Wnt signaling in myofibroblast biology has not been fully
investigated. The C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cell line recapitulates myofibroblast
differentiation in vitro and in vivo, including SM22alpha expression. Using this 
model, we find that Wnt3a upregulates SM22alpha in concert with TGFbeta(1). Wnt1,
Wnt5a and BMP2 could not replace Wnt3a and TGFbeta(1) signals. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified that Wnt3a enhances both genomic SM22alpha histone
H3 acetylation and beta-catenin association, hallmarks of transcriptional
activation. By analyzing a series of SM22alpha promoter-luciferase (LUC) reporter
constructs, we mapped Wnt3a-regulated DNA transcriptional activation to
nucleotides -213 to -192 relative to the transcription initiation site. In gel
shift assays, DNA-protein complexes assembled on this element were disrupted with
antibodies to beta-catenin, Smad2/3, and TCF7, confirming the participation of
known Wnt3a and TGFbeta transcriptional mediators. Mutation of a CAGAG motif
within this region abrogated recognition by these DNA binding proteins. Wnt3a
treatment increased Smad2/3 binding to this element. Mutation of the cognate
within the context of the native 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter resulted in a 70%
decrease in transcription, and reduced Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) induction. A concatamer
of SM22alpha [-213 to -192] conveyed Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) activation to the
unresponsive RSV promoter. Dominant negative TCF inhibited SM22alpha [-213 to
-192] x 6 RSVLUC activation. Moreover, ICAT (inhibitor of beta-catenin and TCF)
decreased while TCF7L2 and beta-catenin enhanced 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter
induction by Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1). RNAi "knockdown" of beta-catenin inhibited Wnt3a
induction of SM22alpha. Thus, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling interacts with
TGFbeta/Smad pathways to control SM22alpha gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2666882
PMID: 19344627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Genes Cells. 2009 Feb;14(2):141-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01258.x. Epub
2008 Jan 6.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 enhances Wnt/beta-catenin signaling-induced
osteoprotegerin expression.

Sato MM(1), Nakashima A, Nashimoto M, Yawaka Y, Tamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo, Japan.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays an important role in the developing skeletal
system. Our previous studies demonstrated that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
inhibits the ability of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 to suppress myotube
formation in the multipotent mesenchymal cell line C2C12 and that this inhibition
is mediated by Id1. In this study, we examined the role of intracellular
signaling by Wnt/beta-catenin and BMP-2 in regulating the expression of
osteoprotegerin (OPG) and of the receptor activator of NFkappaB ligand (RANKL).
OPG expression was induced by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in C2C12 cells and
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Silencing of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta also
increased OPG expression. In contrast, R expression was suppressed by
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. In a transfection assay, beta-catenin induced the
activity of a reporter gene, a 1.5 kb fragment of the 5'-flanking region of the
OPG gene. Deletion and mutation analysis revealed that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
regulates transcription of OPG via a promoter region containing two
Wnt/beta-catenin responsive sites. BMP-2 enhanced Wnt/beta-catenin-dependent
transcriptional activation of the OPG promoter. In response to BMP-2 stimulation,
Smad 1 and 4 interacted with Wnt/beta-catenin responsive sites. These results
show that the regulation of OPG expression is mediated through two transcription 
pathways that involve the OPG promoter.

PMID: 19170762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1362-6.

Allele-specific PCR assay to genotype SNP rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene for rapid
screening of diabetes susceptibility.

Dutra LA(1), Costa PG, Velasco LF, Amato AA, Barra GB.

Author information: 
(1)Sabin Institute and Laboratory of Clinical Analysis, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study is to validate a rapid and simple
allele-specific PCR that genotypes TCF7/L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism with
standard PCR instruments.
METHODS: Two forward primers with variations in their 3' nucleotides were
designed in such a way that each was specific for one of the two variants. They
were combined with a common reverse primer into two PCR reactions. Specific
amplification indicates the presence of the allele. One hundred and four DNA
samples were genotyped by this method. To evaluate the assay, the polymorphism
spanning region of 63 DNA samples representing the three possible genotypes was
sequenced.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 allele assignments derived from the allele-specific PCR
were in complete agreement with sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The assay described here is a suitable strategy for the TCF7/L2
rs7903146 (C/T) genotyping also allowing rapid and reliable identification.

PMID: 19169495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Dyn. 2009 Feb;238(2):459-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21838.

Tracking gene expression during zebrafish osteoblast differentiation.

Li N(1), Felber K, Elks P, Croucher P, Roehl HH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors RUNX2 and OSX have been shown to act sequentially to
direct mammalian osteoblast differentiation. RUNX2 is required during the early
stages of commitment and acts in part to activate Osx transcription. OSX and
RUNX2 then act to direct transcription of bone matrix proteins. Here, we
investigate the expression of these genes and others during zebrafish
osteoblastogenesis. Using whole-mount in situ hybridization, we find that, during
the formation of a given bone, the zebrafish homologues of mouse Runx2 (runx2a
and runx2b) are typically expressed before the onset of osx. osx expression is
usually followed by up-regulation of the bone matrix proteins, col1a2 and
osteonectin. These results suggest that the mammalian pathway is conserved during
development of the head and shoulder skeleton of zebrafish. We also analyze the
expression of three atypical bone markers (tcf7, cvl2, and col10a1) in an effort 
to place them within this canonical hierarchy.

PMID: 19161246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1185-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.115. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Celecoxib-induced degradation of T-cell factors-1 and -4 in human colon cancer
cells.

Takahashi-Yanaga F(1), Yoshihara T, Jingushi K, Miwa Y, Morimoto S, Hirata M,
Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. yanaga@clipharm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

We examined the effect of celecoxib on the expression of T-cell factors (TCFs) to
clarify the mechanism by which celecoxib suppress beta-catenin/TCF-dependent
transcriptional activity without reducing the level of beta-catenin protein,
using HCT-116 cells. Celecoxib suppressed the expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in a 
time-dependent manner. Pretreatment of cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 
inhibited the loss of TCF-1 and TCF-4 induced by celecoxib, suggesting that
celecoxib induced the proteasome-dependent degradation of TCF-1 and TCF-4.
Beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcriptional activity was significantly decreased
after the treatment with celecoxib for 6 h and the pretreatment of the cells with
MG132 attenuated the effect of celecoxib. Further, celecoxib also suppressed the 
expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in another colon cancer cell line, DLD-1. Our
results suggest that TCF-1 and TCF-4 degradation may involve the inhibition of
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway induced by celecoxib.

PMID: 18983819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Bone. 2009 Jan;44(1):32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.08.133. Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Gene expression signatures of a fibroblastoid preosteoblast and cuboidal
osteoblast cell model compared to the MLO-Y4 osteocyte cell model.

Yang W(1), Harris MA, Heinrich JG, Guo D, Bonewald LF, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Cellular and Structural Biology, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

In the osteoblast 2T3 cell model, 326 genes significantly increase in expression 
as subconfluent fibroblastic 2T3 cells become confluent and cuboidal. This gene
set includes BMP2/4, Dlx2/5, Runx2, Osterix and Lrp5, as well as TGFbeta
regulated genes. Both activated or total nuclear Smad158 and Smad2 levels
increase as they become confluent, and beta-catenin protein expression increases 
as 2T3 cells become confluent, reflecting a set of genes involved in early
preosteoblast to osteoblast commitment, as observed in vitro and in vivo. Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) demonstrated that this 326 dataset is very similar
to several early osteoblast geneset signatures. The MLO-Y4 cell model is a
well-known in vitro osteocyte model. The MLO-Y4 expression pattern was directly
compared with the 2T3 osteoblast cell model. 181 genes that are highly expressed 
in MLO-Y4 osteocytes compared to osteoblasts were identified. Very few genes
expressed in MLO-Y4 cells are found in osteocytes directly isolate from bone,
suggesting that osteocyte specific gene programs most likely require the
osteocytes to be embedded in the proper mineralized matrix. The MLO-Y4 dataset
includes few established in vivo osteocyte markers, but does include several
transcription factors such as Vitamin D receptor, Tcf7, and Irx5, whose
expression was confirmed in osteocytes in vivo. Gene expression signatures in
MLO-Y4 cells, as determined by functional clustering and interaction maps,
suggest active prostaglandin-PKA pathways, genes involved in dendrite formation, 
acute/defense response pathways, TGFbeta signaling, and interferon/chemokine
pathways. GSEA demonstrated that MLO-Y4 expression pattern is similar to
macrophages, mesenchymal fibroblasts, and early osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC2692918
PMID: 18973839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Exp Lung Res. 2008 Oct;34(8):513-30. doi: 10.1080/01902140802271826.

The time course of expression of genes involved in specific pathways in normal
human bronchial epithelial cells following exposure to cigarette smoke.

Parsanejad R(1), Fields WR, Morgan WT, Bombick BR, Doolittle DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

This study was conducted to determine the time course of gene expression
associated with specific signaling pathways in normal human bronchial epithelial 
(NHBE) cells after exposure to 2 concentrations of 2R4F tobacco mainstream smoke 
(MSS). Expression of 84 genes representing 18 signal transduction pathways was
quantitated in MSS- and air-exposed cultures using real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) arrays at 1, 4, and 24 hours following exposure. A confidence
score, calculated based on statistical analysis of the degree and reproducibility
of expression changes, was used to identify potential biologically significant
changes in gene expression. Stimulation of NIAP, an apoptosis inhibitor,
suppression of NFKB1 and MYC, representing pro-apoptotic activity, and
down-regulation of TCF7 and up-regulation of KLK2, representing
anti-/pro-inflammatory responses, were altered 1 hour after exposure to the high 
concentration of MSS. At the 4-hour time point, the pattern had changed such that
10 different genes were now up-regulated and an additional gene was now
down-regulated. Significant changes included genes involved in inflammatory
response (LTA, SELPLG, and IL8), repair and wound-healing activity (MMP10), and
growth activity (GREB1, EGR1), suggesting repair in this period. By 24 hours, the
only up-regulated genes in common with the 4-hour profile were SELPLG and IL8,
suggesting continued inflammatory signaling. These results suggest that
identification of specific gene expression-based biomarkers of MSS toxicity is
promising for investigating specific mechanisms of cellular damage. As expected, 
the expressed signals were dependent on the concentration of MSS and the
postexposure times.

PMID: 18850377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Neoplasia. 2008 Jul;10(7):697-705.

Frizzled-7 as a potential therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

Ueno K(1), Hiura M, Suehiro Y, Hazama S, Hirata H, Oka M, Imai K, Dahiya R,
Hinoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Ube, Japan.

We investigated whether one of the Wnt receptors, frizzled-7 (FZD7), functions in
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells harboring an
APC or CTNNB1 mutation and may be a potential therapeutic target for sporadic
CRCs. The expression level of FZD gene family members in colon cancer cells and
primary CRC tissues were determined by real-time PCR. Activation of the Wnt
signaling pathway was evaluated by TOPflash assay. The expression level of Wnt
target genes was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction and/or Western
blot analysis. Cell growth and cell invasion were assessed by MTS and matrigel
assays, respectively. Among 10 FZD gene family members, FZD7 mRNA was
predominantly expressed in six colon cancer cell lines with APC or CTNNB1
mutation. These six cell lines were transfected with FZD7 cDNA together with a
TOPflash reporter plasmid, resulting in a 1.5- to 24.3-fold increase of Tcf
transcriptional activity. The mRNA expression levels of seven known Wnt target
genes were also increased by 1.5- to 3.4-fold after transfection of FZD7 cDNA
into HCT-116 cells. The six cell lines were then cotransfected with FZD7-siRNA
and a TOPflash reporter plasmid, which reduced Tcf transcriptional activity to
20% to 80%. FZD7-siRNA was shown to significantly decrease cell viability and in 
vitro invasion activity after transfection into HCT-116 cells. Our present data
demonstrated that FZD7 activates the canonical Wnt pathway in colon cancer cells 
despite the presence of APC or CTNNB1 mutation and that FZD7-siRNA may be used as
a therapeutic reagent for CRCs.

PMCID: PMC2435005
PMID: 18592008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 15;321(2):446-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.05.551. Epub 2008 
Jun 6.

Regulation of the feedback antagonist naked cuticle by Wingless signaling.

Chang JL(1), Chang MV, Barolo S, Cadigan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, 830 N. University Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

Signaling pathways usually activate transcriptional targets in a cell
type-specific manner. Notable exceptions are pathway-specific feedback
antagonists, which serve to restrict the range or duration of the signal. These
factors are often activated by their respective pathways in a broad array of cell
types. For example, the Wnt ligand Wingless (Wg) activates the naked cuticle
(nkd) gene in all tissues examined throughout Drosophila development. How does
the nkd gene respond in such an unrestricted manner to Wg signaling? Analysis in 
cell culture revealed regions of the nkd locus that contain Wg response elements 
(WREs) that are directly activated by the pathway via the transcription factor
TCF. In flies, Wg signaling activates these WREs in multiple tissues, in distinct
but overlapping patterns. These WREs are necessary and largely sufficient for nkd
expression in late stage larval tissues, but only contribute to part of the
embryonic expression pattern of nkd. These results demonstrate that nkd
responsiveness to Wg signaling is achieved by several WREs which are broadly (but
not universally) activated by the pathway. The existence of several WREs in the
nkd locus may have been necessary to allow the Wg signaling-Nkd feedback circuit 
to remain intact as Wg expression diversified during animal evolution.

PMCID: PMC2892857
PMID: 18585374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mutat Res. 2008 Jul 3;642(1-2):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.04.007. Epub
2008 May 2.

Expression profiles are different in carbon ion-irradiated normal human
fibroblasts and their bystander cells.

Iwakawa M(1), Hamada N, Imadome K, Funayama T, Sakashita T, Kobayashi Y, Imai T.

Author information: 
(1)RadGenomics Research Group, Research Center for Charged Particle Therapy,
National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, Chiba, Japan.
mayumii@nirs.go.jp

Evidence has accumulated that ionizing radiation induces biological effects in
non-irradiated bystander cells having received signals from directly irradiated
cells; however, energetic heavy ion-induced bystander response is incompletely
characterized. Here we performed microarray analysis of irradiated and bystander 
fibroblasts in confluent cultures. To see the effects in bystander cells, each of
1, 5 and 25 sites was targeted with 10 particles of carbon ions (18.3 MeV/u, 103 
keV/microm) using microbeams, where particles traversed 0.00026, 0.0013 and
0.0066% of cells, respectively. diated cells, cultures were exposed to 10%
survival dose (D), 0.1D and 0.01D of corresponding broadbeams (108 keV/microm).
Irrespective of the target numbers (1, 5 or 25 sites) and the time (2 or 6h
postirradiation), similar expression changes were observed in bystander cells.
Among 874 probes that showed more than 1.5-fold changes in bystander cells, 25%
were upregulated and the remainder downregulated. These included genes related to
cell communication (PIK3C2A, GNA13, FN1, ANXA1 and IL1RAP), stress response
(RAD23B, ATF4 and EIF2AK4) and cell cycle (MYCN, RBBP4 and NEUROG1). Pathway
analysis revealed serial bystander activation of G protein/PI-3 kinase pathways. 
Instead, genes related to cell cycle or death (CDKN1A, GADD45A, NOTCH1 and
BCL2L1), and cell communication (IL1B, TCF7 and ID1) were upregulated in
irradiated cells, but not in bystander cells. Our results indicate different
expression profiles in irradiated and bystander cells, and imply that
intercellular signaling between irradiated and bystander cells activate
intracellular signaling, leading to the transcriptional stress response in
bystander cells.

PMID: 18538798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Oncogene. 2008 Aug 28;27(37):5075-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.140. Epub 2008 May
12.

Snail promotes Wnt target gene expression and interacts with beta-catenin.

Stemmer V(1), de Craene B, Berx G, Behrens J.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

The transcription factor snail represses epithelial gene expression and thereby
promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) and tumor invasion. The
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is also involved in EMT and was shown to activate snail.
Here, we demonstrate that snail increases Wnt reporter gene activity induced by
beta-catenin, LRP6 or dishevelled, and also promotes transcription activated by
GAL4-beta-catenin fusion proteins. Snail mutants lacking the transcriptional
repressor domain also stimulate beta-catenin-dependent transcription indicating
that downregulation of snail target genes is not required for this activity.
Snail interacts with beta-catenin in immunoprecipitation experiments at its
N-terminus, which is required for activation by snail. In colorectal cancer cell 
lines, overexpression of snail leads to increased expression of Wnt target genes,
whereas downregulation of endogenous snail by siRNA reduces target gene
expression. Our data indicate a positive feedback stimulation of the Wnt pathway 
by activation of snail.

PMID: 18469861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):480-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-120261. Epub 2008 Apr
4.

Core binding factors are necessary for natural killer cell development and
cooperate with Notch signaling during T-cell specification.

Guo Y(1), Maillard I, Chakraborti S, Rothenberg EV, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):454.

CBFbeta is the non-DNA binding subunit of the core binding factors (CBFs). Mice
with reduced CBFbeta levels display profound, early defects in T-cell but not
B-cell development. Here we show that CBFbeta is also required at very early
stages of natural killer (NK)-cell development. We also demonstrate that T-cell
development aborts during specification, as the expression of Gata3 and Tcf7,
which encode key regulators of T lineage specification, is substantially reduced,
as are functional thymic progenitors. Constitutively active Notch or IL-7
signaling cannot restore T-cell expansion or differentiation of CBFbeta
insufficient cells, nor can overexpression of Runx1 or CBFbeta overcome a lack of
Notch signaling. Therefore, the ability of the prethymic cell to respond
appropriately to Notch is dependent on CBFbeta, and both signals converge to
activate the T-cell developmental program.

PMCID: PMC2481540
PMID: 18390836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Prostate. 2008 May 15;68(7):740-7. doi: 10.1002/pros.20732.

Evaluation of a variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and
prostate cancer risk in a population-based study.

Agalliu I(1), Suuriniemi M, Prokunina-Olsson L, Johanneson B, Collins FS,
Stanford JL, Ostrander EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a high mobility group-box
containing protein that is a critical member of the Wnt/beta-catenin canonical
signaling pathway. In addition to its recently recognized role in diabetes,
aberrant TCF7L2 expression has been implicated in cancer through regulation of
cell proliferation and apoptosis by c-MYC and cyclin D. It has been hypothesized 
that germline variants within the TCF7L2 gene previously associated with diabetes
may affect cancer risk through the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Specifically, the same risk allele of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs12255372 that is associated with diabetes (T allele) has recently been
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
METHODS: Here, we investigated associations between rs12255372 and prostate
cancer risk among 1,457 cases and 1,351 controls from a population-based study.
RESULTS: The variant TT genotype was not associated with overall prostate cancer 
risk. However, there was evidence that men homozygous for the variant T allele
had an elevated relative risk of more aggressive prostate cancer, as defined by
high Gleason score (OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 1.0-2.8) or regional/distant stage (OR =
1.7, 95% CI = 1.1-2.6) disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that this variant in the TCF7L2 gene may be
associated with risk of developing more clinically significant disease. These
results need to be confirmed, but provide initial evidence that the TCF7L2 gene
may alter risk of developing more aggressive prostate cancer.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2765224
PMID: 18302196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Hepatogastroenterology. 2007 Oct-Nov;54(79):2088-91.

AKR1C2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited beta-catenin expression and
transcriptional activation in human liver cancer cell line QGY7701.

Lu DD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tongji University School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai, 200092,
People's Republic of China. ludondon88@163.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: It has been proved that changes in the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway 
lead to hepatocarcinogenesis and the AKR1C2 gene may contribute to the
occurrence, advancement and invasiveness of liver cancer. The purpose of this
study is to investigate AKR1C2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) influence on
beta-catenin expression and transcriptional activation in the human liver cancer 
cell line QGY7701.
METHODOLOGY: We constructed AKR1C2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) expression
vector pSilence2.1/ U6/AKR1C2 RNAi and then transfected it into the liver cancer 
cell QGY7701. Beta-catenin mRNA and its protein expression was detected by
RT-PCR, western blotting and beta-catenin gene transcriptional activity was
analyzed by luciferase assay.
RESULTS: AKR1C2 siRNA inhibited the transcriptional expression of beta-catenin
and decreased beta-catenin protein stability in QGY7701. AKR1C2 siRNA inhibited
beta-catenin gene transcriptional regulation and control activity for TCF gene by
influencing on the down-stream gene's function of beta-catenin in QGY7701 liver
cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: It suggests a causative cooperative role for beta-catenin and AKR1C2
in tumorigenesis. Thus, the inhibition of activation of the beta-catenin/
TCF-signaling pathway is believed to be one mechanism by which AKR1C2 siRNA
exerts a gatekeeper function during hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 18251165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun 1;104(3):942-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21679.

The pro-osteogenic action of beta-catenin requires interaction with BMP
signaling, but not Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity.

Salazar VS(1), Mbalaviele G, Civitelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The role of beta-catenin in skeletal development and osteogenic cell
differentiation is well established, but the molecular mechanisms attending these
effects remain largely unknown. We conducted a structure/function analysis of
beta-catenin to gain further insights on these mechanisms. Retroviral
transduction of a full-length, constitutively active beta-catenin mutant
inhibited adipogenesis and stimulated osteoblast differentiation from multipotent
embryonic fibroblasts (C3H10T1/2). However, N-terminal truncated beta-catenin
mutants with weak Tcf/Lef activity retained their pro-osteogenic action, as did a
constitutively stabilized mutant lacking the C-terminal Tcf/Lef transactivation
domain. Importantly, this Tcf/Lef-defective beta-catenin did not suppress
adipogenesis, and even elicited spontaneous adipogenesis when expressed in cells 
cultured in osteogenic conditions. Thus, Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity of
beta-catenin is critical for inhibition of adipogenesis, while it is dispensable 
for its pro-osteogenic effect. BMP-2 greatly enhanced both osteogenesis and
adipogenesis in the presence of the C-terminally truncated mutant, though it
selectively enhanced only osteoblast differentiation in cells transduced with the
full-length, Tcf/Lef active beta-catenin mutant. C3H10T1/2 cells produce BMP-4,
and inhibition of endogenous BMP signaling by Noggin curtailed osteogenic
differentiation by constitutively active beta-catenin. Therefore, BMP signaling
must be active for full induction by beta-catenin of osteogenic differentiation
from multipotent precursors. These data suggest that cooperative interactions
between beta-catenin and BMP signaling systems drive osteoblast cell fate
specification and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3811910
PMID: 18247340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Mar;29(3):666-72. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn001. Epub 2008 Jan 
19.

Further upregulation of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription is involved in the
development of macroscopic tumors in the colon of ApcMin/+ mice.

Oyama T(1), Yamada Y, Hata K, Tomita H, Hirata A, Sheng H, Hara A, Aoki H,
Kunisada T, Yamashita S, Mori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

Apc(Min/+) mouse, a mouse model for human familial adenomatosis polyposis,
contains a truncating mutation in the Apc gene and spontaneously develops
intestinal tumors. Our previous study revealed two distinct stages of
tumorigenesis in the colon of Apc(Min/+) mouse: microadenomas and macroscopic
tumors. Microadenomas already have lost their remaining allele of the Apc and all
microadenomas show accumulation of beta-catenin, indicating that activation of
the canonical Wnt pathway is an initiating event in the tumorigenesis. This study
shows that expression of nuclear beta-catenin in macroscopic tumors is further
upregulated in comparison with that in microadenomas. Furthermore,
transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling, assessed 
using beta-catenin/Tcf reporter transgenic mice, is higher in the macroscopic
tumors than that in microadenomas. In addition, the expression level of
Dickkopf-1, which is known to be a negative modifier of the canonical Wnt
pathway, was reduced only in colon tumors. These results suggest that activation 
of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription plays a role not only in the initiation stage
but also in the promotion stage of colon carcinogenesis in Apc(Min/+) mice.

PMID: 18204079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 2008 Jan;135(1):159-69.

Insertional mutagenesis by the Tol2 transposon-mediated enhancer trap approach
generated mutations in two developmental genes: tcf7 and synembryn-like.

Nagayoshi S(1), Hayashi E, Abe G, Osato N, Asakawa K, Urasaki A, Horikawa K, Ikeo
K, Takeda H, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.

Gene trap and enhancer trap methods using transposon or retrovirus have been
recently described in zebrafish. However, insertional mutants using these methods
have not been reported. We report here development of an enhancer trap method by 
using the Tol2 transposable element and identification and characterization of
insertional mutants. We created 73 fish lines that carried single copy insertions
of an enhancer trap construct, which contained the zebrafish hsp70 promoter and
the GFP gene, in their genome and expressed GFP in specific cells, tissues and
organs, indicating that the hsp70 promoter is highly capable of responding to
chromosomal enhancers. First, we analyzed genomic DNA surrounding these
insertions. Fifty-one of them were mapped onto the current version of the genomic
sequence and 43% (22/51) were located within transcribed regions, either exons or
introns. Then, we crossed heterozygous fish carrying the same insertions and
identified two insertions that caused recessive mutant phenotypes. One disrupted 
the tcf7 gene, which encodes a transcription factor of the Tcf/Lef family
mediating Wnt signaling, and caused shorter and wavy median fin folds and
pectoral fins. We knocked down Lef1, another member of the Tcf/Lef family also
expressed in the fin bud, in the tcf7 mutant, and revealed functional redundancy 
of these factors and their essential role in establishment of the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER). The other disrupted the synembryn-like gene (synbl), a
homolog of the C. elegans synembryn gene, and caused embryonic lethality and
small pigment spots. The pigment phenotype was rescued by application of
forskolin, an activator of adenylyl cyclase, suggesting that the synbl gene
activates the Galpha(S) pathway leading to activation of adenylyl cyclase. We
thus demonstrated that the transposon-mediated enhancer trap approach can indeed 
create insertional mutations in developmental genes. Our present study provides a
basis for the development of efficient transposon-mediated insertional
mutagenesis in a vertebrate.

PMID: 18065431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 1;313(1):398-407. Epub 2007 Nov 9.

Proliferation and patterning are mediated independently in the dorsal spinal cord
downstream of canonical Wnt signaling.

Bonner J(1), Gribble SL, Veien ES, Nikolaus OB, Weidinger G, Dorsky RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy University, Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Canonical Wnt signaling can regulate proliferation and patterning in the
developing spinal cord, but the relationship between these functions has remained
elusive. It has been difficult to separate the distinct activities of Wnts
because localized changes in proliferation could conceivably alter patterning,
and gain and loss of function experiments have resulted in both types of defects.
To resolve this issue we have investigated canonical Wnt signaling in the
zebrafish spinal cord using multiple approaches. We demonstrate that Wnt
signaling is required initially for proliferation throughout the entire spinal
cord, and later for patterning dorsal progenitor domains. Furthermore, we find
that spinal cord patterning is normal in embryos after cell division has been
pharmacologically blocked. Finally, we determine the transcriptional mediators of
Wnt signaling that are responsible for patterning and proliferation. We show that
tcf7 gene knockdown results in dorsal patterning defects without decreasing the
mitotic index in dorsal domains. In contrast, tcf3 gene knockdown results in a
reduced mitotic index without affecting dorsal patterning. Together, our work
demonstrates that proliferation and patterning in the developing spinal cord are 
separable events that are regulated independently by Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC2212594
PMID: 18062957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Nov 28;8:71.

The candidate genes TAF5L, TCF7, PDCD1, IL6 and ICAM1 cannot be excluded from
having effects in type 1 diabetes.

Cooper JD(1), Smyth DJ, Bailey R, Payne F, Downes K, Godfrey LM, Masters J,
Zeitels LR, Vella A, Walker NM, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
jason.cooper@cimr.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: As genes associated with immune-mediated diseases have an increased
prior probability of being associated with other immune-mediated diseases, we
tested three such genes, IL23R, IRF5 and CD40, for an association with type 1
diabetes. In addition, we tested seven genes, TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL12B, IL6,
ICAM1 and TBX21, with published marginal or inconsistent evidence of an
association with type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped reported polymorphisms of the ten genes, nonsynonymous SNPs
(nsSNPs) and, for the IL12B and IL6 regions, tag SNPs in up to 7,888 case, 8,858 
control and 3,142 parent-child trio samples. In addition, we analysed data from
the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium genome-wide association study to
determine whether there was any further evidence of an association in each gene
region.
RESULTS: We found some evidence of associations between type 1 diabetes and
TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7 and IL6 (ORs = 1.05 - 1.13; P = 0.0291 - 4.16 x 10-4). No
evidence of an association was obtained for IL12B, IRF5, IL23R, ICAM1, TBX21 and 
CD40, although there was some evidence of an association (OR = 1.10; P = 0.0257) 
from the genome-wide association study for the ICAM1 region.
CONCLUSION: We failed to exclude the possibility of some effect in type 1
diabetes for TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL6 and ICAM1. Additional studies, of these and 
other candidate genes, employing much larger sample sizes and analysis of
additional polymorphisms in each gene and its flanking region will be required to
ascertain their contributions to type 1 diabetes susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2217539
PMID: 18045485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 16;104(42):16438-43. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

A gene regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Zhou Q(1), Chipperfield H, Melton DA, Wong WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, 8125 Math
Science Building, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We analyze new and existing expression and transcription factor-binding data to
characterize gene regulatory relations in mouse ES cells (ESC). In addition to
confirming the key roles of Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, our analysis identifies
several genes, such as Esrrb, Stat3, Tcf7, Sall4, and LRH-1, as statistically
significant coregulators. The regulatory interactions among 15 core regulators
are used to construct a gene regulatory network in ESC. The network encapsulates 
extensive cross-regulations among the core regulators, highlights how they may
control epigenetic processes, and reveals the surprising roles of nuclear
receptors. Our analysis also provides information on the regulation of a large
number of putative target genes of the network.

PMCID: PMC2034259
PMID: 17940043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 28;27(10):1478-88. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Deregulated Wnt/beta-catenin program in high-risk neuroblastomas without MYCN
amplification.

Liu X(1), Mazanek P, Dam V, Wang Q, Zhao H, Guo R, Jagannathan J, Cnaan A, Maris 
JM, Hogarty MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104-4318, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is a frequently lethal tumor of childhood. MYCN amplification 
accounts for the aggressive phenotype in a subset while the majority have no
consistently identified molecular aberration but frequently express MYC at high
levels. We hypothesized that activated Wnt/beta-catenin (CTNNB1) signaling might 
account for this as MYC is a beta-catenin transcriptional target and multiple
embryonal and neural crest malignancies have oncogenic alterations in this
pathway. NB cell lines without MYCN amplification express higher levels of MYC
and beta-catenin (with aberrant nuclear localization) than MYCN-amplified cell
lines. Evidence for aberrant beta-catenin-TCF transcriptional activity was
demonstrated using expression profiles from 73 primary NBs. Findings included
increased WNT ligands (WNT1, WNT6, WNT7A, WNT10B), DVL1 and TCF7 expression in
high-risk NBs without MYCN amplification, consistent with canonical beta-catenin 
signaling. More directly, Patterns of Gene Expression and Gene Set Enrichment
Analyses demonstrated beta-catenin target genes (for example, MYC, PPARD, NRCAM, 
CD44, TCF7) as coordinately upregulated in high-risk NBs without MYCN
amplification in comparison to high-risk MYCN-amplified or intermediate-risk NBs,
supporting pathway activation in this subset. Thus, high-risk NBs without MYCN
amplification may deregulate MYC and other oncogenic genes via altered
beta-catenin signaling providing a potential candidate pathway for therapeutic
inhibition.

PMID: 17724465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Chin Med J (Engl). 2007 Aug 5;120(15):1326-30.

Screening of aplastic anaemia-related genes in bone marrow CD4+ T cells by
suppressive subtractive hybridization.

Zheng M(1), Liu WL, Fu JR, Sun HY, Zhou JF, Xu HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

BACKGROUND: CD4(+) T cells play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of aplastic
anaemia. However, the mechanisms of over-proliferation, activation, infiltration 
of bone marrow and damage to haematopoietic cells of CD4(+) T cells in aplastic
anaemia are unclear. Therefore, we screened differentially expressed genes of
bone marrow CD4(+) T cells of aplastic anaemia patients and normal donors by
suppressive subtractive hybridization to investigate the pathogenesis of aplastic
anaemia.
METHODS: The bone marrow mononuclear cells of a first visit aplastic anaemia
patient and a healthy donor of the same age and sex were isolated using
lymphocyte separating medium by density gradient centrifugation. With the
patients as "tester" and donor as "driver", their CD4(+) T cells were separated
with magnetic bead sorting and a cDNA library established by suppressive
subtractive hybridization. Then 15 of the resulting subtracted cDNA clones were
randomly selected for DNA sequencing and homological analysis. With
semiquantitative RT-PCR, bone marrow samples from 20 patients with aplastic
anaemia and 20 healthy donors assessed the expression levels of differentially
expressed genes from SSH library.
RESULTS: PCR detected 89 clones in the library containing an inserted fragment of
100 bp to 700 bp. Among 15 sequenced clones, 12 were known genes including 3
repeated genes. Compared with normal donors, there were 9/12 genes over-expressed
in bone marrow CD4(+) T cells of patients with aplastic anaemia. The effects of
these genes included protein synthesis, biology oxidation, signal transduction,
proliferative regulation and cell migration. Not all these genes had been
reported in the mechanisms of haematopoietic damage mediated by CD4(+) T cells in
aplastic anaemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Screening and cloning genes, which regulate functions of CD4(+) T
cells, are helpful in elucidating the mechanisms of over proliferation,
activation, infiltrating bone marrow and damaging haematopoietic cells of CD4(+) 
T cells in aplastic anaemia.

PMID: 17711738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Oncogene. 2008 Jan 10;27(3):397-403. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Nuclear insulin receptor substrate-1 activates promoters of cell cycle
progression genes.

Wu A(1), Chen J, Baserga R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is a docking protein of the insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor and of the insulin receptor. IRS-1 sends a
strong mitogenic, anti-apoptotic signal and plays an important role in cell
transformation and cancer. IRS-1 translocates to nuclei of cells, where it
increases the activity of the rDNA, c-myc and cyclin D1 promoters. We show, by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, occupancy by IRS-1 of the same promoters. Both
promoter activation and promoter occupancy are IGF-1-dependent. In cells that
respond to IGF-1 but in which IRS-1 does not translocate to nuclei, promoter
occupancy is absent and promoter activation is absent or much reduced.
Transcriptional activation of c-myc and cyclin D1 promoters by nuclear IRS-1 does
not occur with a mutant, inactive IRS-1 protein (deletion of the
phosphotyrosine-binding domain, PTB) and does not require PI3-kinase activity.
Taken together, these results indicate a novel mechanism by which nuclear IRS-1
activates cell cycle genes.

PMID: 17700539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cell Sci. 2007 Sep 1;120(Pt 17):3086-98. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

The RhoA effector mDiaphanous regulates MyoD expression and cell cycle
progression via SRF-dependent and SRF-independent pathways.

Gopinath SD(1), Narumiya S, Dhawan J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, 500 007,
India.

Expression of the key muscle transcription factor MyoD is regulated by RhoA
GTPase, which is an important regulator of adhesion-dependent signaling. We show 
that mDiaphanous (mDia)--an adaptor protein that mediates the effects of RhoA on 
cell motility and the cytoskeleton--is an upstream regulator of MyoD in C2C12
mouse myoblasts. Knockdown of mDia1 reduced MyoD expression and proliferation via
a serum-response factor (SRF)-dependent pathway. Surprisingly, overexpression of 
a Rho-independent form of mDia1 (mDiaDeltaN3), despite activating SRF, also
suppressed MyoD and the cell cycle, suggesting the presence of a second pathway
downstream of mDia1. We present evidence that the alternative pathway by which
mDia1 regulates MyoD involves T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) 
and its co-activator, beta-catenin. TCF activity was suppressed by mDiaDeltaN3
and induced by silencing mDia. mDiaDeltaN3 disrupted the signal-dependent nuclear
localization of beta-catenin and suppressed MyoD expression. Co-expression of a
degradation-resistant form of beta-catenin with mDiaDeltaN3 restored MyoD
expression, suggesting a mechanistic link between the two signaling proteins. We 
also implicate a region encompassing the FH1 domain of mDia1 in beta-catenin-TCF 
regulation. Taken together, our results suggest that a balance between two
pathways downstream of mDia regulates MyoD expression and cell cycle progression.

PMID: 17684061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Aug 3;8:51.

The TCF7L2 locus and type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ(1), Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics Lab, The McGill University Health Center, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada. hui.qi.qu@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 belongs to a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG box-containing
transcription factors, and maps to human chromosome 10q25.3. A recent study
identified genetic association of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with this gene,
correlated with diminished insulin secretion. This study aimed to investigate the
possibility of genetic association between TCF7L2 and type 1 diabetes (T1D).
METHODS: The SNP most significantly associated with T2D, rs7903146, was genotyped
in 886 T1D nuclear family trios with ethnic backgrounds of mixed European
descent.
RESULTS: This study found no T1D association with, and no age-of-onset effect
from rs7903146.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that a T2D mechanism mediated by TCF7L2 does not 
participate in the etiology of T1D.

PMCID: PMC1978206
PMID: 17683561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 1;67(15):7124-31.

IFN-{beta} signaling positively regulates tumorigenesis in aggressive
fibromatosis, potentially by modulating mesenchymal progenitors.

Tjandra SS(1), Hsu C, Goh YI, Gurung A, Poon R, Nadesan P, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;68(3):956. Goh, Ingrid [corrected to Goh, Y Ingrid].

Aggressive fibromatosis (also called desmoid tumor) is a benign, locally
invasive, soft tissue tumor composed of cells with mesenchymal characteristics.
These tumors are characterized by increased levels of beta-catenin-mediated
T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent transcriptional activation. We found that type 1
IFN signaling is activated in human and murine aggressive fibromatosis tumors and
that the expression of associated response genes is regulated by beta-catenin.
When mice deficient for the type 1 IFN receptor (Ifnar1-/-) were crossed with
mice predisposed to developing aggressive fibromatosis tumors (Apc/Apc1638N), a
significant decrease in aggressive fibromatosis tumor formation was observed
compared with littermate controls, showing a novel role for type 1 IFN signaling 
in promoting tumor formation. Type 1 IFN activation inhibits cell proliferation
but does not alter cell apoptosis or the level of beta-catenin-mediated
TCF-dependent transcriptional activation in aggressive fibromatosis cell
cultures. Thus, these changes cannot explain our in vivo results. Intriguingly,
Ifnar1-/- mice have smaller numbers of mesenchymal progenitor cells compared with
littermate controls, and treatment of aggressive fibromatosis cell cultures with 
IFN increases the proportion of cells that exclude Hoechst dye and sort to the
side population, raising the possibility that type 1 IFN signaling regulates the 
number of precursor cells present that drive aggressive fibromatosis tumor
formation and maintenance. This study identified a novel role for IFN type 1
signaling as a positive regulator of neoplasia and suggests that IFN treatment is
a less than optimal therapy for this tumor type.

PMID: 17671179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):421-38.

Molecular dissection of prethymic progenitor entry into the T lymphocyte
developmental pathway.

Tydell CC(1), David-Fung ES, Moore JE, Rowen L, Taghon T, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Notch signaling activates T lineage differentiation from hemopoietic progenitors,
but relatively few regulators that initiate this program have been identified,
e.g., GATA3 and T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) (gene name Tcf7). To identify additional 
regulators of T cell specification, a cDNA library from mouse Pro-T cells was
screened for genes that are specifically up-regulated in intrathymic T cell
precursors as compared with myeloid progenitors. Over 90 genes of interest were
identified, and 35 of 44 tested were confirmed to be more highly expressed in T
lineage precursors relative to precursors of B and/or myeloid lineage. To a
remarkable extent, however, expression of these T lineage-enriched genes,
including zinc finger transcription factor, helicase, and signaling adaptor
genes, was also shared by stem cells (Lin(-)Sca-1(+)Kit(+)CD27(-)) and
multipotent progenitors (Lin(-)Sca-1(+)Kit(+)CD27(+)), although down-regulated in
other lineages. Thus, a major fraction of these early T lineage genes are a
regulatory legacy from stem cells. The few genes sharply up-regulated between
multipotent progenitors and Pro-T cell stages included those encoding
transcription factors Bcl11b, TCF-1 (Tcf7), and HEBalt, Notch target Deltex1,
Deltex3L, Fkbp5, Eva1, and Tmem131. Like GATA3 and Deltex1, Bcl11b, Fkbp5, and
Eva1 were dependent on Notch/Delta signaling for induction in fetal liver
precursors, but only Bcl11b and HEBalt were up-regulated between the first two
stages of intrathymic T cell development (double negative 1 and double negative
2) corresponding to T lineage specification. Bcl11b was uniquely T lineage
restricted and induced by Notch/Delta signaling specifically upon entry into the 
T lineage differentiation pathway.

PMID: 17579063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Inorg Chem. 2007 Jul 9;46(14):5734-8. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

High-valent technetium fluorides. Does TcF7 exist?

Riedel S(1), Renz M, Kaupp M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anorganische Chemie, Universität Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Germany.

The structures and stabilities of technetium fluorides in high oxidation states
have been studied quantum-chemically at density functional theory (B3LYP) and
coupled-cluster (CCSD(T)) levels. The calculations indicate clearly that
technetium heptafluoride, TcF7, has a good chance of existence and preparation,
thus providing the first heptafluoride in the 4d series. The [TcF6]+ cation, a
potential precursor, is also computed to be thermochemically stable against
gas-phase elimination reactions. The problem with such highly fluorinated
complexes appears thus to be mainly in difficult synthetic access under typical
condensed-phase conditions. Matrix-isolation techniques or gas-phase experiments 
appear to be better suited as starting points.

PMID: 17569532  [PubMed]


197. Cancer Res. 2007 May 1;67(9):4079-87.

Development of gastric tumors in Apc(Min/+) mice by the activation of the
beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway.

Tomita H(1), Yamada Y, Oyama T, Hata K, Hirose Y, Hara A, Kunisada T, Sugiyama Y,
Adachi Y, Linhart H, Mori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Gifu, Japan.

Although several lines of evidence suggest the involvement of the Wnt pathway in 
the development of gastric cancers, the functional significance of the pathway in
gastric carcinogenesis is still poorly defined. To examine the role of the
Apc/beta-catenin signaling pathway in the development of gastric cancers, we
investigated the gastric mucosa of the Apc(Min/+) mouse, which is a murine model 
for familial adenomatous polyposis, carrying a germ-line mutation at codon 850 of
Apc. We found that aged Apc(Min/+) mice spontaneously develop multiple tumors in 
the stomach, which are accompanied by loss of heterozygosity of Apc. Such tumors 
consisted of adenomatous glands with strong nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin.
Even a single adenomatous gland already showed nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin, suggesting that Apc/beta-catenin pathway is an initiating event in 
gastric tumorigenesis in Apc(Min/+) mice. Myc and cyclin D1 expressions, which
are transcriptional targets of beta-catenin/Tcf, increased in the adenomatous
lesions. Furthermore, beta-catenin/Tcf reporter transgenic mice with Apc(Min)
allele showed higher levels of the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/Tcf
in the gastric tumors. We also treated Apc(Min/+) and wild-type mice with
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU), an alkylating agent that induces adenomas and
adenocarcinomas in the stomach. Consequently, MNU-treated Apc(Min/+) mice
significantly enhanced the tumor development in comparison with Apc(Min/+) mice
or MNU-treated wild-type mice. Several gastric tumors in MNU-treated Apc(Min/+)
mice showed invasion into the submucosal layer. These results indicate that the
Apc/beta-catenin pathway may play an important role in at least subset of gastric
carcinomas. In addition, Apc(Min/+) mice combined with MNU could be a useful
short-term model to investigate multistage carcinogenesis in the stomach.

PMID: 17483318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Sep;12(9):815-25. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Expression profiling in monozygotic twins discordant for bipolar disorder reveals
dysregulation of the WNT signalling pathway.

Matigian N(1), Windus L, Smith H, Filippich C, Pantelis C, McGrath J, Mowry B,
Hayward N.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, Herston, QLD, Australia.
Nick.Matigian@qimr.edu.au

To identify genes dysregulated in bipolar disorder (BD1), we carried out global
gene expression profiling using whole-genome microarrays. To minimize genetic
variation in gene expression levels between cases and controls, we compared
expression profiles in lymphoblastoid cell lines from monozygotic twin pairs
discordant for the disease. We identified 82 genes that were differentially
expressed by >or=1.3-fold in three BD1 cases compared to their co-twins, and
which were statistically (P<or=0.05) differentially expressed between the groups 
of BD1 cases and controls. Using quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction, we confirmed the differential expression of some of these genes, 
including: KCNK1, MAL, PFN2, TCF7, PGK1 and PI4KCB, in at least two of the twin
pairs. In contrast to the findings of a previous study by Kakiuchi and colleagues
with similar discordant BD1 twin design, our data do not support the
dysregulation of XBP1 and HSPA5. From pathway and gene ontology analysis, we
identified upregulation of the WNT signalling pathway and the biological process 
of apoptosis. The differentially regulated genes and pathways identified in this 
study may provide insights into the biology of BD1.

PMID: 17440432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1523-38. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

DNA methylation profiling of transcription factor genes in normal lymphocyte
development and lymphomas.

Ivascu C(1), Wasserkort R, Lesche R, Dong J, Stein H, Thiel A, Eckhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Kleine Präsidentenstrasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role during hematopoiesis by orchestrating
lineage commitment and determining cellular fate. Although tight regulation of
transcription factor expression appears to be essential, little is known about
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in transcription factor gene regulation. We
have analyzed DNA methylation profiles of 13 key transcription factor genes in
primary cells of the hematopoietic cascade, lymphoma cell lines and lymph node
biopsies of diffuse large B-cell- and T-cell-non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
Several of the transcription factor genes (SPI1, GATA3, TCF-7, Etv5, c-maf and
TBX21) are differentially methylated in specific cell lineages and stages of the 
hematopoietic cascade. For some genes, such as SPI1, Etv5 and Eomes, we found an 
inverse correlation between the methylation of the 5' untranslated region and
expression of the associated gene suggesting that these genes are regulated by
DNA methylation. Differential methylation is not limited to cells of the healthy 
hematopoietic cascade, as we observed aberrant methylation of c-maf, TCF7, Eomes 
and SPI1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our results suggest that epigenetic
remodelling of transcription factor genes is a frequent mechanism during
hematopoietic development. Aberrant methylation of transcription factor genes is 
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and might have a functional
role during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Crit Rev Immunol. 2006;26(6):475-86.

Regulation of thymocyte survival by transcriptional coactivators.

Xie H(1), Huang Z, Wang R, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

A majority of the developing T cells are eliminated by apoptosis because they do 
not meet the positive and negative selection criteria. Developing T cells are
thus susceptible to apoptotic signals. On the other hand, there are mechanisms to
prevent developing T cells from premature apoptosis. Maintenance of a fine
balance between life and death is thus critical for successful completion of
T-cell development. Our recent studies demonstrated an essential role of
transcriptional coactivators in maintaining such a balance for developing T
cells. Transcriptional coactivators are recruited by transcriptional factors to
quantitatively regulate gene expression via modifying chromatin structure. Two
transcriptional factors, TCF-1 and ROR gamma t, are required to upregulate the
levels of Bcl-xL, a critical survival factor for CD4+CD8+ double-positive
thymocytes. However, TCF-1 and ROR gamma t by themselves are not sufficient to
stimulate Bcl-xL expression. Transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin recruited
by TCF-1, and steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs) recruited by ROR gamma t, are 
also required for optimal stimulation of Bcl-xL expression. Thus, transcriptional
coactivators are a substantial component of the transcriptional machinery to
regulate thymocye survival, ensuring the completion of T-cell development.

PMID: 17341189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Gastroenterology. 2007 Feb;132(2):628-32. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

The Intestinal Wnt/TCF Signature.

Van der Flier LG(1), Sabates-Bellver J, Oving I, Haegebarth A, De Palo M, Anti M,
Van Gijn ME, Suijkerbuijk S, Van de Wetering M, Marra G, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Centre
for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In colorectal cancer, activating mutations in the Wnt pathway 
transform epithelial cells through the inappropriate expression of a TCF4 target 
gene program, which is physiologically expressed in intestinal crypts.
METHODS: We have now performed an exhaustive array-based analysis of this target 
gene program in colorectal cancer cell lines carrying an inducible block of the
Wnt cascade. Independently, differential gene-expression profiles of human
adenomas and adenocarcinomas vs normal colonic epithelium were obtained.
RESULTS: Expression analyses of approximately 80 genes common between these data 
sets were performed in a murine adenoma model. The combined data sets describe a 
core target gene program, the intestinal Wnt/TCF signature gene set, which is
responsible for the transformation of human intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The genes were invariably expressed in adenomas, yet could be
subdivided into 3 modules, based on expression in distinct crypt compartments. A 
module of 17 genes was specifically expressed at the position of the crypt stem
cell.

PMID: 17320548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Science. 2007 Jan 12;315(5809):230-3.

Regulation of gammadelta versus alphabeta T lymphocyte differentiation by the
transcription factor SOX13.

Melichar HJ(1), Narayan K, Der SD, Hiraoka Y, Gardiol N, Jeannet G, Held W,
Chambers CA, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate Program in Immunology and Virology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA
01655, USA.

alphabeta and gammadelta T cells originate from a common, multipotential
precursor population in the thymus, but the molecular mechanisms regulating this 
lineage-fate decision are unknown. We have identified Sox13 as a
gammadelta-specific gene in the immune system. Using Sox13 transgenic mice, we
showed that this transcription factor promotes gammadelta T cell development
while opposing alphabeta T cell differentiation. Conversely, mice deficient in
Sox13 expression exhibited impaired development of gammadelta T cells but not
alphabeta T cells. One mechanism of SOX13 function is the inhibition of signaling
by the developmentally important Wnt/T cell factor (TCF) pathway. Our data thus
reveal a dominant pathway regulating the developmental fate of these two lineages
of T lymphocytes.

PMID: 17218525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Anticancer Res. 2006 Nov-Dec;26(6B):4511-8.

Retinoblastoma suppressor associated protein 46 (RbAp46) attenuates the
beta-catenin/TCF signaling through up-regulation of GSK-3beta expression.

Li GC(1), Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Zhuhai Campus, Zunyi Medical College, Zhuhai, Guangdong 519041, PR China.

BACKGROUND: BETA-Catenin plays a critical role in embryonic development and
tumorigenesis through its function in cell-cell adhesion and in the Wnt-dependent
signaling pathway. Thus, the expression of this important protein is strictly and
dynamically regulated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A stable cell line from mammary epithelial cells MCF10AT3B
that ectropically expresses the retinoblastoma suppressor (Rb) associated protein
46 (RbAp46) was established, and used Western blot, luciferase and cell growth
assays to study the effects of constitutive RbAp46 expression.
RESULTS: MCF10AT3B cells expressing recombinant RbAp46 exhibited a decreased rate
of cell growth. In RbAp46-expressing cells, betacatenin protein was highly
phosphorylated and the steady state levels of beta-catenin protein were
significantly decreased. Accordingly, the beta-catenin/TCF nuclear signaling was 
dramatically reduced in RbAp46 expressing cells. In addition, expression levels
of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) were increased in RbAp46 expressing
cells.
CONCLUSION: RbAp46 plays an important role in regulation of beta-catenin
expression and the beta-catenin/TCF signaling pathway presumably through
regulation of GSK-3beta expression.

PMID: 17201172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cell. 2006 Oct 6;127(1):139-55.

P68 RNA helicase mediates PDGF-induced epithelial mesenchymal transition by
displacing Axin from beta-catenin.

Yang L(1), Lin C, Liu ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, University Plaza, Atlanta, GA
30303, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Oct 6;127(1):40-2.

The nuclear p68 RNA helicase (referred to as p68) is a prototypical member of the
DEAD box family of RNA helicases. The protein plays a very important role in
early organ development. In the present study, we characterized the tyrosine
phosphorylation of p68 under platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) stimulation.
We demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 mediated
PDGF-stimulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We showed that PDGF
treatment led to phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 in the cell nucleus. The
Y593-phosphorylated p68 (referred to as phosphor-p68) promotes beta-catenin
nuclear translocation via a Wnt-independent pathway. The phosphor-p68 facilitates
beta-catenin nuclear translocation by blocking phosphorylation of beta-catenin by
GSK-3beta and displacing Axin from beta-catenin. The beta-catenin nuclear
translocation and subsequent interaction with the LEF/TCF was required for the
EMT process. These data demonstrated a novel mechanism of phosphor-p68 in
mediating the growth factor-induced EMT and uncovered a new pathway to promote
beta-catenin nuclear translocation.

PMID: 17018282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Sep;5(9):2428-34.

Intracellular expression of the T-cell factor-1 RNA aptamer as an intramer.

Choi KH(1), Park MW, Lee SY, Jeon MY, Kim MY, Lee HK, Yu J, Kim HJ, Han K, Lee H,
Park K, Park WJ, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, BK21 Graduate Program for RNA Biology,
Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, Dankook University, Hannam-dong san 8,
Yongsan-ku, Seoul 140-714, Korea.

T-cell factor (TCF)-1 protein forms the transcriptional complex with beta-catenin
and regulates the expression of diverse target genes during early development and
carcinogenesis. We have selected previously an RNA aptamer that binds to the
DNA-binding domain of TCF-1 and have shown that it interfered with binding of
TCF-1 to its specific DNA recognition sequences in vitro. As an approach to
modulate the transcription by TCF/beta-catenin complex in the cells, we have
developed the RNA expression vector for stable expression of RNA aptamer inside
of the mammalian cells. High level of RNA was expressed as an intramer in the
fusion with the stable RNA transcript. The RNA intramer inhibited
TCF/beta-catenin transcription activity as shown by luciferase assay. It also
modulated the expression of TCF/beta-catenin target genes, such as cyclin D1 and 
matrix metalloproteinase-7, as predicted to be as an effective inhibitor of the
TCF function. In addition, it efficiently reduced the growth rate and tumorigenic
potential of HCT116 colon cancer cells. Such RNA intramer could lead to valuable 
gene therapeutics for TCF/beta-catenin-mediated carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16985077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. BMC Cancer. 2006 Sep 7;6:221.

Identification of genes regulated by Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and involved in
apoptosis via microarray analysis.

Huang M(1), Wang Y, Sun D, Zhu H, Yin Y, Zhang W, Yang S, Quan L, Bai J, Wang S, 
Chen Q, Li S, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Bioinformatics, National Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and
Protein Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, PR
China. huangml@mail.cbi.pku.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has critical roles in development and
oncogenesis. Although significant progress has been made in understanding the
downstream signaling cascade of this pathway, little is known regarding
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway modification of the cellular apoptosis.
METHODS: To identify potential genes regulated by Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and
involved in apoptosis, we used a stably integrated, inducible RNA interference
(RNAi) vector to specific inhibit the expression and the transcriptional activity
of beta-catenin in HeLa cells. Meanwhile, we designed an oligonucleotide
microarray covering 1384 apoptosis-related genes. Using oligonucleotide
microarrays, a series of differential expression of genes was identified and
further confirmed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Stably integrated inducible RNAi vector could effectively suppress
beta-catenin expression and the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/TCF.
Meanwhile, depletion of beta-catenin in this manner made the cells more sensitive
to apoptosis. 130 genes involved in some important cell-apoptotic pathways, such 
as PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway, NF-kappaB pathway and p53 pathway, showed significant
alteration in their expression level after the knockdown of beta-catenin.
CONCLUSION: Coupling RNAi knockdown with microarray and RT-PCR analyses proves to
be a versatile strategy for identifying genes regulated by Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway and for a better understanding the role of this pathway in apoptosis.
Some of the identified beta-catenin/TCF directed or indirected target genes may
represent excellent targets to limit tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC1574340
PMID: 16959035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Aug;21(8):1307-16.

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 alters canonical Wnt signaling and suppresses
alkaline phosphatase expression in osteoblast-like cell lines.

Matsuzaki E(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F, Miwa Y, Hirata M, Watanabe Y, Sato N,
Morimoto S, Hirofuji T, Maeda K, Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Because DIF-1 has been shown to affect Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, the
effects of DIF-1 on osteoblast-like cell lines, SaOS-2 and MC3T3-E1, were
examined. We found that DIF-1 inhibited this pathway, resulting in the
suppression of ALP promoter activity through the TCF/LEF binding
site.INTRODUCTION: Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), a morphogen of
Dictyostelium, inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell differentiation in
several mammalian cells. Previous studies showed that DIF-1 activated glycogen
synthase kinase-3beta, suggesting that this chemical could affect the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. This pathway has been shown to be involved in
bone biology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied the effects of DIF-1 on SaOS-2 and MC3T3-E1,
osteosarcoma cell lines widely used as a model system for ostoblastic cells and
murine osteoblast-like cell line, respectively. Reporter gene assays were also
carried out to examine the effect of DIF-1 on the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway.
RESULTS: DIF-1 inhibited SaOS-2 proliferation and reduced alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) activity in a concentration- and a time-dependent manner. The expression of
ALP was markedly suppressed by DIF-1-treatment in protein and mRNA levels. DIF-1 
also suppressed the expression of other osteoblast differentiation markers,
including core binding factor alpha1, type I collagen, and osteocalcin, in
protein and mRNA levels and inhibited osteoblast-mediated mineralization.
Subsequently, we examined the effect of DIF-1 on the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway. We found that DIF-1 suppressed the expression of beta-catenin protein
and the activity of the reporter gene containing T-cell factor/lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor (TCF/LEF) consensus binding sites. We examined the effect
of DIF-1 on a reporter gene driven by the human ALP promoter and found that DIF-1
significantly reduced the ALP reporter gene activity through the TCF/LEF binding 
site (-1023/-1017 bp). Furthermore, the effect of DIF-1 on MC3T3-E1, a murine
osteoblast-like cell line, was examined, and it was found that DIF-1 suppressed
ALP mRNA expression by the reduction of the ALP reporter gene activity through
the TCF/LEF binding site.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that DIF-1 inhibits Wnt/beta-catenin signaling,
resulting in the suppression of ALP promoter activity. To our knowledge, this is 
the first report to analyze the role of the TCF/LEF binding site (-1023/-1017 bp)
of the ALP gene promoter in osteoblast-like cell lines.

PMID: 16869729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Sep;18(3):517-21.

NUMB is a break of WNT-Notch signaling cycle.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Notch, FGF and WNT signaling pathways cross-talk during embryogenesis, tissue
regeneration and carcinogenesis. Notch-ligand binding to Notch receptors leads to
the cleavage of Notch receptors and the following nuclear translocation of Notch 
intracellular domain (NICD) to induce transcriptional activation of Notch target 
genes. Notch signaling inhibitors, NUMB and NUMB-like (NUMBL), are docking
proteins with PTB domain. We searched for the TCF/LEF-binding site within the
promoter region of NUMB and NUMBL genes. Because two TCF/LEF-binding sites were
identified within human NUMB promoter based on bioinformatics and human
intelligence (Humint), comparative integromics analyses on NUMB orthologs were
further performed. Chimpanzee NUBM gene, consisting of 13 exons, was identified
within NW_115880.1 genome sequence. XM_510045.1 was not the correct coding
sequence for chimpanzee NUMB. Chimpanzee NUMB gene was found to encode a
651-amino-acid protein showing 99.5, 93.9 and 82.6% total-amino-acid identity
with human NUMB, mouse Numb and chicken numb, respectively. Human NUMB mRNA was
expressed in placenta, ES cells, neural tissues, trachea, testis, uterus, thymus,
coronary artery as well as in a variety of tumors, such as cervical cancer, tong 
tumor, brain tumor, colorectal and breast cancer. Although distal TCF/LEF-binding
site within human NUMB promoter was conserved only among primate NUMB orthologs, 
proximal TCF/LEF-binding site was conserved among primate and rodent NUMB
orthologs. NUMB, JAG1, FGF18, FGF20 and SPRY4 are potent targets of the canonical
WNT signaling pathway in progenitor cells. NUMB inhibits Notch signaling in
progenitor cells to induce differentiation, while JAG1 activates Notch signaling 
in stem cells to maintain self-renewal potential. Because Notch signaling
inhibitor NUMB was identified as the safe apparatus for the WNT - Notch signaling
cycle, epigenetic silencing, deletion and loss-of-function mutation of NUMB gene 
could lead to carcinogenesis through the dysregulation of the WNT - Notch
signaling cycle.

PMID: 16865239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 7;345(3):1059-67. Epub 2006 May 11.

STMN2 is a novel target of beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription in human
hepatoma cells.

Lee HS(1), Lee DC, Park MH, Yang SJ, Lee JJ, Kim DM, Jang Y, Lee JH, Choi JY,
Kang YK, Kim DI, Park KC, Kim SY, Yoo HS, Choi EJ, Yeom YI.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea.

The activity of beta-catenin/TCF, the key component of Wnt signaling pathway, is 
frequently deregulated in human cancers, resulting in the activation of genes
whose dysregulation has significant consequences on tumor development. Therefore,
identifying the target genes of Wnt signaling is important for understanding
beta-catenin-mediated carcinogenesis. Here, we report STMN2, a gene implicated in
the regulation of microtubule dynamics, as a novel target of
beta-catenin-mediated transcription. STMN2 was up-regulated in hepatoma and
cirrhotic liver tissues compared to normal liver and also in cell lines where
beta-catenin/TCF is constitutively activated. Transient activation of
beta-catenin/TCF either by transfection of a constitutively active form of
beta-catenin or by LiCl treatment induced the STMN2 mRNA expression in PLC/PRF/5 
cells. Of the four members of STMN gene family, only STMN2 showed a Wnt-dependent
expression pattern. Through promoter mapping and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, we found that STMN2 is a direct target of beta-catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription and that the TCF binding site at -1713 of STMN2 promoter is
critical for beta-catenin/TCF-dependent expression regulation. siRNA-mediated
knock-down of STMN2 expression indicated that STMN2 is required for maintaining
the anchorage-independent growth state of beta-catenin/TCF-activated hepatoma
cells. Our results suggest that STMN2 might be a novel player of
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated carcinogenesis in the liver.

PMID: 16712787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Jun;17(6):1145-9.

Comparative integromics on Angiopoietin family members.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Angiopoietin-1 (ANGPT1), Angiopoietin-4 (ANGPT4), VEGF, FGF2, FGF4, HGF, Ephrin, 
IL8 and CXCL12 (SFD1) are pro-angiogenic factors (angiogenic activators), while
Angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT2), Angiostatin, Endostatin, Tumstatin, Canstatin, THBS1,
THBS2, TNFSF15 (VEGI) and Vasohibin (VASH1) are anti-angiogenic factors
(angiogenic inhibitors). ANGPT1 and ANGPT2 are ligands for TIE family receptor
tyrosine kinases, TIE1 and TIE2 (TEK). Angiopoietin family consists of ANGPT1,
ANGPT2, ANGPT4, ANGPTL1 (ANGPT3), ANGPTL2, ANGPTL3 (ANGPT5), ANGPTL4, ANGPTL5,
ANGPTL6 and ANGPTL7. TCF/LEF binding sites within the promoter region of human
Angiopoietin family members were searched for by using bioinformatics and human
intelligence (Humint). Because four TCF/LEF-binding sites were identified within 
the human ANGPTL7 promoter, comparative genomics analyses on ANGPTL7 orthologs
were further performed. ANGPTL7 gene at human chromosome 1p36.22 was located
within intron 28 of FRAP1 gene encoding mTOR protein. Chimpanzee ANGPTL7 gene,
consisting of five exons, was located within NW_101546.1 genome sequence.
Chimpanzee ANGPTL7 showed 99.4% and 86.1% total-amino-acid identity with human
ANGPTL7 and mouse Angptl7, respectively. Human ANGPTL7 mRNA was expressed in
neural tissues, keratoconus cornea, trabecular meshwork, melanotic melanoma and
uterus endometrial cancer, while mouse Angptl7 mRNA was expressed in four-cell
embryo, synovial fibroblasts, thymus, uterus and testis. Four TCF/LEF-binding
sites within human ANGPTL7 promoter were conserved in chimpanzee ANGPTL7
promoter; however, only an unrelated TCF/LEF-binding site occurred in mouse and
rat Angptl7 promoters. Human ANGPTL7, characterized as potent target gene of WNT/
beta-catenin signaling pathway, is a pharmacogenomics target in the fields of
oncology and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 16685428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Med. 2005 Jan-Dec;11(1-12):21-9.

Microarray analyses of peripheral blood cells identifies unique gene expression
signature in psoriatic arthritis.

Batliwalla FM(1), Li W, Ritchlin CT, Xiao X, Brenner M, Laragione T, Shao T,
Durham R, Kemshetti S, Schwarz E, Coe R, Kern M, Baechler EC, Behrens TW,
Gregersen PK, Gulko PS.

Author information: 
(1)Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a chronic and erosive form of arthritis of unknown
cause. We aimed to characterize the PsA phenotype using gene expression profiling
and comparing it with healthy control subjects and patients rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). Peripheral blood cells (PBCs) of 19 patients with active PsA and 19 age-
and sex-matched control subjects were used in the analyses of PsA, with blood
samples collected in PaxGene tubes. A significant alteration in the pattern of
expression of 313 genes was noted in the PBCs of PsA patients on Affymetrix U133A
arrays: 257 genes were expressed at reduced levels in PsA, and 56 genes were
expressed at increased levels, compared with controls. Downregulated genes tended
to cluster to certain chromosomal regions, including those containing the
psoriasis susceptibility loci PSORS1 and PSORS2. Among the genes with the most
significantly reduced expression were those involved in downregulation or
suppression of innate and acquired immune responses, such as SIGIRR, STAT3, SHP1,
IKBKB, IL-11RA, and TCF7, suggesting inappropriate control that favors
proin-flammatory responses. Several members of the MAPK signaling pathway and
tumor suppressor genes showed reduced expression. Three proinflammatory
genes--S100A8, S100A12, and thioredoxin--showed increased expression. Logistic
regression and recursive partitioning analysis determined that one gene,
nucleoporin 62 kDa, could correctly classify all controls and 94.7% of the PsA
patients. Using a dataset of 48 RA samples for comparison, the combination of two
genes, MAP3K3 followed by CACNA1S, was enough to correctly classify all RA and
PsA patients. Thus, PBC gene expression profiling identified a gene expression
signature that differentiated PsA from RA, and PsA from controls. Several novel
genes were differentially expressed in PsA and may prove to be diagnostic
biomarkers or serve as new targets for the development of therapies.

PMCID: PMC1449519
PMID: 16622521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 2006 Apr 15;176(8):4880-7.

Transcriptional regulation of CD4 gene expression by T cell factor-1/beta-catenin
pathway.

Huang Z(1), Xie H, Ioannidis V, Held W, Clevers H, Sadim MS, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

By interacting with MHC class II molecules, CD4 facilitates lineage development
as well as activation of Th cells. Expression of physiological levels of CD4
requires a proximal CD4 enhancer to stimulate basic CD4 promoter activity. T cell
factor (TCF)-1/beta-catenin pathway has previously been shown to regulate
thymocyte survival via up-regulating antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-xL. By both loss 
and gain of function studies, in this study we show additional function of
TCF-1/beta-catenin pathway in the regulation of CD4 expression in vivo. Mice
deficient in TCF-1 displayed significantly reduced protein and mRNA levels of CD4
in CD4+ CD8+ double-positive (DP) thymocytes. A transgene encoding Bcl-2 restored
survival but not CD4 levels of TCF-1(-/-) DP cells. Thus, TCF-1-regulated
survival and CD4 expression are two separate events. In contrast, CD4 levels were
restored on DP TCF-1(-/-) cells by transgenic expression of a wild-type TCF-1,
but not a truncated TCF-1 that lacks a domain required for interacting with
beta-catenin. Furthermore, forced expression of a stabilized beta-catenin, a
coactivator of TCF-1, resulted in up-regulation of CD4. TCF-1 or stabilized
beta-catenin greatly stimulated activity of a CD4 reporter gene driven by a basic
CD4 promoter and the CD4 enhancer. However, mutation of a potential TCF binding
site located within the enhancer abrogated TCF-1 and beta-catenin-mediated
activation of CD4 reporter. Finally, recruitment of TCF-1 to CD4 enhancer was
detected in wild-type but not TCF-1 null mice by chromatin-immunoprecipitation
analysis. Thus, our results demonstrated that TCF/beta-catenin pathway enhances
CD4 expression in vivo by recruiting TCF-1 to stimulate CD4 enhancer activity.

PMID: 16585583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2006 Feb;109(2):173-79.

Microarray analysis of selenium-depleted and selenium-supplemented mice.

Hooven LA(1), Butler J, Ream LW, Whanger PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

Nutritional selenium deficiency is associated with Keshan disease in humans and
white muscle disease in ruminant livestock. In this study, mice were fed a
selenium-deficient diet for three generations. Female mice from the third
depleted generation of these mice were given water containing either no added
selenium or 0.1 or 1.0 ppm selenium as sodium selenate; DNA microarrays were used
to compare gene expression in the muscle from mice fed the selenium diets to that
from mice remaining on the depleted diet. The most prominent expression increases
were observed with Ptger2 (a prostaglandin E receptor), Tcrb-V13 (a T-cell
receptor beta), Tcf-7 (a T-cell transcription factor), and Lck (lymphocyte
protein tyrosine kinase), and the major consistent decrease was Vav2, an oncogene
in mice consuming the selenium containing diets.

PMID: 16444006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Immunol. 2006 Feb 1;176(3):1439-46.

Human naive CD8 T cells down-regulate expression of the WNT pathway transcription
factors lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 and transcription factor 7 (T cell
factor-1) following antigen encounter in vitro and in vivo.

Willinger T(1), Freeman T, Herbert M, Hasegawa H, McMichael AJ, Callan MF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. TimW@hammer.imm.ox.ac.uk

The transcription factors lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 (LEF1) and
transcription factor 7 (TCF7) (T cell factor-1 (TCF-1)) are downstream effectors 
of the WNT signaling pathway, which is a critical regulator of T cell development
in the thymus. In this study, we show that LEF1 and TCF7 (TCF-1) are not only
expressed in thymocytes, but also in mature T cells. Our data demonstrate that Ag
encounter in vivo and engagement of the TCR or IL-15 receptor in vitro leads to
the down-regulation of LEF1 and TCF7 (TCF-1) expression in human naive CD8 T
cells. We further show that resting T cells preferentially express inhibitory
LEF1 and TCF7 (TCF-1) isoforms and that T cell activation changes the isoform
balance in favor of stimulatory TCF7 (TCF-1) isoforms. Altogether, our study
suggests that proteins involved in the WNT signaling pathway not only regulate T 
cell development, but also peripheral T cell differentiation.

PMID: 16424171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 15;175(12):7981-8.

Stabilized beta-catenin extends thymocyte survival by up-regulating Bcl-xL.

Xie H(1), Huang Z, Sadim MS, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP) thymocytes, which are extremely sensitive to
apoptosis, specifically up-regulate Bcl-xL to extend their lifespan. Deletion of 
the Bcl-xL gene leads to premature apoptosis of the thymocytes. In this study, we
show that stabilization of beta-catenin, a critical coactivator for T cell factor
(TCF), enhances DP thymocyte survival via up-regulating Bcl-xL. Spontaneous or
glucocorticoid-induced thymocyte apoptosis was associated with reduced levels of 
beta-catenin and Bcl-xL. Transgenic expression of a stabilized beta-catenin
protected DP thymocytes from both spontaneous and glucocorticoid-induced
apoptosis, resulting in significantly increased thymic cellularity. Compared with
the wild-type mice, both protein and transcript levels of Bcl-xL were
significantly increased in thymocytes of beta-catenin transgenic mice. In
addition, TCF-1 as well as beta-catenin were able to stimulate transcriptional
activity of the reporter driven by a Bcl-xL promoter. beta-Catenin/TCF is thus
able to act as a signal to up-regulate Bcl-xL levels in DP thymocytes, resulting 
in their enhanced survival.

PMID: 16339534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Cell. 2005 Dec;9(6):757-67.

EBF2 regulates osteoblast-dependent differentiation of osteoclasts.

Kieslinger M(1), Folberth S, Dobreva G, Dorn T, Croci L, Erben R, Consalez GG,
Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene center and Institute for Biochemistry, University of Munich, 81377
Munich, Germany.

Communication between bone-depositing osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts 
is required for bone development and homeostasis. Here, we identify EBF2, a
member of the early B cell factor (EBF) family of transcription factors that is
expressed in osteoblast progenitors, as a regulator of osteoclast
differentiation. We find that mice homozygous for a targeted inactivation of Ebf2
show reduced bone mass and an increase in the number of osteoclasts. These
defects are accompanied by a marked downregulation of the osteoprotegerin (Opg)
gene, encoding a RANK decoy receptor. EBF2 binds to sequences in the Opg promoter
and transactivates the Opg promoter in synergy with the Wnt-responsive
LEF1/TCF:beta-catenin pathway. Taken together, these data identify EBF2 as a
regulator of RANK-RANKL signaling and osteoblast-dependent differentiation of
osteoclasts.

PMID: 16326388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):318-28. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 have distinct roles in regulating Wnt target genes.

Standley HJ(1), Destrée O, Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology ML7007, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Wnt signaling pathways have essential roles in developing embryos and adult
tissue, and alterations in their function are implicated in many disease
processes including cancers. The major nuclear transducers of Wnt signals are the
Tcf/LEF family of transcription factors, which have binding sites for both the
transcriptional co-repressor groucho, and the co-activator beta-catenin. The
early Xenopus embryo expresses three maternally inherited Tcf/LEF mRNAs, and
their relative roles in regulating the expression of Wnt target genes are not
understood. We have addressed this by using antisense oligonucleotides to deplete
maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 mRNAs in oocytes. We find that XTcf1 represses
expression of Wnt target genes ventrally and laterally, and activates their
expression dorsally. Double depletions of XTcf1 and XTcf3 suggest that they act
cooperatively to repress Wnt target genes ventrally. In contrast, XTcf4 has no
repressive role but is required to activate expression of Xnr3 and chordin in
organizer cells at the gastrula stage. This work provides evidence for distinct
roles for XTcfs in regulating Wnt target gene expression.

PMID: 16325796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1755-64. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

HIC-5 is a novel repressor of lymphoid enhancer factor/T-cell factor-driven
transcription.

Ghogomu SM(1), van Venrooy S, Ritthaler M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (Technische Hochschule),
Kaiserstrasse 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin target genes is regulated by a heterodimer of
beta-catenin and the high mobility group box transcription factors of the
lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF) family. In vertebrates, four
LEF/TCF family members have been identified. They all contain a conserved
beta-catenin-binding motif at the N terminus and a highly conserved high mobility
group box for DNA binding. The core sequence between these motifs is less
conserved and contributes to the specific properties of the individual family
members. To identify interacting proteins that allocate specific functions to the
individual LEF/TCF transcription factors, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen 
using the less conserved core sequence as bait. We isolated the murine LIM
protein HIC-5 (hydrogen peroxide-induced clone 5; also termed ARA-55 (androgen
receptor activator of 55 kDa)) and cloned the highly conserved Xenopus homolog.
In addition, we report that the LIM domain-containing C-terminal half of HIC-5
binds to a conserved alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors.
Our functional analyses revealed that HIC-5 acts as negative regulator of a
subset of LEF/TCF family members, which have been characterized as activators in 
reporter gene analyses and in the Xenopus axis induction assay. In addition, we
observed a repressive interference of LEF/TCF family members with HIC-5-mediated 
activation of glucocorticoid-driven transcription, which again could be allocated
to specific LEF/TCF subtypes. With the characterization of HIC-5 as a binding
partner of the alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors, we
identified a novel molecular mechanism in the dialog of steroid and canonical Wnt
signaling that is LEF/TCF subtype-dependent.

PMID: 16291758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jan;40(1):138-47. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta/beta-catenin promotes angiogenic and
anti-apoptotic signaling through the induction of VEGF, Bcl-2 and survivin
expression in rat ischemic preconditioned myocardium.

Kaga S(1), Zhan L, Altaf E, Maulik N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of
Connecticut Health Center, 263, Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-1110,
USA.

Ischemic preconditioning (IP) enhances vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
Bcl-2 and survivin expression after myocardial infarction (MI). Mechanisms of
angiogenic and anti-apoptotic effects due to IP still remain unclear. The present
study attempts to address whether GSK-3beta-beta-catenin signaling in turn
interacts with T-cell transcription factor/lymphoid-enhancer binding factor
(TCF/LEF) and regulates these genes in the ischemic preconditioned myocardium. In
a rat MI model with permanent occlusion of left anterior descending coronary
artery (LAD), IP (four cycles of 4-min of ischemia and 4-min of reperfusion)
significantly phosphorylated and inhibited GSK-3beta and accumulated beta-catenin
in the cytosol and nucleus. Wortmannin, a PI-3 kinase inhibitor, repressed this
effect in our model. We examined whether pretreatment with GSK-3beta inhibitor
lithium or SB216763, mimicked IP-mediated angiogenesis and cardioprotection.
Lithium- or SB216763- treated rats revealed accumulation of cytosolic and nuclear
beta-catenin. This was followed by increased TCF/LEF transcriptional activity and
the upregulation of VEGF, Bcl-2 and survivin mRNA expression accompanied by
reduction of apoptotic cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells and increased
capillary density after MI. The results of this study demonstrate, first time
that inhibition of GSK-3beta followed by accumulation of beta-catenin in the
cytosol and nucleus has potent anti-apoptotic and angiogenic effects after MI and
that the PI3-kinase/GSK-3beta/beta-catenin signaling pathway plays an important
role in IP.

PMID: 16288908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Immunol. 2006 Mar;43(9):1497-507. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Gene profiling involved in immature CD4+ T lymphocyte responsible for systemic
lupus erythematosus.

Deng YJ(1), Huang ZX, Zhou CJ, Wang JW, You Y, Song ZQ, Xiang MM, Zhong BY, Hao
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, The Third Military Medical
University, ChongQing 400038, PR China.

We attempted to characterize the genes expression of CD4+ T lymphocytes for the
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Genomewide gene expression
profiles of CD4+ T cells, which were isolated from the disease severe activity
(T4-1s) and nonactivity (T4-2s) with an SLE patient by using long serial analysis
of gene expression (LongSAGE). We picked out 289 genes matching to Unigene
cluster with different expression more than four copies between T4-1s and T4-2s
libraries and analyzed their roles from the collectedly published articles of
PubMed by genes functional clustering. The genes functions were related to a
diverse cellular process including: (1) most of these genes were associated with 
CD4+ T cells functions, particularly related to cellular developments; (2) Ras
pathway genes as RANBP10, GMIP, RASGRP2 and ARL5 might be responsible for the
abnormal development of CD4+ T cells of SLE; (3) HIG2, TCF7, KHSRP, WWP1, SMAD3, 
TLK2, AES, CCNI and PIM2 belong to Wnt/beta-catenin way, they could play roles in
modulating proliferation and differentiation of T lymphocytes; (4) uncertain
viral infections may initiate autoimmunity because high levels expression genes
were detected in T4-1s such as TRIM22, IER2, ABCE1, DUT, G1P2, G1P3, HNRPUL1,
EVER2, IFNAR1, TNFSF14, TMP21 and PVRL2; and (5) apoptosis relating genes as
EIF3S8, SH3BGRL3, GPX4, TOSO, PFDN5, BIN1, XIAPAF1, TEGT and CUGBP2 may
contribute to over uploading of selfantigens in SLE cells. Abnormalities findings
of multiple genes expression involving with a variety of CD4+ T cells process
might be meaningful to understanding the pathogenesis of SLE, and immature CD4+ T
cells may be responsible for SLE.

PMID: 16143398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 2005 Sep 1;106(5):1726-33. Epub 2005 May 12.

Cooperating pre-T-cell receptor and TCF-1-dependent signals ensure thymocyte
survival.

Goux D(1), Coudert JD, Maurice D, Scarpellino L, Jeannet G, Piccolo S, Weston K, 
Huelsken J, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, Ch des Boveresses 155, 
1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Intrathymic T-cell maturation critically depends on the selective expansion of
thymocytes expressing a functionally rearranged T-cell receptor (TCR) beta chain.
In addition, TCR-independent signals also contribute to normal T-cell
development. It is unclear whether and how signals from the 2 types of pathways
are integrated. Here, we show that T-cell factor-1 (TCF-1), a nuclear effector of
the canonical wingless/int (wnt)/catenin signaling pathway, ensures the survival 
of proliferating, pre-TCR(+) thymocytes. The survival of pre-TCR(+) thymocytes
requires the presence of the N-terminal catenin-binding domain in TCF-1. This
domain can bind the transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin and may also bind
gamma-catenin (plakoglobin). However, in the absence of gamma-catenin, T-cell
development is normal, supporting a role for beta-catenin. Signaling competent
beta-catenin is present prior to and thus arises independently from pre-TCR
signaling and does not substantially increase on pre-TCR signaling. In contrast, 
pre-TCR signaling significantly induces TCF-1 expression. This coincides with the
activation of a wnt/catenin/TCF reporter transgene in vivo. Collectively, these
data suggest that efficient TCF-dependent transcription requires that pre-TCR
signaling induces TCF-1 expression, whereas wnt signals may provide the
coactivator such as beta-catenin. The 2 pathways thus have to cooperate to ensure
thymocyte survival at the pre-TCR stage.

PMID: 15890681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Genes Immun. 2005 Aug;6(5):438-44.

Family-based association analysis implicates IL-4 in susceptibility to Kawasaki
disease.

Burns JC(1), Shimizu C, Shike H, Newburger JW, Sundel RP, Baker AL, Matsubara T, 
Ishikawa Y, Brophy VA, Cheng S, Grow MA, Steiner LL, Kono N, Cantor RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics-0830, University of California San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. jcburns@ucsd.edu

Several compelling lines of evidence suggest an important influence of genetic
variation in susceptibility to Kawasaki disease (KD), an acute vasculitis that
causes coronary artery aneurysms in children. We performed a family-based
genotyping study to test for association between KD and 58 genes involved in
cardiovascular disease and inflammation. By analysis of a cohort of 209 KD trios 
using the transmission disequilibrium test, we documented the asymmetric
transmission of five alleles including the interleukin-4 (IL-4) C(-589)T allele
(P=0.03). Asymmetric transmission of the IL-4 C(-589)T was replicated in a
second, independent cohort of 60 trios (P=0.05, combined P=0.002). Haplotypes of 
alleles in IL-4, colony-stimulating factor 2 (CSF2), IL-13, and transcription
factor 7 (TCF7), all located in the interleukin gene cluster on 5q31, were also
asymmetrically transmitted. The reported associations of KD with atopic
dermatitis and allergy, elevated serum IgE levels, eosinophilia, and increased
circulating numbers of monocyte/macrophages expressing the low-affinity IgE
receptor (FCepsilonR2) may be related to effects of IL-4. Thus, the largest
family-based genotyping study of KD patients to date suggests that genetic
variation in the IL-4 gene, or regions linked to IL-4, plays an important role in
KD pathogenesis and disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2911125
PMID: 15889128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 29;330(1):11-7.

Inhibition of the DNA binding by the TCF-1 binding RNA aptamer.

Park MW(1), Choi KH, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Republic of Korea.

The DNA binding architectural protein, TCF, and the transcriptional activator,
beta-catenin, form a complex that regulates the expression of diverse target
genes during early development and carcinogenesis. As an approach to modulating
transcription by this complex, we selected an RNA aptamer that binds to the DNA
binding domain of TCF-1. The aptamer interfered with the binding of TCF-1 to its 
specific DNA recognition sequences in vitro and also inhibited DNA binding of
cellular TCF-1. We also developed the truncated version of the aptamer for
efficient delivery to the cells. Structural analysis of the truncated aptamer
revealed that a stem-loop with an internal loop was responsible for the binding
to TCF-1. Similar approach may well be applicable to other proteins, especially
DNA binding transcription factors, in order to modulate their DNA binding and
transcriptional activity in the cells.

PMID: 15781225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Dev Dyn. 2005 May;233(1):233-9.

Expression pattern of zebrafish tcf7 suggests unexplored domains of
Wnt/beta-catenin activity.

Veien ES(1), Grierson MJ, Saund RS, Dorsky RI.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Tcf/Lef transcription factors play an important role in mediating canonical Wnt
signaling. When bound by beta-catenin, Tcf/Lef proteins either activate or
de-repress gene transcription. In zebrafish, four members have been identified:
Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf3b, and Tcf4. Here, we report the cloning and expression of the
tcf7 gene. Forms of Tcf7 expressed in the embryo contain two highly conserved
regions: an N-terminal beta-catenin binding domain and a C-terminal HMG domain.
Tcf7 lacks a putative Groucho corepressor binding site, suggesting that, like
Lef1, it functions as a transcriptional activator. We isolated three C-terminal
splice variants of tcf7 corresponding to human B, C, and D isoforms. tcf7
expression overlaps with lef1 expression maternally, in the tail bud, fin buds,
and paraxial mesoderm, and we expect that the two genes function redundantly in
those areas. tcf7 is also expressed in nonoverlapping areas such as the
prechordal mesoderm, dorsal retina, and median fin fold, suggesting unique
functions.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15765502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Feb 4;327(1):294-9.

An RNA aptamer that binds to the beta-catenin interaction domain of TCF-1
protein.

Lee SK(1), Park MW, Yang EG, Yu J, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Republic of Korea.

The architectural transcription factor TCF-1 interacts directly with beta-catenin
and activates transcription of various target genes that are important for early 
development and carcinogenesis. We selected an RNA aptamer that specifically
bound to the beta-catenin-interacting N-terminal motif of TCF-1. Structural
analysis revealed that it formed a stem-loop structure that was responsible for
binding TCF-1 and contained a pair of internal loops. The RNA aptamer interfered 
with the binding of TCF-1 to beta-catenin and also inhibited the formation of
TCF-1/beta-catenin complexes. Disruption of TCF-1/beta-catenin complexes could
alter the transcriptional activity of TCF-1. Taken together our observations show
that a rationally designed RNA aptamer can disrupt protein-protein interactions
required for the formation of an active transcription complex.

PMID: 15629461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hum Immunol. 2005 Jan;66(1):60-4.

Association of the single nucleotide polymorphism C1858T of the PTPN22 gene with 
type 1 diabetes.

Ladner MB(1), Bottini N, Valdes AM, Noble JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA 94609, USA.

The PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase N22) gene encodes the protein tyrosine
phosphatase Lyp. One function of Lyp is downregulation of T-cell signaling
through its interaction with the negative regulatory kinase C-terminal Src
tyrosine kinase (Csk). A single nucleotide polymorphism in the PTPN22 gene,
C1858T, encodes products with different Csk binding affinities. Disease
association of the PTPN22 1858T allele has been reported in case-control studies 
of three different autoimmune disorders: type 1 diabetes (T1D), rheumatoid
arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. In this study, a set of 341 white,
multiplex T1D families were genotyped for the C1858T single nucleotide
polymorphism of PTPN22, and transmission disequilibrium test analysis revealed
significant association (p = 0.005) of the T allele with T1D. No effects of
parent of origin, sex of patient, or human leukocyte antigen genotype (high-risk 
human leukocyte antigen DR3/DR4 vs non-DR3/DR4) were observed. However,
transmission of the T allele was significantly increased in the subset of
patients who also carried at least one copy of the TCF7 883A allele, another
allele that is important in regulating T-cell responses and that is associated
with T1D. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that individuals
lacking the C allele of PTPN22 may have reduced capacity to downregulate T-cell
responses and may therefore be more susceptible to autoimmunity.

PMID: 15620463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Exp Med. 2004 Sep 20;200(6):797-803. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

IL-7 receptor signals inhibit expression of transcription factors TCF-1, LEF-1,
and RORgammat: impact on thymocyte development.

Yu Q(1), Erman B, Park JH, Feigenbaum L, Singer A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bldg. 10, Rm. 4B36, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Intrathymic T cell development depends on signals transduced by both T cell
receptor and cytokine receptors. Early CD4(-)CD8(-) (double negative) thymocytes 
require interleukin (IL)-7 receptor (IL-7R) signals for survival and
proliferation, but IL-7R signals are normally extinguished by the immature single
positive (ISP) stage of thymocyte development. We now demonstrate that IL-7R
signals inhibit expression of transcription factors TCF-1, LEF-1, and RORgammat
that are required for the ISP to double positive (DP) transition in the thymus.
In addition, we demonstrate that IL-7R signals also inhibit TCF-1 and LEF-1
expression in mature peripheral T cells. Thus, the present work has identified
several important downstream target genes of IL-7R signaling in T cells and
thymocytes that provide a molecular mechanism for the inhibitory influence of
IL-7R signaling on DP thymocyte development. We conclude that IL-7R signals
down-regulate transcription factors required for the ISP to DP transition and so 
must be terminated by the ISP stage of thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2211960
PMID: 15365098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jun 10;296(2):99-108.

Wnt and beta-catenin signaling target the expression of ecto-5'-nucleotidase and 
increase extracellular adenosine generation.

Spychala J(1), Kitajewski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.
jozek@med.unc.edu

Solid tumors, which routinely experience necrosis and ischemia, release and
degrade adenine nucleotides. This process may lead, depending on the expression
of enzymes that regulate adenosine, to the generation of extracellular adenosine.
Since genes encoding ecto-5'-nucleotidase (eN) and adenosine deaminase (ADA)
contain TCF/LEF consensus binding sites, we asked whether Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling, a pathway that is deregulated in several human tumors, targets the
expression of these genes and thus influence extracellular adenosine generation. 
Our results show that beta-catenin strongly increased the activity of the 969-bp 
promoter of eN and this increase depended on the presence of TCF-1 transcription 
factor. Reciprocally, the eN promoter activity was decreased by co-transfection
of APC, a beta-catenin antagonist. The expression of endogenous eN mRNA was
increased either in Cos-7 cells transfected with a mutated beta-catenin and TCF-1
or in Rat-1 cells transformed by the Wnt-1 oncogene. In Rat-1 cells, expression
of Wnt-1 correlated with increased eN protein levels and enzymatic activity and a
concomitant decrease of adenosine deaminase mRNA and enzymatic activity. This
expression profile is accompanied by a threefold increase in the generation of
extracellular adenosine. Our study demonstrates a link between the Wnt signaling 
and the regulation of two enzymes that control the metabolism of adenosine.

PMID: 15149841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Jun;19(6):947-58. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Identification of novel regulators associated with early-phase osteoblast
differentiation.

de Jong DS(1), Vaes BL, Dechering KJ, Feijen A, Hendriks JM, Wehrens R, Mummery
CL, van Zoelen EJ, Olijve W, Steegenga WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Key regulatory components of the BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation cascade
remain to be established. Microarray and subsequent expression analyses in mice
identified two transcription factors, Hey1 and Tcf7, with in vitro and in vivo
expression characteristics very similar to Cbfa1. Transfection studies suggest
that Tcf7 modulates BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation. This study
contributes to a better definition of the onset of BMP-induced osteoblast
differentiation.INTRODUCTION: Elucidation of the genetic cascade guiding
mesenchymal stem cells to become osteoblasts is of extreme importance for
improving the treatment of bone-related diseases such as osteoporosis. The aim of
this study was to identify regulators of the early phases of bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP)2-induced osteoblast differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Osteoblast differentiation of mouse C2C12 cells was
induced by treatment with BMP2, and regulation of gene expression was studied
during the subsequent 24 h using high-density microarrays. The regulated genes
were grouped by means of model-based clustering, and protein functions were
assigned. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis was used to validate
BMP2-induced gene expression patterns in C2C12 cells. Osteoblast specificity was 
studied by comparing these expression patterns with those in C3H10T1/2 and NIH3T3
cells under similar conditions. In situ hybridization of mRNA in embryos at
embryonic day (E)14.5 and E16.5 of gestation and on newborn mouse tails were used
to study in vivo expression patterns. Cells constitutively expressing the
regulated gene Tcf7 were used to investigate its influence on BMP-induced
osteoblast differentiation.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A total of 184 genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) 
were differentially expressed in the first 24 h after BMP2 treatment and grouped 
in subsets of immediate early, intermediate early, and late early response genes.
Signal transduction regulatory factors mainly represented the subset of immediate
early genes. Regulation of expression of these genes was direct, independent of
de novo protein synthesis and independent of the cell type studied. The
intermediate early and late early genes consisted primarily of genes related to
processes that modulate morphology, basement membrane formation, and synthesis of
extracellular calcified matrix. The late early genes require de novo protein
synthesis and show osteoblast specificity. In vivo and in vitro experiments
showed that the transcription factors Hey1 and Tcf7 exhibited expression
characteristics and cell type specificity very similar to those of the osteoblast
specific transcription factor Cbfa1, and constitutive expression of Tcf7 in C2C12
cells differentially regulated osteoblast differentiation marker genes.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research

PMID: 15125793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 14;317(4):1045-51.

Evidence of impaired adipogenesis in insulin resistance.

Yang X(1), Jansson PA, Nagaev I, Jack MM, Carvalho E, Sunnerhagen KS, Cam MC,
Cushman SW, Smith U.

Author information: 
(1)The Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Department of Internal
Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Göteborg SE-413 45,
Sweden.

To elucidate the roles of adipose tissue and skeletal muscle in the early
development of insulin resistance, we characterized gene expression profiles of
isolated adipose cells and skeletal muscle of non-diabetic insulin-resistant
first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients using oligonucleotide
microarrays. About 600 genes and expressed sequence tags, which displayed a gene 
expression pattern of cell proliferation, were differentially expressed in the
adipose cells. The differentially expressed genes in the skeletal muscle were
mostly related to the cellular signal transduction and transcriptional
regulation. To verify the microarray findings, we studied expression of genes
participating in adipogenesis. The expression of Wnt signaling genes, WNT1, FZD1,
DVL1, GSK3beta, beta-catenin, and TCF1, and adipogenic transcription factors,
C/EBPalpha and beta and delta, PPARgamma, and SREBP-1, was reduced in the adipose
tissue. The expression of adipose-specific proteins related to terminal
differentiation, such as adiponectin and aP2, was reduced both in the adipose
tissue and in the adipose cells isolated from portions of the biopsies. The
adipose cells were enlarged in the insulin-resistant relatives and the cell size 
inversely correlated with the expression of the Wnt signaling genes, adiponectin,
and aP2. Our findings suggest that insulin resistance is associated with an
impaired adipogenesis.

PMID: 15094374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cells. 2004 Feb 29;17(1):174-9.

In vitro selection and characterization of TCF-1 binding RNA aptamers.

Lee SY(1), Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Korea.

Erratum in
    Mol Cells. 2005 Oct 31;18(2):269.

TCF proteins are architectural transcription factors that bind to beta-catenin
when the Wnt signaling pathway is activated. TCF-1 is specifically expressed in
T-cell lineages and its interaction with beta-catenin is thought to be critical
for early T-cell development. However, the mechanisms underlying activation of
TCF-1 during T-cell development are not completely understood. With the aim of
developing RNA aptamers that bind to TCF-1 and regulate its activity, we screened
an RNA library consisting of random sequences of 70 nucleotides and were able to 
isolate aptamers that bind to TCF-1 with high affinity and specificity. We
employed RNase footprinting to characterize the RNA structures and map their
binding sites for TCF-1. It is hoped that the selected aptamers will regulate
TCF-1 activity in vivo, thereby providing a unique tool for modulating TCF-1
function in early T-cell development.

PMID: 15055546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2004 Jan-Jun;23(1-2):41-52.

Lymphoid enhancer factor/T cell factor expression in colorectal cancer.

Waterman ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, USA. mlwaterm@uci.edu

Genetic inactivation of key components of the Wnt signal transduction system is a
frequent event in colorectal cancer. These genetic mutations lead to
stabilization of beta-catenin, a cytoplasmic-nuclear shuttling protein with a
potent transcription activation domain. Stabilization and subsequent nuclear
localization of beta-catenin produces aberrant, Wnt-independent signals to target
genes, an activity tightly linked to the genesis of colon cancers. In the
nucleus, the transcription factor family of LEF/TCF proteins transmits Wnt
signals by binding to beta-catenin and recruiting it to target genes for
activation. Such activities are carried out by full-length LEF/TCFs that are
thought to be mostly interchangeable and redundant. However, truncated forms of
LEF-1 and TCF-1 that do not bind to beta-catenin function as dominant negatives
and an alternatively spliced TCF isoform with a unique activation function has
recently been discovered. The dominant negative forms block Wnt signals because
they occupy Wnt target genes and limit beta-catenin access; the alternatively
spliced TCF isoform activates certain Wnt target promoters whereas other TCF
isoforms and LEF-1 do not. A study of LEF/TCF expression and activity in normal
intestine and colon carcinomas suggests that the relative amounts of LEF/TCF
isoforms may change as tumors progress and this may influence the strength and
specificity of Wnt signals in the nucleus. While the underlying mechanism for a
change in the LEF/TCF isoform expression is not yet known, recent evidence
implicates the Wnt signaling pathway itself as a potential modulator.

PMID: 15000148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Dyn. 2004 Mar;229(3):703-7.

Dynamic expression of Lef/Tcf family members and beta-catenin during chick
gastrulation, neurulation, and early limb development.

Schmidt M(1), Patterson M, Farrell E, Münsterberg A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Dundee, School of Life Sciences Biocentre, Dundee, Scotland,
United Kingdom.

Members of the Lef/Tcf family of HMG-box transcription factors mediate the
response to Wnt as part of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade. Positive and
negative cofactors, including beta-catenin, CtBP, and Smad3, regulate the
activity of Lef/Tcf transcription complexes. Interaction of Lef/Tcfs with
beta-catenin results in target gene activation or repression, depending on the
context. Here, we report the cloning of a novel chick Tcf-1 splice variant and of
a partial cDNA for chick Tcf-3. We describe their expression patterns during
early development and have compared them with the expression profiles of Lef-1
and beta-catenin. We found restricted patterns during gastrulation, neurulation, 
somitogenesis, and early limb development. beta-catenin and Lef/Tcf expression
did not always coincide, indicating developmental contexts in which Lef/Tcf
proteins may interact with other cofactors and conversely, the areas in which
beta-catenin may interact with other coregulators, or be involved in regulating
adhesive properties of cells.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14991726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17232-40. Epub 2004 Feb 11.

Wnt activates the Tak1/Nemo-like kinase pathway.

Smit L(1), Baas A, Kuipers J, Korswagen H, van de Wetering M, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Center for Biomedical Genetics, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Genetic studies on endoderm-mesoderm specification in Caenorhabditis elegans have
demonstrated a role for several Wnt cascade components as well as for a MAPK-like
pathway in this process. The latter pathway includes the MAPK kinase kinase-like 
MOM-4/Tak1, its adaptor TAP-1/Tab1, and the MAPK-like LIT-1/Nemo-like kinase. A
model has been proposed in which the Tak1 kinase cascade counteracts the Wnt
cascade at the level of beta-catenin/TCF phosphorylation. In this model, the
signal that activates the Tak1 kinase cascade is unknown. As an alternative
explanation of these genetic data, we have explored whether Tak1 is directly
activated by Wnt. We find that Wnt1 stimulation results in autophosphorylation
and activation of MOM-4/Tak1 in a TAP-1/Tab1-dependent fashion. Wnt1-induced Tak1
stimulation activates Nemo-like kinase, resulting in the phosphorylation of TCF. 
Our results combined with the genetic data from C. elegans imply a mechanism
whereby Wnt directly activates the MOM-4/Tak1 kinase signaling pathway. Thus, Wnt
signal transduction through the canonical pathway activates beta-catenin/TCF,
whereas Wnt signal transduction through the Tak1 pathway phosphorylates and
inhibits TCF, which might function as a feedback mechanism.

PMID: 14960582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1099-108.

Wnt target genes identified by DNA microarrays in immature CD34+ thymocytes
regulate proliferation and cell adhesion.

Staal FJ(1), Weerkamp F, Baert MR, van den Burg CM, van Noort M, de Haas EF, van 
Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr.
Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The thymus is seeded by very small numbers of progenitor cells that undergo
massive proliferation before differentiation and rearrangement of TCR genes
occurs. Various signals mediate proliferation and differentiation of these cells,
including Wnt signals. Wnt signals induce the interaction of the cytoplasmic
cofactor beta-catenin with nuclear T cell factor (TCF) transcription factors. We 
identified target genes of the Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF pathway in the most immature 
(CD4-CD8-CD34+) thymocytes using Affymetrix DNA microarrays in combination with
three different functional assays for in vitro induction of Wnt signaling. A
relatively small number (approximately 30) of genes changed expression, including
several proliferation-inducing transcription factors such as c-fos and c-jun,
protein phosphatases, and adhesion molecules, but no genes involved in
differentiation to mature T cell stages. The adhesion molecules likely confine
the proliferating immature thymocytes to the appropriate anatomical sites in the 
thymus. For several of these target genes, we validated that they are true
Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF target genes using real-time quantitative PCR and reporter
gene assays. The same core set of genes was repressed in Tcf-1-null mice,
explaining the block in early thymocyte development in these mice. In conclusion,
Wnt signals mediate proliferation and cell adhesion, but not differentiation of
the immature thymic progenitor pool.

PMID: 14707084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Nov;147(1):28-35.

Comprehensive genome-wide comparison of DNA and RNA level scan using microarray
technology for identification of candidate cancer-related genes in the HL-60 cell
line.

Ulger C(1), Toruner GA, Alkan M, Mohammed M, Damani S, Kang J, Galante A, Aviv H,
Soteropoulos P, Tolias PP, Schwalb MN, Dermody JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Genome-wide scans for DNA and RNA changes in the HL-60 cell line relative to
normal leukocytes were conducted. Microarray-based comparative genome
hybridization (CGH) studies were performed with the Spectral Genomics Human
Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) 3MB system. Transcriptional measurements of
approximately 12,500 human genes were monitored using Affymetrix U95A GeneChips. 
In HL-60, genomic DNA amplification of the 8q24 locus, trisomy 18, and deletions 
at loci 5q11.2 approximately q31, 6q12, 9p21.3 approximately p22, 10p12
approximately p15, 14q22 approximately q31, 17p12 approximately p13.3, and
monosomy X were detected. After obtaining locus information about the RNA
transcripts from the Affymetrix database, 4368 genes were stratified both
according to status of RNA expression and the DNA copy number of their designated
loci. The expression level of 2326 (53.25%) of 4368 transcripts is concordant
with DNA copy number. Examples of specific, highly expressed, cancer-associated
genes in amplified loci include SERPINB10, MYC, TYMS, HEC, and EPB41L3, while
CD14, GZMK, TCF7, FOS, MLH3, CTNNA1, IRF1, VIM, CRK, MAP3K1, STAM, MAX, SFRG5,
ENC1, PURA, MNT, RASA1, GLRX, UBE2B, NR3C1, PTENP1, BS69, COPEB, SKIP, PIM2, and 
MIC2 represent cancer-associated genes in deleted loci with decreased expression.
The complementary usage of genome-wide DNA and RNA scans should enhance the
identification of candidate genes in the neoplastic process.

PMID: 14580768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 15;171(2):769-75.

Initiation and limitation of Ly-49A NK cell receptor acquisition by T cell
factor-1.

Ioannidis V(1), Kunz B, Tanamachi DM, Scarpellino L, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
Epalinges, Switzerland.

The establishment of clonally variable expression of MHC class I-specific
receptors by NK cells is not well understood. The Ly-49A receptor is used by
approximately 20% of NK cells, whereby most cells express either the maternal or 
paternal allele and few express simultaneously both alleles. We have previously
shown that NK cells expressing Ly-49A were reduced or almost absent in mice
harboring a single or no functional allele of the transcription factor T cell
factor-1 (TCF-1), respectively. In this study, we show that enforced expression
of TCF-1 in transgenic mice yields an expanded Ly-49A subset. Even though the
frequencies of Ly-49A(+) NK cells varied as a function of the TCF-1 dosage, the
relative abundance of mono- and biallelic Ly-49A cells was maintained. Mono- and 
biallelic Ly-49A NK cells were also observed in mice expressing exclusively a
transgenic TCF-1, i.e., expressing a fixed amount of TCF-1 in all NK cells. These
findings suggest that Ly-49A acquisition is a stochastic event due to limiting
TCF-1 availability, rather than the consequence of clonally variable expression
of the endogenous TCF-1 locus. Efficient Ly-49A acquisition depended on the
expression of a TCF-1 isoform, which included a domain known to associate with
the TCF-1 coactivator beta-catenin. Indeed, the proximal Ly-49A promoter was
beta-catenin responsive in reporter gene assays. We thus propose that Ly-49A
receptor expression is induced from a single allele in occasional NK cells due to
a limitation in the amount of a transcription factor complex requiring TCF-1.

PMID: 12847244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2003 Apr;19(4):345-6.

Peptide from Tat basic domain shows striking similarity to a region of human T
cell transcription factor 1.

Nyhus J, Sommerfelt MA, Sørensen B.

PMID: 12804007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Diabetes. 2003 Jun;52(6):1579-82.

A polymorphism in the TCF7 gene, C883A, is associated with type 1 diabetes.

Noble JA(1), White AM, Lazzeroni LC, Valdes AM, Mirel DB, Reynolds R, Grupe A,
Aud D, Peltz G, Erlich HA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, 5700 Martin Luther King Jr.
Way, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. jnoble@chori.org

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease with a Th1 phenotype in which
insulin-producing beta-cells in the pancreas are destroyed. The T-cell-specific
transcription factor TCF7 activates genes involved in immune regulation and is a 
candidate locus for genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes. A nonsynonymous
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (Pro to Thr) in the TCF7 gene, C883A, was
examined in samples from 282 Caucasian multiplex type 1 diabetic families.
HLA-DRB1 and -DQB1 genotypes were previously determined for these samples,
allowing data stratification based on HLA-associated risk. The transmission
disequilibrium test showed significant overtransmission of the A allele from
fathers (64.1%, P < 0.007) and nonsignificant overtransmission (57.4%, P < 0.06) 
of the A allele to patients who do not carry the highest-risk HLA-DR3/DR4
genotype. Elliptical sib pair analysis showed significant associations of the A
allele with type 1 diabetes in paternal transmissions (P < 0.03), transmissions
to male children (P < 0.04), and in the non-DR3/DR4 group (P < 0.04). These data 
also suggest that TCF7 C883A may affect age of disease onset. Analysis of
genotype data from surrounding SNPs suggests that this TCF7 polymorphism may
itself represent a risk factor for type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 12765974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Eur J Immunol. 2003 May;33(5):1393-8.

Redundant functions of TCF-1 and LEF-1 during T and NK cell development, but
unique role of TCF-1 for Ly49 NK cell receptor acquisition.

Held W(1), Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch and University of
Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland. wheld@isrec.unil.ch

Members of the TCF/LEF (T cell factor / lymphoid enhancer factor) family of
DNA-binding factors play important roles during embryogenesis, the establishment 
and/or maintenance of self-renewing tissues such as the immune system and for
malignant transformation. Specifically, it has been shown that TCF-1 is required 
for T cell development. A role for LEF-1 became apparent when mice harbored two
hypomorphic TCF-1 alleles and consequently expressed low levels of TCF-1. Here we
show that NK cell development is similarly regulated by redundant functions of
TCF-1 and LEF-1, whereby TCF-1 contributes significantly more to NK cell
development than LEF-1. Despite this role for NK cell development, LEF-1 is not
required for the establishment of a repertoire of MHC class I-specific Ly49
receptors on NK cells. The proper formation of this repertoire depends to a large
extent on TCF-1. These findings suggest common and distinct functions of TCF-1
and LEF-1 during lymphocyte development.

PMID: 12731066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 May;3(2):123-6.

Tcf-1 expression during Xenopus development.

Roël G(1), van den Broek O, Spieker N, Peterson-Maduro J, Destrée O.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology (NIOB), Hubrecht Laboratory,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We report the cloning and expression of Xenopus Tcf-1. The amino acid sequence of
Tcf-1 of Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis is closely related to that of
chicken, mouse and man. Thus, the family of Tcf/Lef proteins in the amphibian
Xenopus comprises four members as in higher vertebrates. RT-PCR analysis revealed
that Tcf-1 RNA encoding a beta-catenin binding isoform is maternally present as
well as throughout early development. Different transcripts are expressed by
alternative splicing. In cleavage and blastula stage embryos, Tcf-1 RNA is
present at high levels in the animal hemisphere. During gastrulation Tcf-1 is
differentially expressed with high levels in the animal cap and most of the
marginal zone except for a narrow domain around the blastopore. At neurula stages
expression is predominant in the neural plate. At tailbud stages expression is
localized in specific areas of the brain, in the eyes, the otic vesicle,
branchial arches and head mesenchyme, somites, tailbud, pronephros and pronephric
duct.

PMID: 12711535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Am J Pathol. 2003 May;162(5):1539-44.

Loss of expression of the WNT/beta-catenin-signaling pathway transcription
factors lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1) and T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) in a
subset of peripheral T cell lymphomas.

Dorfman DM(1), Greisman HA, Shahsafaei A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. ddorfman@partners.org

T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1), members of the
TCF/LEF family of transcription factors, play a significant role in T cell
development and are expressed in thymocytes and peripheral CD3+ T cells.
Previously, precursor T lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-ALL/LyL)
was found to express TCF-1, and we find that 9 of 10 cases of T-ALL/LyL express
LEF-1 as well as TCF-1, exhibiting uniform nuclear immunostaining for both
transcription factors. In addition, a significant subset of cases of peripheral T
cell lymphoma (PTCL), 39 of 81 cases (48%), are immunoreactive for LEF-1 and/or
TCF-1, with 36 of 38 cases immunoreactive for both, indicating that these
transcription factors are coordinately expressed in PTCL. The vast majority of
LEF-1+ and/or TCF-1+ PTCL (34 of 39 or 87%) exhibit a composite Th1 T-cell-like
immunophenotype, based on expression of Th1 T cell-associated, but not Th2 T
cell-associated, chemokine receptors and activation markers. Of the Th1-like PTCL
studied, 33 of 42 (79%) were immunoreactive for LEF-1 and 32 of 42 (76%) were
immunoreactive for TCF-1, including most cases of angioimmunoblastic lymphoma and
all cases of lymphoepithelioid lymphoma. Surprisingly, none of the 21 cases of
Th2-like PTCL studied, all cases of anaplastic large cell lymphoma, were
immunoreactive for LEF-1 or TCF-1 (P < 0.0001), suggesting that LEF-1 and TCF-1
transcription factor expression may be lost in Th2 T cells or Th2-like PTCL.
LEF-1 and TCF-1 immunostaining can serve to identify specific subtypes of PTCL,
and lends support to a bipartite model of PTCL development, based on expression
of activation markers.

PMCID: PMC1851202
PMID: 12707037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):251-63.

Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning in the intestinal epithelium by
controlling the expression of EphB/ephrinB.

Batlle E(1), Henderson JT, Beghtel H, van den Born MM, Sancho E, Huls G, Meeldijk
J, Robertson J, van de Wetering M, Pawson T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, University
Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In the small intestine, the progeny of stem cells migrate in precise patterns.
Absorptive, enteroendocrine, and goblet cells migrate toward the villus while
Paneth cells occupy the bottom of the crypts. We show here that beta-catenin and 
TCF inversely control the expression of the EphB2/EphB3 receptors and their
ligand ephrin-B1 in colorectal cancer and along the crypt-villus axis. Disruption
of EphB2 and EphB3 genes reveals that their gene products restrict cell
intermingling and allocate cell populations within the intestinal epithelium. In 
EphB2/EphB3 null mice, the proliferative and differentiated populations
intermingle. In adult EphB3(-/-) mice, Paneth cells do not follow their downward 
migratory path, but scatter along crypt and villus. We conclude that in the
intestinal epithelium beta-catenin and TCF couple proliferation and
differentiation to the sorting of cell populations through the EphB/ephrin-B
system.

PMID: 12408869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 19;21(42):6446-57.

Inactivation of Apc perturbs mammary development, but only directly results in
acanthoma in the context of Tcf-1 deficiency.

Gallagher RC(1), Hay T, Meniel V, Naughton C, Anderson TJ, Shibata H, Ito M,
Clevers H, Noda T, Sansom OJ, Mason JO, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Medical School,
Teviot Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK.

Apc (adenomatous polyposis coli) encodes a tumour suppressor gene that is mutated
in the majority of colorectal cancers. Recent evidence has also implicated Apc
mutations in the aetiology of breast tumours. Apc is a component of the canonical
Wnt signal transduction pathway, of which one target is Tcf-1. In the mouse,
mutations of both Apc and Tcf-1 have been implicated in mammary tumorigenesis. We
have conditionally inactivated Apc in both the presence and absence of Tcf-1 to
examine the function of these genes in both normal and neoplastic development.
Mice harbouring mammary-specific mutations in Apc show markedly delayed
development of the mammary ductal network. During lactation, the mice develop
multiple metaplastic growths which, surprisingly, do not spontaneously progress
to neoplasia up to a year following their induction. However, additional
deficiency of Tcf-1 completely blocks normal mammary development and results in
acanthoma.

PMID: 12226748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Aug;44(4):315-25.

Beta-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling in apical ectodermal ridge induction and
FGF8 expression in normal and limbless mutant chick limbs.

McQueeney K(1), Soufer R, Dealy CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, University of Connecticut Health
Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and beta-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling
pathways are key regulators of vertebrate limb development. FGF10 induces
expression of Wnt3a, which regulates the formation and FGF8 expression of the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER). In amelic limbless limbs, an AER fails to form and
FGF8 is not expressed, despite expression of FGF10. It has been found that Wnt3a 
is initially expressed in limbless ectoderm, although subsequently is drastically
reduced. In addition, changes in the expression pattern or level of several
Frizzled receptors, Axin, Lef1/Tcf1 and beta-catenin have been found in limbless 
limbs. Notably, while normal wing buds respond to LiCl-stimulated activation of
beta-catenin-dependent signaling by forming ectopic, FGF8-expressing AER, LiCl
was unable to induce an AER in limbless wing buds. The results of this study
suggest that the limbless gene is required for beta-catenin-dependent Wnt
signaling in limb ectoderm leading to FGF8 expression and AER formation.

PMID: 12175366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 3;21(11):2703-14.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor interacts with LEF-1, a mediator
of Wnt signaling.

Yasumoto K(1), Takeda K, Saito H, Watanabe K, Takahashi K, Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

Wnt signals regulate differentiation of neural crest cells through the
beta-catenin associated with a nuclear mediator of the lymphoid-enhancing factor 
1 (LEF-1)/T-cell factors (TCFs) family. Here we show the interaction between the 
basic helix-loop-helix and leucine-zipper region of microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor (MITF) and LEF-1. MITF is essential for melanocyte
differentiation and its heterozygous mutations cause auditory-pigmentary
syndromes. Functional cooperation of MITF with LEF-1 results in synergistic
transactivation of the dopachrome tautomerase (DCT) gene promoter, an early
melanoblast marker. This activation depends on the separate cis-acting elements, 
which are also responsible for the induction of the DCT promoter by lithium
chloride that mimics Wnt signaling. beta-catenin is required for efficient
transactivation, but dispensable for the interaction between MITF and LEF-1. The 
interaction with MITF is unique to LEF-1 and not detectable with TCF-1. LEF-1
also cooperates with the MITF-related proteins, such as TFE3, to transactivate
the DCT promoter. This study therefore suggests that the MITF/TFE3 family is a
new class of nuclear modulators for LEF-1, which may ensure efficient propagation
of Wnt signals in many types of cells.

PMCID: PMC126018
PMID: 12032083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Apr;32(4):967-71.

Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 regulate thymic cellularity.

Mulroy T(1), McMahon JA, Burakoff SJ, McMahon AP, Sen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston 02115, 
USA.

Thymic primordium, formed by cells derived from the endoderm, the ectoderm and
the neural crest-derived mesenchyme, receive fetal liver derived lymphoid
precursors. Reciprocal cell-cell interactions between thymic stromal cells and
lymphoid precursors are critical in the expansion and maturation of thymocytes.
Transcription factor TCF-1 is critical for the expansion of thymocytes because
deletion of TCF-1 results in a significant decrease in the number of thymocytes
without affecting the developmental pattern. In this report we show that Wnt-1
and Wnt-4 are expressed in the thymus and the deletion of Wnt-1 or Wnt-4 result
in a substantial decrease in the number of thymocytes without affecting the
pattern of maturation. Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 both regulate developing thymocytes
because a double deficiency results in a significantly greater decrease of
immature and mature thymocytes compared to deficiency in either Wnt-1 or Wnt-4.

PMID: 11920562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Hematol J. 2000;1(1):3-6.

Tcf/Lef transcription factors during T-cell development: unique and overlapping
functions.

Staal FJ(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Utrecht Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
f.staal@lab.azu.nl

The founding members of the TCF family are T-cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) and lymphoid
enhancing factor-1 (Lef-1). In adult mammals, Tcf-1 is uniquely expressed in T
lymphocytes, while Lef-1 is expressed in T cells and early B cells. During murine
development, however, expression of Tcf-1 and Lef-1 occurs in complex overlapping
patterns in many tissues. The unique in vivo function of Tcf-1 and Lef-1 have
been explored by gene disruption experiments. Tcf-1-/- knockout mice are severely
impaired in the generation of T cells, but are otherwise normal. Lef-1-/- mice
lack hair, teeth, mammary glands and trigeminal nuclei and as a consequence die
around birth. As deduced from direct analyses and from transplantation
experiments, the Lef-1 mutation has no major effects on the immune system. In
Tcf-1/Lef-1 double knockout mice, development of T cells is completely abrogated,
indicating that Lef-1 can substitute for Tcf-1 in T-cell differentiation. Factors
of the TCF/LEF HMG domain family (TCFs) exist throughout the animal kingdom. It
has become evident that the TCFs interact with the vertebrate Wnt effector
beta-catenin to mediate axis formation in Xenopus. Likewise, Armadillo (the
Drosophila ortholog of beta-catenin) is genetically upstream of Drosophila TCF in
the Wingless pathway. Upon Wingless/Wnt signaling, Armadillo/beta-catenin
associate with nuclear TCFs and contribute a trans-activation domain to the
resulting bipartite transcription factor. In the absence of Wnt signaling, Tcf
factors associate with proteins of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors to strongly repress target gene transcription.

PMID: 11920163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):437-40.

Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the developing
mouse lung.

Tebar M(1), Destrée O, de Vree WJ, Ten Have-Opbroek AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, NL-2300 RC,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Recent evidence that Wnts and other genes in the Wnt signaling pathway are
expressed in embryonic and adult mouse lung suggests that this pathway is
important for cell fate decisions and differentiation of lung cell types. We
therefore examined the expression and protein distribution of several Wnt pathway
components during prenatal mouse lung development using whole-mount in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Between embryonic days 10.5 and 17.5
(E10.5-E17.5), beta-catenin was localized in the cytoplasm, and often also the
nucleus, of the undifferentiated primordial epithelium (PE), differentiating
alveolar epithelium (AE; present from E14.5 onward), and adjacent mesenchyme.
Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4, sFrp1, sFrp2 and sFrp4 were also expressed in the PE, AE,
and adjacent mesenchyme in specific spatio-temporal patterns.

PMID: 11731265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nat Immunol. 2001 Sep;2(9):823-4.

"Decisions, decisions.": beta-catenin-mediated activation of TCF-1 and Lef-1
influences the fate of developing T cells.

Wu L, Strasser A.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2001 Sep;2(9):863-9.

PMID: 11526393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41675-82. Epub 2001 Aug 24.

Differential modulation of transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors by
direct protein-protein interactions with the T cell factor family of
transcription factors.

El-Tanani M(1), Fernig DG, Barraclough R, Green C, Rudland P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Molecular Medicine Group, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United
Kingdom.

Two major signaling pathways, those triggered by estrogen (E(2)) and by the Wnt
family, interact in the breast to cause growth and differentiation. The estrogen 
receptors ER(alpha) and ER(beta) are activated by binding E(2) and act as
ligand-dependent transcription factors. The effector for the Wnt family is the
Tcf family of transcription factors. Both sets of transcription factors recognize
discrete but different nucleotide sequences in the promoters of their target
genes. By using transient transfections of reporter constructs for the
osteopontin and thymidine kinase promoters in rat mammary cells, we show that
Tcf-4 antagonizes and Tcf-1 stimulates the effects of activated ER/E(2). For
mutants of the former promoter, the stimulatory effects of ER(alpha)/E(2) can be 
made to be dependent on Tcf-1, and for the latter promoter the effects of the T
cell factors (TCFs) are dependent on ER/E(2). Direct interaction between ERs and 
Tcfs either at the Tcf/ER(alpha)-binding site on the DNA or in the absence of DNA
is established by gel retardation assays or by coimmunoprecipitation/biosensor
methods, respectively. These results show that the two sets of transcription
factors can interact directly, the interaction between ERs and Tcf-4 being
antagonistic and that between ERs and Tcf-1 being synergistic on the activity of 
the promoters employed. Since Tcf-4 is the major Tcf family member in the breast,
it is suggested that the antagonistic interaction is normally dominant in vivo in
this tissue.

PMID: 11522780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nat Immunol. 2001 Aug;2(8):691-7.

The beta-catenin--TCF-1 pathway ensures CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocyte survival.

Ioannidis V(1), Beermann F, Clevers H, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
155 Ch. des Boveresses, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

The association of trans-acting T cell factors (TCFs) or lymphoid enhancer factor
1 (LEF-1) with their coactivator beta-catenin mediates transient transcriptional 
responses to extracellular Wnt signals. We show here that T cell maturation
depends on the presence of the beta-catenin--binding domain in TCF-1. This domain
is necessary to mediate the survival of immature CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive
(DP) thymocytes. Accelerated spontaneous thymocyte death in the absence of TCF-1 
correlates with aberrantly low expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-x(L).
Increasing anti-apoptotic effectors in thymocytes by the use of a Bcl-2 transgene
rescued TCF-1-deficient DP thymocytes from apoptosis. Thus, TCF-1, upon
association with beta-catenin, transiently ensures the survival of immature T
cells, which enables them to generate and edit T cell receptor (TCR) alpha chains
and attempt TCR-mediated positive selection.

PMID: 11477404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8668-73. Epub 2001 Jul 10.

Rescue of a Wnt mutation by an activated form of LEF-1: regulation of maintenance
but not initiation of Brachyury expression.

Galceran J(1), Hsu SC, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Center and Institute of Biochemistry, University of Munich, Feodor
Lynenstrasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Members of the LEF-1/TCF family of transcription factors have been implicated in 
mediating a nuclear response to Wnt signals by association with beta-catenin.
Consistent with this view, mice carrying mutations in either the Wnt3a gene or in
both transcription factor genes Lef1 and Tcf1 were previously found to show a
similar defect in the formation of paraxial mesoderm in the gastrulating mouse
embryo. In addition, mutations in the Brachyury gene, a direct transcriptional
target of LEF-1, were shown to result in mesodermal defects. However, direct
evidence for the role of LEF-1 and Brachyury in Wnt3a signaling has been
limiting. In this study, we genetically examine the function of LEF-1 in the
regulation of Brachyury expression and in signaling by Wnt3a. Analysis of the
expression of Brachyury in Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) mice and studies of Brachyury:lacZ 
transgenes containing wild type or mutated LEF-1 binding sites indicate that Lef1
is dispensable for the initiation, but is required for the maintenance of
Brachyury expression. We also show that the expression of an activated form of
LEF-1, containing the beta-catenin activation domain fused to the amino terminus 
of LEF-1, can rescue a Wnt3a mutation. Together, these data provide genetic
evidence that Lef1 mediates the Wnt3a signal and regulates the stable maintenance
of Brachyury expression during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC37493
PMID: 11447280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 2001 May 15;166(10):6181-7.

Positive and negative roles of the trans-acting T cell factor-1 for the
acquisition of distinct Ly-49 MHC class I receptors by NK cells.

Kunz B(1), Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
Epalinges, Switzerland.

Members of the Ly-49 gene family code for class I MHC-specific receptors that
regulate NK cell function. Due to a combinatorial distribution of Ly-49
receptors, NK cells display considerable clonal heterogeneity. The acquisition of
one Ly-49 receptor, Ly-49A is strictly dependent on the transcriptional
trans-acting factor T cell-specific factor-1 (TCF-1). Indeed, TCF-1 binds to two 
sites in the Ly-49a promoter and regulates its activity, suggesting that the
Ly-49a gene is a direct TCF-1 target. TCF-1 deficiency resulted in the altered
usage of additional Ly-49 receptors. We show in this study, using TCF-1
beta(2)-microglobulin double-deficient mice, that these repertoire alterations
are not due to Ly-49/MHC class I interactions. Our findings rather suggest a
TCF-1-dependent, cell autonomous effect on the acquisition of multiple Ly-49
receptors. Besides reduced receptor usage (Ly-49A and D), we also observed no
effect (Ly-49C) and significantly expanded (Ly-49G and I) receptor usage in the
absence of TCF-1. These effects did not in all cases correlate with the presence 
of TCF binding sites in the respective proximal promoter. Therefore, besides
TCF-1 binding to the proximal promoter, Ly-49 acquisition may also be regulated
by TCF-1 binding to more distant cis-acting elements and/or by regulating the
expression of additional trans-acting factors. Consistent with the observed
differential, positive or negative role of TCF-1 for Ly-49 receptor acquisition, 
reporter gene assays revealed the presence of an inducing as well as a repressing
TCF site in certain proximal Ly-49 promoters. These findings reveal an important 
role of TCF-1 for the formation of the NK cell receptor repertoire.

PMID: 11342639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nat Genet. 2001 May;28(1):53-7.

Beta-catenin-sensitive isoforms of lymphoid enhancer factor-1 are selectively
expressed in colon cancer.

Hovanes K(1), Li TW, Munguia JE, Truong T, Milovanovic T, Lawrence Marsh J,
Holcombe RF, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 May;28(1):3-4.

Constitutive activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is a root cause of many
colon cancers. Activation of this pathway is caused by genetic mutations that
stabilize the beta-catenin protein, allowing it to accumulate in the nucleus and 
form complexes with any member of the lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF1) and T-cell 
factor (TCF1, TCF3, TCF4) family of transcription factors (referred to
collectively as LEF/TCFs) to activate transcription of target genes. Target genes
such as MYC, CCND1, MMP7 and TCF7 (refs. 5-9) are normally expressed in colon
tissue, so it has been proposed that abnormal expression levels or patterns
imposed by beta-catenin/TCF complexes have a role in tumor progression. We report
here that LEF1 is a new type of target gene ectopically activated in colon
cancer. The pattern of this ectopic expression is unusual because it derives from
selective activation of a promoter for a full-length LEF1 isoform that binds
beta-catenin, but not a second, intronic promoter that drives expression of a
dominant-negative isoform. beta-catenin/TCF complexes can activate the promoter
for full-length LEF1, indicating that in cancer high levels of these complexes
misregulate transcription to favor a positive feedback loop for Wnt signaling by 
inducing selective expression of full-length, beta-catenin-sensitive forms of
LEF/TCFs.

PMID: 11326276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Exp Hematol. 2001 Apr;29(4):499-506.

T-cell factor-1 expression during human natural killer cell development and in
circulating CD56(+) bright natural killer cells.

Toor AA(1), Lund TC, Miller JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Harvard Street 
at East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Transcription factors are essential to govern differentiation along the lymphoid 
lineage from uncommitted hematopoietic stem cells. Although many of these
transcription factors have putative roles based on murine knockout experiments,
their function in human lymphoid development is less known and was studied
further. Transcription factor expression in fresh and cultured adult human bone
marrow and umbilical cord blood progenitors was evaluated. We found that fresh
CD34(+)Lin(-) cells that are human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR(-) or CD38(-)
constitutively express GATA-3 but not T-cell factor-1 (TCF-1) or Id-3. Culture
with the murine fetal liver cell line AFT024 and defined cytokines was capable of
inducing TCF-1 mRNA. However, no T-cell receptor gene rearrangement was
identified in cultured progeny. Id-3, a basic helix loop helix factor with
dominant negative function for T-cell differentiation transcription factors, also
was upregulated and may explain unsuccessful T-cell maturation. To better
understand the developmental link between natural killer (NK) cells derived from 
progenitors, we studied NK cell subsets circulating in blood. CD56(+bright), but 
not CD56(+dim), NK cells constitutively express TCF-1 by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis. The TCF-1 isoform found in
CD56(+bright) cells, which express lectin but not immunoglobulin class I
recognizing inhibitory receptors, was identical to that induced in NK cell
differentiation culture and was distinctly different from isoforms in T cells.
These results suggest that TCF-1 does not target human killer immunoglobulin
receptor genes, TCF-1 is uniquely expressed in circulating CD56(+bright) NK
cells, and specific TCF-1 isoforms may play an important role in regulating NK
differentiation from a common NK/T-cell progenitor.

PMID: 11301190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Jan;31(1):285-93.

Wnt signaling is required for thymocyte development and activates Tcf-1 mediated 
transcription.

Staal FJ(1), Meeldijk J, Moerer P, Jay P, van de Weerdt BC, Vainio S, Nolan GP,
Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht Medical
Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

T cell factor / lymphocyte enhancer factor (Tcf/Lef) transcription factors
complex with the transcriptional co-activator beta-catenin to transduce Wnt
signals in a variety of developmental systems. The prototypic family member Tcf-1
is highly expressed in T lineage cells. Tcf1-/- mice are defective in cell
cycling of early thymocyte stages. Here, we show that the interaction of
beta-catenin with Tcf-1 is required for full thymocyte development. This
interaction may be established by signals mediated by Wnt1 and Wnt4, leading to
increased Tcf-dependent transcriptional activity in thymocytes, as demonstrated
in Tcf-LacZ reporter mice. Transduction of fetal thymocytes with Wnt1 and Wnt4
results in increased survival in an in vitro cell culture system. Retroviral
expression of soluble Wnt receptor mutants that block Wnt signaling inhibits
thymocyte development. These results imply an important role for the Wnt cascade 
in thymocyte development.

PMID: 11265645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Scand J Immunol. 2000 Nov;52(5):502-9.

Prethymic progenitors from the avian para-aortic mesoderm express GATA-3 and
distinct chTcf isoforms but still lack T-cell receptor-gamma rearrangements.

Liippo J(1), Koskela K, Lassila O.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Medical
Microbiology, University of Turku, Finland. jussi.liippo@utu.fi

Haematopoietic precursors first colonizing the avian embryonic thymus are derived
from the intraembryonic sites located around the dorsal aortae. These
intraembryonic precursors have previously been demonstrated to include cells that
harbour T-cell progenitor capacity and express the Ikaros transcription factor,
known to be a prerequisite for lymphocyte development. In this study, we further 
evaluated the properties of these prethymic cells. We show that early
intraembryonic cells and prethymic progenitors already express the GATA-3
transcription factor. The chicken homologue of T-cell factor-1, chTcf, is also
detected in cells isolated from the avian para-aortic region. However, these
intraembryonic cells retain their T-cell receptor gamma loci in germline
configuration. Interestingly, chTcf was found to express different alternatively 
spliced isoforms during early ontogeny and thymic T-cell development, which
indicates developmentally regulated expression of chTcf variants. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that, although the avian prethymic progenitor cells
express T-lineage-associated transcription factors, they have not yet undergone
TCR rearrangements. It is therefore suggested that activation of
lineage-associated genes is an early event in the generation of haematopoietic
progenitor cells during ontogeny.

PMID: 11119250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 23;18(56):7985-93.

Molecular characterization of a zebrafish TCF ETS-domain transcription factor.

Brown LA(1), Yang SH, Hair A, Galanis A, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

The ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-transcription factors represent
key nuclear targets of the MAP kinase pathways. Members of this subfamily are
classified by the presence of several conserved domains for DNA binding,
interaction with SRF, interaction with MAP kinases and transcriptional
activation. In this study we have isolated a further member of this subfamily
(TCF-1) from zebrafish. The protein product of zebrafish TCF-1 (zTCF-1), shares
sequence similarity with the mammalian TCFs in all four conserved domains, with
highest overall similarity to SAP-1. Zebrafish TCF-1 is expressed throughout
zebrafish embryonic development and exhibits typical TCF DNA binding
characteristics, with the B-box being required for interaction with SRF. Of the
mammalian TCFs, its DNA binding specificity resembles Elk-1. zTCF-1 is a target
for both the growth factor/mitogen-activated and stress-activated MAP kinase
cascades in vitro and in vivo. However, differential targeting occurs, with the
profile of its activation closely resembling that of mammalian SAP-1. Together,
our results demonstrate that the TCFs have been functionally conserved during
vertebrate development.

PMID: 10637509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Immunity. 1999 Oct;11(4):433-42.

Clonal acquisition of the Ly49A NK cell receptor is dependent on the trans-acting
factor TCF-1.

Held W(1), Kunz B, Lowin-Kropf B, van de Wetering M, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne, 
Epalinges, Switzerland. wheld@isrec.unil.ch

Families of clonally expressed major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I-specific receptors provide specificity to and regulate the function of natural 
killer (NK) cells. One of these receptors, mouse Ly49A, is expressed by 20% of NK
cells and inhibits the killing of H-2D(d) but not D(b)-expressing target cells.
Here, we show that the trans-acting factor TCF-1 binds to two sites in the Ly49A 
promoter and regulates its activity. Moreover, we find that TCF-1 determines the 
size of the Ly49A NK cell subset in vivo in a dosage-dependent manner. We propose
that clonal Ly49A acquisition during NK cell development is regulated by TCF-1.

PMID: 10549625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Science. 1999 Sep 17;285(5435):1923-6.

Synergy between tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1.

Roose J(1), Huls G, van Beest M, Moerer P, van der Horn K, Goldschmeding R,
Logtenberg T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Mutations in APC or beta-catenin inappropriately activate the transcription
factor Tcf4, thereby transforming intestinal epithelial cells. Here it is shown
that one of the target genes of Tcf4 in epithelial cells is Tcf1. The most
abundant Tcf1 isoforms lack a beta-catenin interaction domain. Tcf1(-/-) mice
develop adenomas in the gut and mammary glands. Introduction of a mutant APC
allele into these mice substantially increases the number of these adenomas. Tcf1
may act as a feedback repressor of beta-catenin-Tcf4 target genes and thus may
cooperate with APC to suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

PMID: 10489374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22705-12.

Tissue-specific regulation of the ecto-5'-nucleotidase promoter. Role of the camp
response element site in mediating repression by the upstream regulatory region.

Spychala J(1), Zimmermann AG, Mitchell BS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-6573, USA. jozek@med.unc.edu

We have isolated the 5' region of the ecto-5'-nucleotidase (low K(m) 5'-NT) gene 
and established that a 969-base pair (bp) fragment confers cell-specific
expression of a CAT reporter gene that correlates with the expression of
endogenous ecto-5'-NT mRNA and enzymatic activity. A 768-bp upstream negative
regulatory region has been identified that conferred lymphocyte-specific negative
regulation in a heterologous system with a 244-bp deoxycytidine kinase core
promoter. DNase I footprinting identified several protected areas including Sp1, 
Sp1/AP-2, and cAMP response element (CRE) binding sites within the 201-bp core
promoter region and Sp1, NRE-2a, TCF-1/LEF-1, and Sp1/NF-AT binding sites in the 
upstream regulatory region. Whereas the CRE site was essential in mediating the
negative activity of the upstream regulatory region in Jurkat but not in HeLa
cells, mutation of the Sp1/AP-2 site decreased promoter activity in both cell
lines. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis of proteins binding to the
CRE site identified both ATF-1 and ATF-2 in Jurkat cells. Finally, phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate increased the activity of both the core and the 969-bp
promoter fragments, and this increase was abrogated by mutations at the CRE site.
In summary, we have identified a tissue-specific regulatory region 5' of the
ecto-5'-NT core promoter that requires the presence of a functional CRE site
within the basal promoter for its suppressive activity.

PMID: 10428853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int Immunol. 1999 Mar;11(3):317-23.

Tcf-1-mediated transcription in T lymphocytes: differential role for glycogen
synthase kinase-3 in fibroblasts and T cells.

Staal FJ(1), Burgering BM, van de Wetering M, Clevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Beta-catenin is the vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila segment polarity gene
Armadillo and plays roles in both cell-cell adhesion and transduction of the Wnt 
signaling cascade. Recently, members of the Lef/Tcf transcription factor family
have been identified as protein partners of beta-catenin, explaining how
beta-catenin alters gene expression. Here we report that in T cells, Tcf-1 also
becomes transcriptionally active through interaction with beta-catenin,
suggesting that the Wnt signal transduction pathway is operational in T
lymphocytes as well. However, although Wnt signals are known to inhibit the
activity of the negative regulatory protein kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3beta
(GSK-3beta), resulting in increased levels of beta-catenin, we find no evidence
for involvement of GSK-3beta in Tcf-mediated transcription in T cells. That is, a
dominant negative GSK-3beta does not specifically activate Tcf transcription and 
stimuli (lithium or phytohemagglutinin) that inhibit GSK-3beta activity also do
not activate Tcf reporter genes. Thus, inhibition of GSK-3beta is insufficient to
activate Tcf-dependent transcription in T lymphocytes. In contrast, in C57MG
fibroblast cells, lithium inactivates GSK-3beta and induces Tcf-controlled
transcription. This is the first demonstration that lithium can alter gene
expression of Tcf-responsive genes, and points to a difference in regulation of
Wnt signaling between fibroblasts and lymphocytes.

PMID: 10221643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Genes Dev. 1999 Mar 15;13(6):709-17.

Wnt3a-/--like phenotype and limb deficiency in Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) mice.

Galceran J(1), Fariñas I, Depew MJ, Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Microbiology and
Biochemistry, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Members of the LEF-1/TCF family of transcription factors have been implicated in 
the transduction of Wnt signals. However, targeted gene inactivations of Lef1,
Tcf1, or Tcf4 in the mouse do not produce phenotypes that mimic any known Wnt
mutation. Here we show that null mutations in both Lef1 and Tcf1, which are
expressed in an overlapping pattern in the early mouse embryo, cause a severe
defect in the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm and lead to the formation of
additional neural tubes, phenotypes identical to those reported for
Wnt3a-deficient mice. In addition, Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) embryos have defects in the
formation of the placenta and in the development of limb buds, which fail both to
express Fgf8 and to form an apical ectodermal ridge. Together, these data provide
evidence for a redundant role of LEF-1 and TCF-1 in Wnt signaling during mouse
development.

PMCID: PMC316557
PMID: 10090727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int Immunol. 1998 Oct;10(10):1519-27.

Expression of Tcf-1 mRNA and surface TCR-CD3 complexes are reduced during
apoptosis of T cells.

Jeon SH(1), Jeong S, Lee C, Kim JK, Kim YS, Chung HY, Park SD, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics and Department of Molecular
Biology, Seoul National University, Korea.

When a T cell hybridoma, 70.7, was treated with a Ca2+ ionophore (A23187),
apoptotic cell death was induced. Interestingly, we observed that the expression 
of Tcf-1, a T cell-specific transcription factor, mRNA was reduced by
approximately 5-fold in the A23187-treated apoptotic cells compared to an
ethanol-treated control. The hybridoma cells, however, did not display such a
reduced expression of Tcf-1 mRNA upon treatment with buthionine sulfoxide, which 
is known to induce a necrosis-like cell death. When another T cell hybridoma,
KMIs-8.3.5, was treated with A23187 and phorbol myristate acetate, which leads to
activation-induced apoptosis, Tcf-1 expression was again greatly reduced.
However, a mutant line (KCIT1-8.5) derived from KMIs-8.3.5, which produces IL-2
upon activation and is resistant to apoptosis, did not show such reduction in
Tcf-1 expression. We also showed that the reduced expression level of CD3epsilon 
mRNA and surface TCR-CD3 complex in apoptotic T cells is caused by the reduced
expression of Tcf-1. When 70.7 cells were transfected with a plasmid DNA
pSVtcf-1, in which Tcf-1 gene expression is driven by the SV40 promoter, such
reduction of the Tcf-1 mRNA and the surface expression of the TCR-CD3 complex
were not observed upon apoptosis induction. Our results suggest that the reduced 
expression of Tcf-1 is specific for the apoptotic, but not for the activating,
process of T cells and is also responsible for the reduced surface expression of 
the TCR-CD3 in apoptotic T cells.

PMID: 9796919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4591-8.

A mouse carrying genetic defect in the choice between T and B lymphocytes.

Tokoro Y(1), Sugawara T, Yaginuma H, Nakauchi H, Terhorst C, Wang B, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Japan.

Transgenic mice with human CD3epsilon gene have been shown to exhibit early
arrest of T cell development in the thymus. The present study shows that, instead
of T cells, B cells are generated in the thymus of a line, tg epsilon26, of the
human CD3epsilon transgenic mice. The accumulation of mature B cells in the
thymus was found only in tg epsilon26 mice, not in other human CD3epsilon
transgenic mouse lines or other T cell-deficient mice, including CD3-epsilon
knockout mice and TCR-beta/TCR-delta double knockout mice. Hanging drop-mediated 
transfer into 2-deoxyguanosine-treated thymus lobes showed that lymphoid
progenitor cells rather than thymus stromal cells were responsible for abnormal B
cell development in tg epsilon26 thymus, and that tg epsilon26 fetal liver cells 
were destined to become B cells in normal thymus even in the presence of normal
progenitor cells undergoing T cell development. These results indicate that
lymphoid progenitor cells in tg epsilon26 mice are genetically defective in
thymic choice between T cells and B cells, generating B cells even in normal
thymus environment. Interestingly, tg epsilon26 thymocytes expressed GATA-3 and
TCF-1, but not LEF-1 and PEBP-2alpha, among T cell-specific transcription factors
that are involved in early T cell development, indicating that GATA-3 and TCF-1
expressed during thymocyte development do not necessarily determine the cell fate
into T cell lineage. Thus, tg epsilon26 mice provide a novel mouse model in that 
lineage choice between T and B lymphocytes is genetically defective.

PMID: 9794386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 15;161(8):3984-91.

Critical involvement of Tcf-1 in expansion of thymocytes.

Schilham MW(1), Wilson A, Moerer P, Benaissa-Trouw BJ, Cumano A, Clevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
mschilham@kindjc.azl.nl

T cell maturation in Tcf-1(-/-) mice deteriorates progressively and halts
completely around 6 mo of age. During fetal development thymocyte subpopulations 
seem normal, although total cell numbers are lower. By 4 to 6 wk of age, obvious 
blockades in the differentiation of CD4- 8- thymocytes are observed at two
distinct stages (CD44+ 25+ and CD44- 25-), both of which are normally
characterized by extensive proliferation. This lack of thymocyte expansion and/or
differentiation was also observed when Tcf-1(-/-) progenitor cells from the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (embryonic day 11.5), fetal liver (embryonic day
12.5/14.5), and fetal bone marrow (embryonic day 18.5) were allowed to
differentiate in normal thymic lobes (fetal thymic organ cultures) or were
injected intrathymically into normal recipients. Despite these apparent defects
in thymocyte differentiation and expansion, adult Tcf-1(-/-) mice are
immunocompetent, as they generate virus neutralizing Abs at normal titers.
Furthermore, their peripheral T cells have an activated phenotype (increased CD44
and decreased CD62L expression) and proliferate normally in response to Ag or
mitogen, suggesting that these cells may have arisen from the early wave of
development during embryogenesis and are either long lived or have subsequently
been maintained by peripheral expansion. As Tcf-1 is a critical component in the 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, these data suggest that Wnt-like factors play
a role in the expansion of double-negative thymocytes.

PMID: 9780167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Genet. 1998 Aug;19(4):379-83.

Depletion of epithelial stem-cell compartments in the small intestine of mice
lacking Tcf-4.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Moerer P, van Donselaar E, Huls G, Peters PJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mutations of the genes encoding APC or beta-catenin in colon carcinoma induce the
constitutive formation of nuclear beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes, resulting in
activated transcription of Tcf target genes. To study the physiological role of
Tcf-4 (which is encoded by the Tcf7/2 gene), we disrupted Tcf7/2 by homologous
recombination. Tcf7/2-/- mice die shortly after birth. A single histopathological
abnormality was observed. An apparently normal transition of intestinal endoderm 
into epithelium occurred at approximately embryonic day (E) 14.5. However, no
proliferative compartments were maintained in the prospective crypt regions
between the villi. As a consequence, the neonatal epithelium was composed
entirely of differentiated, non-dividing villus cells. We conclude that the
genetic program controlled by Tcf-4 maintains the crypt stem cells of the small
intestine. The constitutive activity of Tcf-4 in APC-deficient human epithelial
cells may contribute to their malignant transformation by maintaining stem-cell
characteristics.

PMID: 9697701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4819-32.

Differential importin-alpha recognition and nuclear transport by nuclear
localization signals within the high-mobility-group DNA binding domains of
lymphoid enhancer factor 1 and T-cell factor 1.

Prieve MG(1), Guttridge KL, Munguia J, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-4025, USA.

The transcription factor lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF-1) is directed to the
nucleus by a nine-amino-acid nuclear localization signal (NLS; KKKKRKREK) located
in the high-mobility-group DNA binding domain. This NLS is recognized by two
armadillo repeat proteins (pendulin/Rch1/alpha-P1/hSrp1alpha and
Srp1/karyopherin-alpha/alpha-S1/NPI-1) which function in nuclear transport as the
importin-alpha subunit of NLS receptors. T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1), a related
transcription factor, contains a similar sequence (KKKRRSREK) in the identical
position within its HMG DNA binding domain. We show that this sequence functions 
as an NLS in vivo but is not recognized by these two importin-alpha subtypes in a
yeast two-hybrid assay and only weakly recognized in an in vitro binding assay.
Transfer of the LEF-1 NLS to TCF-1 can confer pendulin/Rch1 binding,
demonstrating that the NLS is the primary determinant for recognition. We have
constructed a set of deletion mutations in pendulin/Rch1 to examine the
differential NLS recognition more closely. We find that the entire armadillo
repeat array of pendulin/Rch1 is necessary to maintain high affinity and
specificity for the LEF-1 NLS versus the TCF-1 NLS. Importin-beta, the second
subunit of the NLS receptor complex, does not influence in vitro NLS binding
affinity or specificity. To test whether this differential recognition is
indicative of distinct mechanisms of nuclear transport, the subcellular
localization of LEF-1 and TCF-1 fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP)) was
examined in an in vitro nuclear transport assay. GFP-LEF-1 readily localizes to
the nucleus, whereas GFP-TCF-1 remains in the cytoplasm. Thus, LEF-1 and TCF-1
differ in several aspects of nuclear localization.

PMCID: PMC109067
PMID: 9671491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Semin Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(2):127-32.

HMG box containing transcription factors in lymphocyte differentiation.

Schilham MW(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Leiden, The Netherlands.

The identification of the mammalian sex-determining gene Sry has led to the
discovery of a large family of related ('HMG box') transcription factors that
control developmental events in yeast, C. elegans, Drosophila and vertebrates. In
lymphocyte differentiation, several HMG box proteins play a decisive role. Sox-4 
is important for very early B-cell differentiation, while TCF-1/LEF-1 play a
crucial role in early thymocyte development. TCF/LEF proteins have recently been 
found to constitute a downstream component of the Wingless/Wnt signal
transduction pathway. In flies, this pathway controls segment polarity; in
Xenopus it controls the definition of the body axis. Deregulation of the pathway 
occurs in several human tumors. These insights in the molecular events that are
involved in TCF/LEF function in these organisms may eventually lead to the
understanding of the function of these HMG box proteins in lymphoid development.

PMID: 9618758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Gen Genet. 1998 Apr;258(1-2):45-52.

Genomic organization of the segment polarity gene pan in Drosophila melanogaster.

Dooijes D(1), van Beest M, van de Wetering M, Boulanger G, Jones T, Clevers H,
Mortin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We previously described the molecular cloning of a mammalian T cell factor 1
(TCF-1)-like protein from Drosophila melanogaster, encoded by the pangolin (pan) 
locus, and demonstrated that it consists of a DNA binding domain similar to that 
of other high mobility group proteins and a protein-protein interaction domain
that binds beta-catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) but that it lacks a
transcriptional activation domain. Here we show that the pan locus spans
approximately 50 kb and the mRNA results from the splicing of 13 exons. We note
remarkable conservation of the exon/intron boundaries between the human and D.
melanogaster genes, suggesting that they share a common ancestor. Chromosomal in 
situ hybridization locates pan to the base of chromosome 4, near the cubitus
interruptus locus. Restriction map and sequence analyses confirm their close
proximity. The small fourth chromosome undergoes little or no recombination and
was previously reported to lack DNA polymorphisms; however, we note two DNA
polymorphisms occurring in three combinations within the pan locus, demonstrating
the presence of synonymous substitutions and the past occurrence of
recombination. We present evidence suggesting that the protein encoded by pan is 
more similar to mammalian TCF-1 and Caenorhabditis elegans POP-1 than to
mammalian LEF-1.

PMID: 9613571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Immunity. 1998 Jan;8(1):11-20.

Redundant regulation of T cell differentiation and TCRalpha gene expression by
the transcription factors LEF-1 and TCF-1.

Okamura RM(1), Sigvardsson M, Galceran J, Verbeek S, Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0414, USA.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF-1) and T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) are closely
related transcription factors that are both expressed during murine T cell
differentiation and that regulate the T cell receptor alpha (TCRalpha) enhancer
in transfection assays. Targeted gene disruption of either the Tcf1 or Lef1 gene 
in mice did not affect TCRalpha gene expression and resulted in an incomplete
defect or no defect in thymocyte differentiation. Here, we examine a potential
redundancy of these transcription factors by analyzing double-mutant mice. In
fetal thymic organ cultures from Lef1-/- Tcf1-/- mice, alpha/beta T cell
differentiation is completely arrested at the immature CD8+ single-positive (CD8+
ISP) stage and is markedly impaired at an earlier stage. In addition, we find
that sorted CD8+ ISP cells from Lef1-/- Tcf1-/- mice express TCRbeta but show a
severely reduced level of TCRalpha gene transcription. Together, these data show 
that LEF-1 and TCF-1 are redundant in the regulation of T cell differentiation
and gene expression.

PMID: 9462507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Genomics. 1997 Oct 1;45(1):147-57.

Construction of a 3-Mb contig and partial transcript map of the central region of
mouse chromosome 11.

Watkins-Chow DE(1), Douglas KR, Buckwalter MS, Probst FJ, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109, USA.

We report the establishment of a high-resolution genetic map, a physical map, and
a partial transcript map of the Ames dwarf critical region on mouse chromosome
11. A contig of 24 YACs and 13 P1 clones has been assembled and spans
approximately 3 Mb from Flt4 to Tcf7. A library of approximately 1000 putative
transcript clones from the region was prepared using exon amplification and
pituitary cDNA selection. Ten novel transcripts were partially characterized,
including a member of the olfactory receptor family, an alpha-tubulin-related
sequence, and a novel member of the cdc2/CDC28-like kinase family, Clk4. The
location of Prop1, the gene responsible for Ames dwarfism, has been localized
within the contig. This contig spans a region of mouse chromosome 11 that
exhibits linkage conservation with human chromosome 5q23-q35. The strength of the
genetic map and genomic resources for this region suggest that comparative DNA
sequencing of this region could reveal the genes responsible for other mouse
mutants and human genetic diseases.

PMID: 9339371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Cancer. 1997 Aug 7;72(4):625-30.

Ectopic activation of lymphoid high mobility group-box transcription factor TCF-1
and overexpression in colorectal cancer cells.

Mayer K(1), Hieronymus T, Castrop J, Clevers H, Ballhausen WG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Physical interaction between the lymphoid high mobility group (HMG)-box
architectural transcription factors TCF/LEF and beta-catenin is associated with
translocation of the heteromeric complex to the nucleus and regulation of target 
gene expression. Since formation of molecular complexes among beta-catenin,
E-cadherin, p300apc and TCF/LEF depends on balanced expression of these
constituents, we investigated the biosynthesis of TCF-1 in colorectal cancer.
Here we report detailed analyses of activation and overexpression of lymphoid
transcription factor TCF-1 in human colorectal cancer-derived cell lines.
Northern blot analyses revealed considerable steady-state expression levels of
TCF-1 mRNA of normal size. Genomic rearrangement of the 5' flanking region of the
TCF-1 gene was excluded as a cause of ectopic expression. By contrast,
CAT-reporter constructs depending on a 515-bp T-cell-regulated TCF-1 genomic
upstream region were significantly activated in epithelial tumor cells. RT-PCR
analyses revealed a heterogeneic population of mRNA isoforms due to alternative
splicing in the TCF-1 gene. On Western blots of colorectal cancer cells, the
TCF-1-specific monoclonal antibody 7H3 detected a similar heterogeneous spectrum 
of TCF-1 specific polypeptide chains. Interestingly, overexpression of
TCF-1-specific splice forms correlated with the metastatic behavior of the
analyzed cells and with overproduction of lymphoid tyrosine protein kinase
p56(lck). We conclude that ectopic expression of the HMG-box factor TCF-1 is
associated with late events in tumor progression.

PMID: 9259402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 15;24(24):5034-44.

An enhancer LEF-1/TCF-1 site is essential for insertion site-independent
transgene expression in thymus.

Haynes TL(1), Thomas MB, Dusing MR, Valerius MT, Potter SS, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Transcriptional activation of eukaryotic genes involves assembly of specific
multiprotein complexes on the promoters and enhancers of the genes. Recently, it 
has been proposed that the role of some of the proteins in the complex may be
architectural, involving DNA bending, orchestration of protein-protein
interaction and modulation of nucleosome structure. This role has been proposed
for the HMG proteins LEF-1 and TCF-1. We examined the role of a LEF-1/TCF-1
binding site in the human adenosine deaminase (ADA) thymic enhancer. Mutational
analysis demonstrated that a functional LEF-1/TCF-1 binding site is not required 
for enhancer-mediated transcriptional activation in transient transfection
studies, but is essential for enhancer function in the in vivo chromatin context 
of transgenic mice. Mutation of the LEF-1/TCF-1 site destroyed the ability of the
ADA enhancer/locus control region to specify high level, insertion
site-independent transgene expression in thymus. DNase I and DpnII accessibility 
experiments indicated dramatic changes in the chromatin organization of the ADA
enhancer in transgenic mice with a mutated LEF-1/TCF-1 site. This supports the
hypothesis that factors binding the LEF-1/TCF-1 site play an architectural role
during the in vivo activation of the ADA enhancer, possibly involving chromatin
modification.

PMCID: PMC146351
PMID: 9016677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Exp Med. 1996 Sep 1;184(3):1137-47.

Involvement of transcription factors TCF-1 and GATA-3 in the initiation of the
earliest step of T cell development in the thymus.

Hattori N(1), Kawamoto H, Fujimoto S, Kuno K, Katsura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Flow cytometric and immunocytochemical analyses of murine fetal thymus (FT) cells
with antibodies to various surface markers and transcription factors reveal that 
the synthesis of TCF-1 and GATA-3 protein begins simultaneously in a fraction of 
the most immature population of FT cells, which have the phenotype of
CD4-CD8-CD44+CD25-. No TCF-1-producing cells is found in the fetal liver (FL). In
CD44+CD25- FT cells, the production of TCF-1 is immediately followed by
intracellular expression of CD3 epsilon. It is also found that the T cell
development from FL, but not FT, progenitors in the FT organ culture system is
severely inhibited by the addition of antisense oligonucleotides for either TCF-1
or GATA-3. These results strongly suggest that TCF-1 and GATA-3 play essential
roles in the initiation of the earliest steps of T cell development in the
thymus.

PMCID: PMC2192786
PMID: 9064330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):745-52.

Extensive alternative splicing and dual promoter usage generate Tcf-1 protein
isoforms with differential transcription control properties.

Van de Wetering M(1), Castrop J, Korinek V, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Previously, we reported the isolation of cDNA clones representing four
alternative splice forms of TCF-1, a T-cell-specific transcription factor. In the
present study, Western blotting (immunoblotting) yielded a multitude of TCF-1
proteins ranging from 25-55 kDa, a pattern not simply explained from the known
splice alternatives. Subsequent cDNA cloning, PCR amplification, and analysis by 
rapid amplification of 5' cDNA ends revealed (i) the presence of an alternative
upstream promoter, which extended the known N terminus by 116 amino acids, (ii)
the presence of four alternative exons, and (iii) the existence of a second
reading frame in the last exon encoding an extended C terminus. Inclusion of the 
extended N terminus into the originally reported protein resulted in a striking
similarity to the lymphoid factor Lef-1. Several of the TCF-1 isoforms, although 
less potent, mimicked Lef-1 in transactivating transcription through the T-cell
receptor alpha-chain (TCR-alpha) enhancer. These data provide a molecular basis
for the complexity of the expressed TCF-1 proteins and establish the existence of
functional differences between these isoforms. Furthermore, the functional
redundancy between Tcf-1 and Lef-1 explains the apparently normal TCR-alpha
expression in single Tcf-1 or Lef-1 knockout mice despite the firm in vitro
evidence for the importance of the Tcf/Lef site in the TCR-alpha enhancer.

PMCID: PMC231054
PMID: 8622675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Lab Invest. 1996 Feb;74(2):395-405.

Absence of T-cell- and B-cell-specific transcription factors TCF-1, GATA-3, and
BSAP in Hodgkin's Reed-Sternberg cells.

Hsu PL(1), Xie SS, Hsu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock 72205, USA.

Based on the presence of T cell receptor-beta (TcR-beta) gene rearrangements in
L428 and HDLM-1 cells, the expression of CD2 in HDLM-1 cells, and the presence of
immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) gene rearrangement in KM-H2 cells, some
researchers have concluded that these long-term cell lines derived from patients 
with Hodgkin's disease are lymphoid in nature. The information obtained from
these cell lines has also been used in arguments for a lymphoid origin of H-RS
cells in tissue despite the frequent absence of lymphoid markers and Ig/TcR gene 
rearrangements in these cells. We questioned whether one can use the limited
expression of lymphoid markers or the limited gene rearrangement to conclude that
H-RS cells have a lymphoid origin, because these markers may be aberrant in tumor
cells. In this study, we examined the expression of two T-cell-specific
transcription factors (TCF-1 and GATA-3) and one B-cell-specific transcription
factor (BSAP) in cultured H-RS cells by using a gel mobility shift assay. The
sensitivity and specificity of this assay for determination of cell lineage have 
been established in a large number of cultured human and murine cell lines. All
three types of H-RS cell lines were consistently negative for BSAP, TCF-1, and
GATA-3. The absence of GATA-3 was confirmed in H-RS cells in tissues by an in
situ hybridization technique. Virtually all B-cell lines, with the exception of
some myeloma cell lines, are positive for BSAP, which is the transcription factor
for promoters for several B-cell markers, including VpreB1, lambda 5, CD19, and
CD20. All T-cell lines tested were positive for TCF-1 and GATA-3, which are the
transcription factors for promoters for several T-cell-restricted markers,
including CD2, CD3, TcR, and lck. The absence of BSAP, TCF-1, and GATA-3 clearly 
indicates an underlying difference between H-RS cells and lymphoid cells.

PMID: 8780159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Feb;26(2):351-5.

Selectively impaired development of intestinal T cell receptor gamma delta+ cells
and liver CD4+ NK1+ T cell receptor alpha beta+ cells in T cell
factor-1-deficient mice.

Ohteki T(1), Wilson A, Verbeek S, MacDonald HR, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, Epalinges,
Switzerland.

T cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) is a transcription factor that binds to a sequence motif 
present in several T cell-specific enhancer elements. In Tcf-1-deficient
(Tcf-1-/-) mice, thymocyte development is partially blocked at the transition
from the CD4-8+ immature single-positive stage to the CD4+8+ double-positive
stage, resulting in a marked decrease of mature peripheral T cells in lymph node 
and spleen. We report here that the development of most intestinal TCR gamma
delta+ cells and liver CD4+ NK1.1+TCR alpha beta+ (NK1+T) cells, which are
believed to be of extrathymic origin, is selectively impaired in Tcf-1-/- mice.
In contrast, thymic and thymus-derived (splenic) TCR gamma delta+ cells are
present in normal numbers in Tcf-1-/- mice, as are other T cell subsets in
intestine and liver. Collectively, our data suggest that Tcf-1 is differentially 
required for the development of some extrathymic T cell subsets, including
intestinal TCR gamma delta+ cells and liver CD4+ NK1+T cells.

PMID: 8617303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Blood. 1995 Oct 15;86(8):3050-9.

The human TCF-1 gene encodes a nuclear DNA-binding protein uniquely expressed in 
normal and neoplastic T-lineage lymphocytes.

Castrop J(1), van Wichen D, Koomans-Bitter M, van de Wetering M, de Weger R, van 
Dongen J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The TCF-1 gene encodes a putative transcription factor with affinity for a
sequence motif occurring in a number of T-cell enhancers. TCF-1 mRNA was
originally found to be expressed in a T cell-specific fashion within a set of
human and mouse cell lines. In contrast, expression reportedly occurs in multiple
nonlymphoid tissues during murine embryogenesis. We have now raised a monoclonal 
antibody to document expression and biochemistry of the human TCF-1 protein. As
expected, the TCF-1 protein was detectable only in cell lines of T lineage. Its
expression was always restricted to the nucleus. Immunohistochemistry on a panel 
of human tissues revealed that the TCF-1 protein was found exclusively in
thymocytes and in CD3+ T cells in peripheral lymphoid tissues. Western blotting
yielded a set of bands ranging from 25 kD to 55 kD, resulting from extensive
alternative splicing. The TCF-1 protein was detectable in all samples of a set of
22 T-cell malignancies of various stages of maturation, but was absent from a
large number of other hematologic neoplasms. These observations imply a T
cell-specific function for TCF-1, a notion corroborated by recent observations on
Tcf-1 knock-out mice. In addition, these results indicate that nuclear TCF-1
expression can serve as a pan-T-lineage marker in the diagnosis of lymphoid
malignancies.

PMID: 7579399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nature. 1995 Aug 31;376(6543):791-5.

Structural basis for DNA bending by the architectural transcription factor LEF-1.

Love JJ(1), Li X, Case DA, Giese K, Grosschedl R, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF-1) and the closely related T-cell factor 1 
(TCF-1) are sequence-specific and cell-type-specific DNA-binding proteins that
play important regulatory roles in organogenesis and thymocyte differentiation.
LEF-1 participates in regulation of the enhancer associated with the T cell
receptor (TCR)-alpha gene by inducing a sharp bend in the DNA and facilitating
interactions between Ets-1, PEBP2-alpha, and ATF/CREB, transcription factors
bound at sites flanking the LEF-1 site. It seems that LEF-1 plays an
architectural role in the assembly and function of this regulatory nucleoprotein 
complex. LEF-1 recognizes a specific nucleotide sequence through a
high-mobility-group (HMG) domain. Proteins containing HMG domains bind DNA in the
minor groove, bend the double helix, and recognize four-way junctions and other
irregular DNA structures. Here we report the solution structure of a complex of
the LEF-1 HMG domain and adjacent basic region with its cognate DNA. The
structure reveals the HMG domain bound in the widened minor groove of a markedly 
distorted and bent double helix. The basic region binds across the narrowed major
groove and contributes to DNA recognition.

PMID: 7651541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Aug 22;1263(2):169-72.

The human high mobility group (HMG)-box transcription factor TCF-1: novel
isoforms due to alternative splicing and usage of a new exon IXA.

Mayer K(1), Wolff E, Clevers H, Ballhausen WG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik der Universität, Erlangen, Germany.

The C-terminal peptide sequences of the human lymphocyte-specific high mobility
group (HMG)-box transcription factor TCF-1 are determined by alternative splice
mechanisms affecting the exons VIII to X. Here we report, in addition to four
splice forms described previously (TCF-1A, B, C, D), the identification of three 
novel transcripts designated TCF-1E, F, G. Cloning and sequencing of the novel
cDNAs revealed (i) joining of the exons VIII and IX to an internal exon X splice 
acceptor site resulting in a new open reading frame (ORF) of 99 amino acids
derived from exon X sequences, (ii) the identification of an additional
functional splice acceptor site within exon X, and (iii) a new 81-nucleotide
insertion between exon VIII and exon X sequences in a novel transcript form.
Genomic cloning and sequence analysis of this transcribed segment of 81 basepairs
revealed that it was bordered by canonical splice consensus sites and located in 
a distance of some 400 bp from both the exons IX and X. It was therefore termed
exon IXA. Novel ORFs were generated as a consequence of these alternative splice 
mechanisms resulting in TCF-1 gene products with significantly different
C-terminal peptide sequences, which are prone to selective protein-protein
interactions or transactivating functions.

PMID: 7640309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Immunobiology. 1995 Jul;193(2-4):281-7.

Circumvention of tolerance for the nuclear T cell protein TCF-1 by immunization
of TCF-1 knock-out mice.

Castrop J(1), Verbeek S, Hofhuis F, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Molecular events that underlie the well-defined phenotypic changes of the
differentiating thymocyte are poorly understood. A candidate gene to control
thymocyte differentiation, T cell factor-1 (TCF-1)* encodes a DNA-binding
protein. Its mRNA expression pattern is complex during embryogenesis, yet
restricted to lymphocytes postnatally. Expression studies on TCF-1 protein have
been hampered by the difficulty to raise antibodies due to extreme evolutionary
conservation. TCF-1 knock-out mice, generated recently in our laboratory, have
strongly decreased numbers of thymocytes, but are otherwise normal. We have used 
these mice to generate anti-TCF-1 antibodies. By immunization with a recombinant 
fusion protein, we show that TCF-1 knock-out mice readily yield antiserum titers 
against human and mouse TCF-1 protein. Wild-type littermates remain unresponsive 
to TCF-1 while they mount a high-titer antibody response to the fusion protein,
Maltose Binding Protein (MBP). Subsequently, TCF-1-specific hybridomas could be
prepared from the spleens of immunized knock-out mice. This study illustrates the
almost complete tolerance of mice for human TCF-1 and demonstrates that this
tolerance is readily broken by gene knock-out. Furthermore, the usefulness of
knock-out mice for the generation of monoclonal antibodies against the gene
product of interest is underscored.

PMID: 8530156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Genes Dev. 1995 Mar 15;9(6):700-13.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 directs hair follicle patterning and epithelial cell
fate.

Zhou P(1), Byrne C, Jacobs J, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

T cell-specific transcription factor (TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer factor 1
(LEF-1) have been implicated exclusively in the regulation of T cell-specific
genes. The only adult tissue other than thymus known to express these factors is 
spleen and lymph node, which contain low levels of LEF-1 and no TCF-1. We noticed
that genes involved in hair-specific gene expression possess LEF-1/TCF-1
consensus motifs located in similar positions relative to their TATA box. We show
that of the two factors only LEF-1 is expressed in hair follicles; it can be
cloned in both splice forms from human skin keratinocytes and it can bind to
these sites in the hair promoters. We show that LEF-1 mRNA is present in
pluripotent ectoderm, and it is up-regulated in a highly restricted pattern just 
before the formation of underlying mesenchymal condensates and commitment of
overlying ectodermal cells to invaginate and become hair follicles. New waves of 
ectodermal LEF-1 spots appear concomitant with new waves of follicle
morphogenesis. To test whether LEF-1 patterning might be functionally important
for hair patterning and morphogenesis, we used transgenic technology to alter the
patterning and timing of LEF-1 over the surface ectoderm. Striking abnormalities 
arose in the positioning and orientation of hair follicles, leaving a marked
disruption of this normally uniform patterning. This provides the first direct
evidence that ectodermal cues are critical in establishing these developmental
processes, which at later stages are known to be influenced by underlying
mesenchyme. Remarkably, elevated LEF-1 in the lip furrow epithelium of developing
transgenic animals triggered these cells to invaginate, sometimes leading to the 
inappropriate adoption of hair follicle and tooth cell fates. Collectively, our
findings demonstrate that ectodermal expression of LEF-1 plays a central role in 
gene expression, pattern formation, and other developmental processes involving
epithelial-mesenchymal associations.

PMID: 7537238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nature. 1995 Mar 2;374(6517):70-4.

An HMG-box-containing T-cell factor required for thymocyte differentiation.

Verbeek S(1), Izon D, Hofhuis F, Robanus-Maandag E, te Riele H, van de Wetering
M, Oosterwegel M, Wilson A, MacDonald HR, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Two candidate genes for controlling thymocyte differentiation, T-cell factor-1
(Tcf-1) and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef-1), encode closely related
DNA-binding HMG-box proteins. Their expression pattern is complex and largely
overlapping during embryogenesis, yet restricted to lymphocytes postnatally. Here
we generate two independent germline mutations in Tcf-1 and find that thymocyte
development in (otherwise normal) mutant mice is blocked at the transition from
the CD8+, immature single-positive to the CD4+/CD8+ double-positive stage. In
contrast to wild-type mice, most of the immature single-positive cells in the
mutants are not in the cell cycle and the number of immunocompetent T cells in
peripheral lymphoid organs is reduced. We conclude that Tcf-1 controls an
essential step in thymocyte differentiation.

PMID: 7870176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Virol. 1994 May;68(5):3163-74.

Naturally occurring genotypes of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long
terminal repeat display a wide range of basal and Tat-induced transcriptional
activities.

Michael NL(1), D'Arcy L, Ehrenberg PK, Redfield RR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Retrovirology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Rockville, 
Maryland.

The primary body of information on the structure of human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR)/gag leader genotypes has been
determined from the analysis of cocultivated isolates. Functional studies of this
regulatory portion of the provirus have been derived from the study of in
vitro-generated mutations of laboratory-adapted molecular clones of HIV-1. We
have performed a longitudinal analysis of molecular clones from the LTR/gag
leader region amplified directly from the peripheral blood of four patients over 
three years. We have found a remarkable number of point mutations and length
polymorphisms in cis- and trans-acting regulatory elements within this cohort.
Most of the length polymorphisms were associated with duplications of Sp1 and
TCF-1 alpha sequences. These mutations were associated with a wide range of
transcriptional activities for these genotypes in a reporter gene assay.
Mutations in conserved Sp1 sequences correlated with a diminished capacity of
such genotypes to bind purified Sp1 protein. Although no generalized trend in
transcriptional activity was seen, a single patient accumulated mutations in
NF-kappa B, Sp1, and TAR elements over this period. The analysis of naturally
occurring mutations of LTR genotypes provides a means to study the molecular
genetic consequences of virus-host interactions and to assess the functional
impact of HIV therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC236807
PMID: 7908701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 1993 Aug 25;268(24):18083-7.

The sequence-specific high mobility group 1 box of TCF-1 adopts a predominantly
alpha-helical conformation in solution.

van Houte L(1), van Oers A, van de Wetering M, Dooijes D, Kaptein R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The High Mobility Group (HMG) 1 box is a protein motif that mediates DNA binding 
in a novel family of transcription-regulating proteins. Several members of this
family, including the lymphoid-specific proteins TCF-1 and LEF-1 and the
mammalian sex-determining factor SRY, carry a single HMG box with affinity for
the minor groove of the heptamer motif AACAAAG or variations thereof. To initiate
studies on the structural characteristics of the TCF-1 HMG box, we have expressed
the 87-amino acid HMG box in milligram quantities in Escherichia coli and
purified the soluble peptide to > 95% homogeneity. The peptide bound DNA with the
same specificity as the complete protein and was capable of inducing DNA bending.
Circular dichroism (CD) analysis revealed the TCF-1 HMG box to adopt an
approximately 60% alpha-helix/40% random coil conformation in solution. In the
presence of an equimolar amount of double-stranded DNA containing the cognate
motif, the CD spectrum changed significantly, implying the induction of a
structural modification upon DNA/protein association.

PMID: 8349685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Development. 1993 Jun;118(2):439-48.

Differential expression of the HMG box factors TCF-1 and LEF-1 during murine
embryogenesis.

Oosterwegel M(1), van de Wetering M, Timmerman J, Kruisbeek A, Destree O,
Meijlink F, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The recent identification of a number of T lymphocyte-specific enhancers has
allowed the cloning of several novel transcription factors. Two of these, TCF-1
and LEF-1, contain a virtually identical DNA-binding domain of the High Mobility 
Group (HMG-1) box type. TCF-1 and LEF-1 originate from a recent gene duplication 
event as evidenced by comparison with the chicken homologue, chTCF. We have now
analyzed the differential expression of these two transcription factors. In a
panel of lymphoid cell lines, TCF-1 was exclusively expressed in the T cell
lineage. In contrast, LEF-1 mRNA was detected at equivalent levels in pro- and
pre-B cells and in all T lineage cells. In situ hybridization on murine embryos
revealed that TCF-1 and LEF-1 were widely expressed at day 7.5 of gestation. At
later stages, the expression patterns were complex and only partially
overlapping. The expression of TCF-1 and LEF-1 coincided until day 10.5, when
mRNAs were detected in limb buds, neural crest, pharyngeal arches and nasal
process. At later time points (day 13.5 to 14.5), sites of overlapping expression
included lung, the urogenital system, tooth buds, thymus and choroid plexus.
Unique expression sites for TCF-1 included Reichert's membrane and
trophectoderm-derived cells, the ribs and thoracic prevertebrae, craniofacial
structures, the adrenal gland and meninges. Unique LEF-1 expression was observed 
in the tail prevertebrae, brain and inner ear. Postnatally, expression of both
genes could only be detected in lymphoid tissues. These observations suggest that
TCF-1 and LEF-1 exert differential functions during murine embryogenesis.

PMID: 8223271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. EMBO J. 1992 Aug;11(8):3039-44.

Sequence-specific interaction of the HMG box proteins TCF-1 and SRY occurs within
the minor groove of a Watson-Crick double helix.

van de Wetering M(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The high mobility group I (HMG) box is proposed to mediate DNA binding in a novel
group of transcription-regulating proteins. Two of these, the proteins encoded by
the T cell-specific TCF-1 and the mammalian sex-determining gene SRY, carry a
single HMG box with specificity for the heptamer motif A/T A/T C A A A G. We have
now analysed the mode of interaction of the HMG boxes of TCF-1 and SRY with this 
motif. Methylation interference footprinting revealed that both HMG boxes
contacted adenines on both strands in the minor groove, whereas no major groove
guanine contacts were discerned. Diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC) carbethoxylation
interference footprinting of TCF-1 indicated the absence of major groove contacts
on positions 5, 6 and 7 of the motif. Carbethoxylation interference was observed,
however, on positions 2, 3 and 4 and to a lesser extent on position 1 in the
major groove. Combined T----C and A----I substitution, which changes the surface 
of the major groove but leaves the minor groove intact, did not interfere with
sequence-specific binding by TCF-1 and SRY. These observations indicate that
recognition of the heptamer motif by the HMG boxes of the distantly related TCF-1
and SRY proteins predominantly occurs through nucleotide contacts in the minor
groove.

PMCID: PMC556786
PMID: 1639073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 25;267(12):8530-6.

The human T cell transcription factor-1 gene. Structure, localization, and
promoter characterization.

van de Wetering M(1), Oosterwegel M, Holstege F, Dooyes D, Suijkerbuijk R, Geurts
van Kessel A, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

We have recently isolated cDNA clones representing four alternative splice forms 
of a T cell-specific transcription factor, TCF-1. Here we report the
characterization of the human gene encoding this factor. The TCF-1 gene is
contained in 10 exons including an untranslated first exon. The DNA-binding high 
mobility group (HMG) box of TCF-1 is encoded by the closely spaced exons VI and
VII. Differential splicing involves an alternative exon (IX) and three splice
acceptor sites in exon X. Based on comparison of sequence and on the placement of
an alternative exon, TCF-1 appears closely related to the recently characterized 
HMG box transcription factor TCF-1 alpha/LEF. In particular, the HMG boxes
encoded by the two TCF genes are virtually identical. The TCF-1 gene resides on
chromosome 5 band q31.1. The TCF-1 promoter coincides with a CpG island. As
determined by chloramphenicol acetyltransferase analysis, the promoter is
preferentially active in T cells. The promoter does not contain TCF-1/TCF-1 alpha
binding sites and is therefore not autoregulated. This observation implies the
existence of yet uncharacterized T cell transcription factors that are active
during early T cell differentiation.

PMID: 1569101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Feb 11;20(3):611.

A gene family of HMG-box transcription factors with homology to TCF-1.

Castrop J(1), van Norren K, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

PMCID: PMC310434
PMID: 1741298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Cell Biochem. 1992 Feb;48(2):129-35.

Identification of a core motif that is recognized by three members of the HMG
class of transcriptional regulators: IRE-ABP, SRY, and TCF-1 alpha.

Alexander-Bridges M(1), Ercolani L, Kong XF, Nasrin N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Diabetes Unit, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston.

Insulin induces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GADPH) gene
transcription in part by regulating one or more proteins that bind a cis-acting
element, IRE-A. We have recently cloned a protein, IRE-ABP, that binds the IRE-A 
element. IRE-ABP is a member of the HMG class of transcriptional regulators and
is 67% identical within its HMG box domain to the candidate gene for the
testis-determining factor, SRY. IRE-ABP and SRY share binding specificity for the
IRE-A motif. This sequence is also highly conserved with a core motif,
5'-Py-ctttg(a/t)-3', contained in T-cell specific genes that have high affinity
for TCF-1 alpha, another member of the HMG class of transcriptional regulators.
Thus, diverse members of the HMG family interact with similar nucleotide
sequences to regulate expression of genes that initiate and maintain the
differentiated phenotype. We have found this core motif in the upstream region of
many genes that are positively and negatively regulated by insulin. These
observations suggest that IRE-ABP or a related family member may coordinate the
expression of these genes. The HMG family of proteins has diverse functions
ranging from the regulation of differentiation and mating type in yeast to the
regulation of tissue- and species-specific gene expression in mammals. Insulin
regulates GAPDH gene transcription in a tissue-specific manner. We propose that
members of the IRE-ABP family play an important role in controlling tissue
specificity of the insulin response.

PMID: 1618927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Nov 11;19(21):5929-36.

One base pair change abolishes the T cell-restricted activity of a kB-like
proto-enhancer element from the interleukin 2 promoter.

Briegel K(1), Hentsch B, Pfeuffer I, Serfling E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie und Immunbiologie, Universität Würzburg, FRG.

The inducible, T cell-specific enhancers of murine and human Interleukin 2 (Il-2)
genes contain the kB-like sequence GGGATTTCACC as an essential cis-acting
enhancer motif. When cloned in multiple copies this so-called TCEd (distal T cell
element) acts as an inducible proto-enhancer element in E14 T lymphoma cells, but
not in HeLa cells. In extracts of induced, Il-2 secreting El4 cells three
individual protein factors bind to TCEd DNA. The binding of the most prominent
factor, named TCF-1 (T cell factor 1), is correlated with the proto-enhancer
activity of TCEd. TCF-1 consists of two polypeptides of about 50 kD and 105 kD;
the former seems to be related to the 50 kD polypeptide of NF-kB. Purified NF-kB 
is also able to bind to the TCEd, but TCF-1 binds stronger than NF-kB to TCEd
DNA. The conversion of the TCEd to a 'perfect' NF-kB binding site leads to a
tighter binding of NF-kB to TCEd DNA and, as a functional consequence, to the
activity of the 'converted' TCEd motifs in HeLa cells. Thus, the substitution of 
the underlined A residue to a C within the GGGATTTCACC motif abolishes its T
cell-restricted activity and leads to its functioning in both El4 cells and HeLa 
cells. These results indicate that lymphocyte-specific factors binding to the
TCEd are involved in the control of T cell specific-transcription of the Il-2
gene.

PMCID: PMC329049
PMID: 1945879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. EMBO J. 1991 Jan;10(1):123-32.

Identification and cloning of TCF-1, a T lymphocyte-specific transcription factor
containing a sequence-specific HMG box.

van de Wetering M(1), Oosterwegel M, Dooijes D, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

CD3-epsilon expression is controlled by a downstream T lymphocyte-specific
enhancer element. We report the identification of a T cell-specific transcription
factor, TCF-1, binding to this element. The multimerized recognition motif of
TCF-1 constituted a T cell-specific enhancer. Subsequent cloning of TCF-1
identified three splice alternatives. TCF-1 contained a single DNA-binding HMG
box most closely related to similar boxes in the putative mammalian
sex-determining gene SRY and in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Mc mating type
gene. TCF-1 mRNA was expressed uniquely in T lymphocytes. Upon cotransfection
into non-T cells, TCF-1 could transactivate through its cognate motif. These
results identify TCF-1 as a T cell-specific transcription factor, which might
play a role in the establishment of the mature T cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC452620
PMID: 1989880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


