
1. Diabet Med. 2016 Mar 30. doi: 10.1111/dme.13123. [Epub ahead of print]

Dissecting heterogeneity in paediatric Type 1 diabetes: association of TCF7L2
rs7903146 TT and low-risk human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genotypes.

Redondo MJ(1), Grant SF(2,)(3), Davis A(4), Greenbaum C(4); T1D Exchange Biobank.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Texas
Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX. (2)Divisions of
Human Genetics and Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. (4)Diabetes Clinical Research
Program, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.

AIMS: To test the hypothesis that non-obese individuals with childhood-onset Type
1 diabetes and the rs7903146 TT genotype would be less likely to have high-risk
human leukocyte antigen genotypes and alleles.
METHODS: We studied a cohort of non-obese participants in the 105 T1D Exchange
Biobank Residual Insulin Study who had childhood-onset Type 1 diabetes [mean (sd)
age at onset and recruitment, respectively, 9.9 (4.15) and 14.4 (4.13) years;
84.8% non-Hispanic white]. We analysed islet autoantibodies (glutamic acid
decarboxylase 65, islet cell autoantigen 512/islet antigen-2 and zinc transporter
8), non-fasting random C-peptide levels, HLA type and TCF7L2 single nucleotide
polymorphism rs7903146 in this cohort.
RESULTS: None of the 13 individuals with the rs7903146 TT genotype carried the
highest Type 1 diabetes risk HLA genotype, i.e. DRB1*03:01/DR4 (DRB1*0401, *04:05
or *04:02), compared with 29.4% (27/92) of those without it (P=0.023). The
DRB1*03:01 allele was present in 15.4% (2/13) of individuals with the single
nucleotide polymorphism, compared with 59.8% (55/92) of those without it
(P=0.003). Analyses restricted to autoantibody-positive individuals (n=80)
yielded similar results. The HLA DRB1*15:01 allele, which affords dominant
protection against Type 1 diabetes, was found in one participant, who had
multiple islet autoantibodies and carried the rs7903146 TT genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings further support the hypothesis that TCF7L2 gene
variation contributes to diabetogenesis in a subset of young people with Type 1
diabetes, opening possible new pathways for therapy and prevention. This article 
is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27027642  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Clin Invest. 2016 Mar 28. pii: 80205. doi: 10.1172/JCI80205. [Epub ahead of
print]

Hedgehog inhibits ß-catenin activity in synovial joint development and
osteoarthritis.

Rockel JS, Yu C, Whetstone H, Craft AM, Reilly K, Ma H, Tsushima H, Puviindran V,
Al-Jazrawe M, Keller GM, Alman BA.

Both the WNT/ß-catenin and hedgehog signaling pathways are important in the
regulation of limb development, chondrocyte differentiation, and degeneration of 
articular cartilage in osteoarthritis (OA). It is not clear how these signaling
pathways interact in interzone cell differentiation and synovial joint
morphogenesis. Here, we determined that constitutive activation of hedgehog
signaling specifically within interzone cells induces joint morphological changes
by selectively inhibiting ß-catenin-induced Fgf18 expression. Stabilization of
ß-catenin or treatment with FGF18 rescued hedgehog-induced phenotypes. Hedgehog
signaling induced expression of a dominant negative isoform of TCF7L2 (dnTCF7L2) 
in interzone progeny, which may account for the selective regulation of ß-catenin
target genes observed. Knockdown of TCF7L2 isoforms in mouse chondrocytes rescued
hedgehog signaling-induced Fgf18 downregulation, while overexpression of the
human dnTCF7L2 orthologue (dnTCF4) in human chondrocytes promoted the expression 
of catabolic enzymes associated with OA. Similarly, expression of dnTCF4 in human
chondrocytes positively correlated with the aggrecanase ADAMTS4. Consistent with 
our developmental findings, activation of ß-catenin also attenuated
hedgehog-induced or surgically induced articular cartilage degeneration in mouse 
models of OA. Thus, our results demonstrate that hedgehog inhibits selective
ß-catenin target gene expression to direct interzone progeny fates and articular 
cartilage development and disease. Moreover, agents that increase ß-catenin
activity have the potential to therapeutically attenuate articular cartilage
degeneration as part of OA.

PMID: 27018594  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2016 Mar;124(3):157-62. doi:
10.1055/s-0035-1564161. Epub 2016 Mar 23.

Combined Influence of Genetic Variants and Gene-gene Interaction on Sulfonylurea 
Efficacy in Type 2 Diabetic Patients.

Ren Q(1), Han X(1), Zhang S(1), Cai X(1), Ji L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Peking University Diabetes Center, Beijing, China.

Several genes have been shown to influence the response to sulfonylureas in
previous studies. However, their interactions and combined genetic influence on
sulfonylurea efficacy remain mostly unexplored. So the aim of this study was to
examine the interactions of these published susceptibility alleles and access the
potential utility of combining information for drug response prediction.METHODS: 
We genotyped 5 variants of these genes in a total of 747 diabetic patients
enrolled in a trial of glibenclamide (CYP2C9, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, KCNQ1 and CDKN2A/2B
gene). All the patients were followed for 48 weeks. Treatment failure was fasting
blood glucose level=7.0<U+2009>mmol/L. A Cox regression model was used to evaluate the
relationship between genetic variants and treatment failure over a period of 48
weeks. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the area under the
curve (AUC) and the multifactor dimensionality reduction method (MDR) analyses
were used to assess the gene-gene interaction and also the predictive power of
the combined variants.
RESULTS: The relationship beween risk alleles and FBG reduction at the end of the
first month was not significant (Low Risk Group 10.8% (1.2-20.7%), Middle Risk
Group 10.7% (1.3-21.1%), High Risk Group 8.51% (-<U+2009>0.1-18.4%), P=0.212). After
adjusting for sex, age, BMI, total dose of glibenclamide and baseline HbA1c, Cox 
regression showed a borderline significant association between the number of risk
alleles and glibenclamide treatment failure (HR=1.125, 95%CI 1.016-1.246,
P=0.023). There was potential gene-gene interaction between KCNJ11 and CDKN2A/2B 
gene using MDR method. The area under the ROC curve was 0.547, and the testing
balanced accuracy of the best genetic model in MDR analysis was 0.5643.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that the combined genetic variants were
borderline significantly associated with the efficacy of glibenclamide, and there
are gene-gene interaction between KCNJ11 and CDKN2A/2B. More evidence was needed 
for increasing the predictive value of genetic variants on glibenclamide
efficacy.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 27008632  [PubMed - in process]


4. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Mar;95(11):e3087. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003087.

Association of the Transcription Factor 7 Like 2 (TCF7L2) Polymorphism With
Diabetic Nephropathy Risk: A Meta-Analysis.

Fan Z(1), Cai Q, Chen Y, Meng X, Cao F, Zheng S, Guo J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Endocrinology, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical
University (ZF, YC, XM, FC, SZ, JG); and Department of Urology, Second Hospital
of Tianjin Medical university (QC), Tianjin, Republic of China.

It is assumed that genetic factors may participate in the development of diabetic
nephropathy (DN). The association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and DN risk is
still unclear. To evaluate the relationship, we performed this
meta-analysis.Eligible relevant studies were searched and selected from PubMed,
Embase, and ISI Web of Science. Summary effect estimates were derived using a
random effects model, with attention to study quality and publication bias.
Ethnical approval was not necessary, because this meta-analysis was based on
published articles, and did not involve patient consent.A total of 7 studies were
identified. Analysis of all studies indicated significant association between
TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and DN risk (odds ratio [OR]<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.31, 95% confidence
interval (CI)<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10-1.56, Pheterogeneity<U+200A><<U+200A>0.00001, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002). Subgroup
analysis showed similar results in Asian (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.33, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10-1.62,
Pheterogeneity<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004), in Caucasian (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.27, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.78-2.90,
Pheterogeneity<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.17, P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.00001), in rs7903146 mutation (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.61, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.25-2.07, Pheterogeneity<U+200A><<U+200A>0.00001, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0002), However, no association
was observed in Negroid (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.90-1.35, Pheterogeneity<U+200A><<U+200A>00001,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.36).Our results suggest that TCF7L2 gene polymorphism may contribute to the
risk of DN. However, more studies should be launched in the future.

PMID: 26986145  [PubMed - in process]


5. Afr Health Sci. 2015 Dec;15(4):1149-60. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v15i4.14.

Contribution of ENPP1, TCF7L2, and FTO polymorphisms to type 2 diabetes in mixed 
ancestry ethnic population of South Africa.

Yako YY(1), Madubedube JH(2), Kengne AP(3), Erasmus RT(4), Pillay TS(5), Matsha
TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Witwatersrand, South Africa. (2)Department of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of
Health and Wellness Sciences, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Cape Town,
South Africa. (3)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical
Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa; Department of Medicine, University of 
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. (4)Division of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS) and
University of Stellenbosch, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Institute for Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, Molecular Endocrinology, University of Pretoria.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), fat mass and
obesity-associated gene (FTO), and ectonucleotide
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase gene (ENPP1) are known risk loci for type 2
diabetes (T2DM) mostly in European populations.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the association of these genes with T2DM risk in a South
African mixed-ancestry population.
METHODS: Five hundred and sixty six participants were genotyped for
ENPP1-rs997509 and -rs1044498, FTO-9941349 and -rs3751812, TCF7L2-rs12255372 and 
-rs7903146 polymorphisms using Taqman genotyping assays and validated by
automated sequencing to assess the association of the polymorphisms with
cardiometabolic traits.
RESULTS: In logistic regression models adjusted for age, sex, body mass index
(BMI) and insulin resistance, minor allele of rs997509 was associated with a
higher risk of prevalent T2DM under a recessive model [odd ratio 4.60 (95%
confidence interval: 1.07 to 19.86); p = 0.040].Under additive model, the
rs7903146 [1.43 (1.00 to 2.04); p= 0.053] and rs9941349 [1.43 (1.00 to 2.04); p =
0.052] minor alleles showed marginally significant associations with a high risk 
of T2DM. However, only the rs7903146 alleles (p=0.011) and genotypes (p=0.025)
distributions were statistically significantly different between diabetic and
non-diabetic individuals.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that ENPP1, TCF7L2, and FTO may predispose
to T2DM in the mixed-ancestry population.

PMCID: PMC4765404
PMID: 26958016  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 9;7:10883. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10883.

Dual regulatory switch through interactions of Tcf7l2/Tcf4 with stage-specific
partners propels oligodendroglial maturation.

Zhao C(1,)(2), Deng Y(1,)(2), Liu L(1,)(3), Yu K(1), Zhang L(2), Wang H(2), He
X(2), Wang J(2,)(4), Lu C(1), Wu LN(2), Weng Q(4), Mao M(3), Li J(5), van Es
JH(6), Xin M(2), Parry L(7), Goldman SA(8), Clevers H(6), Lu QR(2,)(3,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Division of Experimental Hematology and
Cancer Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. (3)Key
Laboratory of Obstetrics, and Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth
Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (5)Department of Veterinary
Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.
(6)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht 3584CT, The Netherlands.
(7)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff
CF244HQ, UK. (8)Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue Rochester, New York 14642, USA. (9)Key
Laboratory of Birth Defects, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China.

Constitutive activation of Wnt/ß-catenin inhibits oligodendrocyte myelination.
Tcf7l2/Tcf4, a ß-catenin transcriptional partner, is required for oligodendrocyte
differentiation. How Tcf7l2 modifies ß-catenin signalling and controls
myelination remains elusive. Here we define a stage-specific Tcf7l2-regulated
transcriptional circuitry in initiating and sustaining oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Multistage genome occupancy analyses reveal that Tcf7l2 serially
cooperates with distinct co-regulators to control oligodendrocyte lineage
progression. At the differentiation onset, Tcf7l2 interacts with a
transcriptional co-repressor Kaiso/Zbtb33 to block ß-catenin signalling. During
oligodendrocyte maturation, Tcf7l2 recruits and cooperates with Sox10 to promote 
myelination. In that context, Tcf7l2 directly activates cholesterol biosynthesis 
genes and cholesterol supplementation partially rescues oligodendrocyte
differentiation defects in Tcf712 mutants. Together, we identify stage-specific
co-regulators Kaiso and Sox10 that sequentially interact with Tcf7l2 to
coordinate the switch at the transitions of differentiation initiation and
maturation during oligodendrocyte development, and point to a previously
unrecognized role of Tcf7l2 in control of cholesterol biosynthesis for CNS
myelinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4786870
PMID: 26955760  [PubMed - in process]


7. Bipolar Disord. 2016 Mar;18(2):124-35. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12368. Epub 2016 Mar 2.

Accumulating evidence for a role of TCF7L2 variants in bipolar disorder with
elevated body mass index.

Cuellar-Barboza AB(1,)(2), Winham SJ(3), McElroy SL(4), Geske JR(3), Jenkins
GD(3), Colby CL(3), Prieto ML(1,)(5,)(6), Ryu E(3), Cunningham JM(7), Frye MA(1),
Biernacka JM(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo
Leon, Monterrey, Mexico. (3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN. (4)Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, OH, USA. (5)Departamento de
Psiquiatría, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes. (6)Clínica
Universidad de los Andes, Unidad de Salud Mental, Santiago, Chile. (7)Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Bipolar disorder (BD) is a complex disease associated with various
hereditary traits, including a higher body mass index (BMI). In a prior
genome-wide association study, we found that BMI modified the association of
rs12772424 - a common variant in the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 
(TCF7L2) - with risk for BD. TCF7L2 is a transcription factor in the canonical
Wnt pathway, involved in multiple disorders, including diabetes, cancer and
psychiatric conditions. Here, using an independent sample, we evaluated 26 TCF7L2
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to explore further the association of BD
with the TCF7L2-BMI interaction.
METHODS: Using a sample of 662 BD cases and 616 controls, we conducted SNP-level 
and gene-level tests to assess the evidence for an association between BD and the
interaction of BMI and genetic variation in TCF7L2. We also explored the
potential mechanism behind the detected associations using human brain expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis.
RESULTS: The analysis provided independent evidence of an rs12772424-BMI
interaction (p = 0.011). Furthermore, while overall there was no evidence for SNP
marginal effects on BD, the TCF7L2-BMI interaction was significant at the gene
level (p = 0.042), with seven of the 26 SNPs showing SNP-BMI interaction effects 
with p < 0.05. The strongest evidence of interaction was observed for rs7895307
(p = 0.006). TCF7L2 expression showed a significant enrichment of association
with the expression of other genes in the Wnt canonical pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study provides further evidence suggesting that TCF7L2
involvement in BD risk may be regulated by BMI. Detailed, prospective assessment 
of BMI, comorbidity, and other possible contributing factors is necessary to
explain fully the mechanisms underlying this association.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26934194  [PubMed - in process]


8. Chin J Integr Med. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Association between genetic variants and characteristic symptoms of type 2
diabetes: A matched case-control study.

Dou HY(1), Wang YY(1), Yang N(1), Heng ML(2), Zhou X(2), Bu HE(2), Xu F(2), Zhao 
TN(2), Huang H(3), Wang HW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Tianjin, 300193, China. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 300193, China. (3)Department
of Biochemical Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Key
Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, 
Tianjin, 300072, China. (4)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 300193, China.
wanghongwu55@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of genetic variants with characteristic
symptoms of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
METHODS: A matched case-control study was performed to investigate the
association between common variants in four genes (CDKAL1, GLIS3, GRK5, and
TCF7L2) and symptoms of T2DM. Symptoms were examined with questionnaire for 710
subjects. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cell by
salting-out procedure. Genotyping was carried out by direct sequencing of the
unpurified polymerase chain reaction products.
RESULT: Most of the T2DM patients pressented characteristic symptoms, such as
feeling weak in limbs (P=0.0057), hand tremor (P=0.0208), bradymasesis
(P=0.0234), and polyuria (P=0.0051). Some of the T2DM patients shared
characteristic symptoms, such as desire for cold drinks ( =0.0304), polyphagia
(P=0.0051), and furred tongue (P=0.028). The impaired glucose regulation (IGR)
cases took only one characteristic symptom of frequent micturition (P=0.0422).
GLIS3 rs7034200 and GRK5 rs10886471 were significantly associated with increased 
T2DM risk (GLIS3 rs7034200 under dominant model: P=0.0307; GRK5 rs10886471 under 
recessive model: P=0.0092). However, only the rs10886471 polymorphism in GRK5
showed a significant effect on both differentiated symptoms and T2DM risk. The
C-allele was involved in both dampness-heat encumbering the Pi (Spleen) syndrome 
(P=0.047) and qi-yin deficiency syndrome (P=0.002) via increased GRK5 expression.
CONCLUSION: Both T2DM and IGR exhibited its corresponding characteristic
symptoms. The variants of GRK5 were involved with both qi-yin deficiency syndrome
and dampness-heat encumbering Pi syndrome.

PMID: 26919830  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 25;11(2):e0149992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149992.
eCollection 2016.

Association between the rs7903146 Polymorphism in the TCF7L2 Gene and Parameters 
Derived with Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Individuals without Diabetes.

van der Kroef S(1), Noordam R(1), Deelen J(2), Akintola AA(1), Jansen SW(1),
Postmus I(1), Wijsman CA(1), Beekman M(2), Mooijaart SP(1), Slagboom PE(2), van
Heemst D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands. (2)Section of Molecular Epidemiology, Department of
Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The rs7903146-T allele in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) 
gene has been associated with impaired pancreatic insulin secretion, enhanced
liver glucose production, and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Nevertheless,
the impact of rs7903146 on daily glucose trajectories remains unclear. Continuous
glucose monitoring (CGM) can estimate glycemia and glycemic variability based on 
consecutive glucose measurements collected over several days. The purpose of the 
present study was to investigate the associations of rs7903146 with glycemia and 
glycemic variability in middle-aged participants without diabetes.
METHODS: Complete data from 235 participants without diabetes from the Leiden
Longevity Study were available. Participants were divided into two groups based
on rs7903146 genotype; rs7903146-CC genotype carriers (N = 123) and
rs7903146-CT/TT genotype carriers (N = 112). Validated parameters of glycemia
(e.g., mean 24h glucose level) and glycemic variability (e.g., 24h standard
deviation) were derived from data collected with a CGM system for a 72-hour
period.
RESULTS: The study population was on average 64.7 years old (standard deviation =
5.9) and composed of 49.8% of women. Compared with rs7903146-CC carriers,
rs7903146-CT/TT carriers exhibited a trend towards a higher mean 24-hour glucose 
level (5.21 versus 5.32 mmol/L; p-value = 0.15) and a significantly higher mean
nocturnal glucose (3:00am- 6:00am; 4.48 versus 4.67 mmol/L; p-value = 0.03) that 
was explained for 34.6% by body weight and percentage body fat. No differences in
measures of glycemic variability between the genotype groups were observed.
CONCLUSION: Despite limited sample size, our study indicates that the rs7903146-T
allele in TCF7L2 was associated with a higher mean nocturnal glucose dependent on
body composition, which might suggest that rs7902146 affects liver-specific
aspects of glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4767367
PMID: 26914832  [PubMed - in process]


10. Microrna. 2016 Feb 9;4(3):209. doi: 10.2174/2211536604666151020213432.

Retraction Notice: Generation of Knock down Tools for Transcription Factor
7-like-2 (TCF7L2) and Evaluation of its Expression Pattern in Developing Chicken 
Optic Tectum.

Ahmad N, Bano S.

Retraction of
    Ahmad N, Bano S. Microrna. 2015;4(3):209-16.

The publishers have decided to retract the manuscript entitled "Generation of
Knock Down Tools for Transcription Factor 7-Like-2 (TCF7L2) and Evaluation of its
Expression Pattern in Developing Chicken Optic Tectum" published in MicroRNA,
volume 4, issue 3, page numbers 209-216, 2015, for the following reasons.  Due
to conflict of interests between authors and the Principal Investigator.

PMID: 26861895  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 1. pii: S0303-7207(16)30027-2. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.027. [Epub ahead of print]

HMGB1 binds to the rs7903146 locus in TCF7L2 in human pancreatic islets.

Zhou Y(1), Oskolkov N(1), Shcherbina L(1), Ratti J(2), Kock KH(2), Su J(3),
Martin B(4), Oskolkova MZ(5), Göransson O(1), Bacon J(1), Li W(5), Bucciarelli
S(5), Cilio C(1), Brazma A(3), Thatcher B(1), Rung J(3), Wierup N(1), Renström
E(1), Groop L(1), Hansson O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö, 20502, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, CB2 1GA, Cambridge, UK.
(3)European Bioinformatics Institute, Functional Genomics, Hinxton, Cambridge
CB10 1SD, UK. (4)National Institute of Mental Health NIMH, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 USA. (5)Department of physical chemistry, Lund
University, Lund, 22100, Sweden. (6)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund
University, Malmö, 20502, Sweden. Electronic address: Ola.Hansson@med.lu.se.

The intronic SNP rs7903146 in the T-cell factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) is the
common genetic variant most highly associated with Type 2 diabetes known to date.
The risk T-allele is located in an open chromatin region specific to human
pancreatic islets of Langerhans, thereby accessible for binding of regulatory
proteins. The risk T-allele locus exhibits stronger enhancer activity compared to
the non-risk C-allele. The aim of this study was to identify transcriptional
regulators that bind the open chromatin region in the rs7903146 locus and thereby
potentially regulate TCF7L2 expression and activity. Using affinity
chromatography followed by Edman sequencing, we identified one candidate
regulatory protein, i.e. high-mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1). The binding of
HMGB1 to the rs7903146 locus was confirmed in pancreatic islets from human
deceased donors, in HCT116 and in HEK293 cell lines using: (i) protein
purification on affinity columns followed by Western blot, (ii) chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by qPCR and (iii) electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. The results also suggested that HMGB1 might have higher binding affinity
to the C-allele of rs7903146 compared to the T-allele, which was supported in
vitro using Dynamic Light Scattering, possibly in a tissue-specific manner. The
functional consequence of HMGB1 depletion in HCT116 and INS1 cells was reduced
insulin and TCF7L2 mRNA expression, TCF7L2 transcriptional activity and glucose
stimulated insulin secretion. These findings suggest that the rs7903146 locus
might exert its enhancer function by interacting with HMGB1 in an allele
dependent manner.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26845344  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2016 Jan 18. pii: S0168-8227(16)00012-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2016.01.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic risk of type 2 diabetes in populations of the African continent: A
systematic review and meta-analyses.

Yako YY(1), Guewo-Fokeng M(2), Balti EV(3), Bouatia-Naji N(4), Matsha TE(5),
Sobngwi E(6), Erasmus RT(7), Echouffo-Tcheugui JB(8), Kengne AP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical Research
Council, Cape Town, South Africa; Faculty of Health and Wellness Sciences, Cape
Peninsula University of Technology, Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(3)Diabetes Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Brussels Free
University, Brussels, Belgium. (4)INSERM UMR970 Paris Cardiovascular Research
Center, 56 rue Leblanc F-75015 Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, PRES
Paris Sorbonne, 12 rue de l'école de medecine F75006 Paris, France. (5)Faculty of
Health and Wellness Sciences, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Cape Town,
South Africa. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon. (7)Division of
Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, National Health
Laboratory Service (NHLS), University of Stellenbosch, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA; Department of Medicine, MedStar Health System,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (9)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African
Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa; Department of Medicine, Groote
Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; The George
Institute for Global Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Electronic address: andre.kengne@mrc.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is growing faster in Africa than anywhere else,
driven by the dual effects of genetic and environmental factors. We conducted a
systematic review and meta-analyses of published studies on genetic markers of
T2D in populations within Africa.
METHODS: Multiple databases were searched for studies of genetic variants
associated with T2D in populations living in Africa. Studies reporting on the
association of a genetic marker with T2D or indicators of glycaemia were
included. Data were extracted on study design and characteristics, genetic
determinants, effect estimates of associations with T2D.
FINDINGS: Overall, 100 polymorphisms in 57 genes have been investigated in
relation with T2D in populations within Africa, in 60 studies. Almost all studies
used the candidate gene approach, with >88% published during 2006-2014 and 70%
(42/60) originating from Tunisia and Egypt. Polymorphisms in ACE, AGRP, eNOS,
GSTP1, HSP70-2, MC4R, MTHFR, PHLPP, POL1, TCF7L2, and TNF-a gene were found to be
associated with T2D, with overlapping effect on various cardiometabolic traits.
The polymorphisms investigated in multiple studies mostly had consistent effects 
across studies, with only modest or no statistical heterogeneity. Effect sizes
were modestly significant [e.g., odd ratio 1.49 (95%CI 1.33-1.66) for TCF7L2
(rs7903146)]. Underpowered genome-wide studies revealed no diabetes risk loci
specific to African populations.
INTERPRETATION: Current evidence on the genetic markers of T2D in African
populations mostly originate from North African countries, is overall scanty and 
largely insufficient to reliably inform the genetic architecture of T2D across
Africa.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26830076  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Diabetes. 2016 Jan 28. pii: db151593. [Epub ahead of print]

Diabetes-associated variation in TCF7L2 is not associated with hepatic or
extrahepatic insulin resistance.

Varghese RT(1), Viegas I(2), Barosa C(2), Marques C(2), Shah M(1), Rizza RA(1),
Jones JG(2), Vella A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN. (2)Center for Neurosciences and Cell Biology, Department
of Zoology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (3)Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN vella.adrian@mayo.edu.

Common genetic variation in TCF7L2 is associated with type 2 diabetes. However
the mechanism by which this occurs remains elusive. In addition to affecting
insulin secretion, genetic variation at the TCF7L2 locus may alter insulin action
or directly modify hepatic glucose metabolism. We sought to determine whether the
diabetes-associated variant in this locus (T allele of rs7903146) increases
fasting endogenous glucose production (EGP), impairs insulin-induced suppression 
of EGP and insulin-stimulated glucose disappearance. To address this, we studied 
individuals who were either homozygous for the diabetes-associated allele (TT) at
rs7903146 or homozygous for the protective allele (CC). Subjects were matched for
other anthropometric characteristics and were studied using a euglycemic clamp.
EGP and glucose uptake was measured using the tracer dilution technique and the
relative contribution of gluconeogenesis to EGP quantitated using deuterated
water corrected for transaldolase exchange. We report that the
diabetes-associated variation in TCF7L2 did not associate with fasting EGP,
insulin-induced suppression of EGP and insulin-induced stimulation of glucose
uptake. There was no association with the contribution of gluconeogenesis and
glycogenolysis to EGP. These data indicate that genetic variation at TCF7L2 does 
not predispose to type 2 diabetes by altering either hepatic or extra-hepatic
insulin action.

© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4806663 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26822092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Evol Bioinform Online. 2015 Dec 1;11(Suppl 1):67-76. doi: 10.4137/EBO.S21545.
eCollection 2015.

Discovering All Transcriptome Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms and Scanning for
Selection Signatures in Ducks (Anas platyrhynchos).

Lin R(1), Du X(2), Peng S(1), Yang L(1), Ma Y(1), Gong Y(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of
Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (2)Key Lab of Animal Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.;
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's
Republic of China.

The duck is one of the most economically important waterfowl as a source of meat,
eggs, and feathers. Characterizing the genetic variation in duck species is an
important step toward linking genes or genomic regions with phenotypes.
Human-driven selection during duck domestication and subsequent breed formation
has likely left detectable signatures in duck genome. In this study, we employed 
a panel of >1.4 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified from
the RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data of 15 duck individuals. The density of the
resulting SNPs is significantly positively correlated with the density of genes
across the duck genome, which demonstrates that the usage of the RNA-seq data
allowed us to enrich variant functional categories, such as coding exons,
untranslated regions (UTRs), introns, and downstream/upstream. We performed a
complete scan of selection signatures in the ducks using the composite likelihood
ratio (CLR) and found 76 candidate regions of selection, many of which harbor
genes related to phenotypes relevant to the function of the digestive system and 
fat metabolism, including TCF7L2, EIF2AK3, ELOVL2, and fatty acid-binding protein
family. This study illustrates the potential of population genetic approaches for
identifying genomic regions affecting domestication-related phenotypes and
further helps to increase the known genetic information about this economically
important animal.

PMCID: PMC4721680
PMID: 26819540  [PubMed]


15. Pharmacogenomics J. 2016 Jan 26. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2015.95. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic markers predicting sulphonylurea treatment outcomes in type 2 diabetes
patients: current evidence and challenges for clinical implementation.

Loganadan NK(1), Huri HZ(1,)(2), Vethakkan SR(3), Hussein Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (2)Clinical Investigation Centre, University of Malaya Medical 
Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Department 
of Medicine, Putrajaya Hospital, Putrajaya, Malaysia.

The clinical response to sulphonylurea, an oral antidiabetic agent often used in 
combination with metformin to control blood glucose in type 2 diabetes (T2DM)
patients, has been widely associated with a number of gene polymorphisms,
particularly those involved in insulin release. We have reviewed the genetic
markers of CYP2C9, ABCC8, KCNJ11, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2), IRS-1
(insulin receptor substrate-1), CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, KCNQ1 and NOS1AP (nitric oxide
synthase 1 adaptor protein) genes that predict treatment outcomes of
sulphonylurea therapy. A convincing pattern for poor sulphonylurea response was
observed in Caucasian T2DM patients with rs7903146 and rs1801278 polymorphisms of
the TCF7L2 and IRS-1 genes, respectively. However, limitations in evaluating the 
available studies including dissimilarities in study design, definitions of
clinical end points, sample sizes and types and doses of sulphonylureas used as
well as ethnic variability make the clinical applications challenging. Future
studies need to address these limitations to develop personalized sulphonylurea
medicine for T2DM management.The Pharmacogenomics Journal advance online
publication, 26 January 2016; doi:10.1038/tpj.2015.95.

PMID: 26810132  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Curr Diab Rep. 2016 Feb;16(2):15. doi: 10.1007/s11892-015-0709-z.

Genetics of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus and Maternal Metabolism.

Lowe WL Jr(1), Scholtens DM(2), Sandler V(3,)(4), Hayes MG(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine and Department
of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Rubloff
Building 420 E. Superior St., 12th Floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
wlowe@northwestern.edu. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Suite 1400 680 N Lake Shore Drive,
Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. dscholtens@northwestern.edu. (3)Division of
Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Rubloff Building 420 E.
Superior St., 12th Floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
victoria.sandler@northwestern.edu. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and
Molecular Medicine, Suite 530, 645 N Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
victoria.sandler@northwestern.edu. (5)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and 
Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Rubloff Building 420 E. Superior St., 12th Floor, Chicago,
IL, 60611, USA. ghayes@northwestern.edu. (6)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism
and Molecular Medicine, Tarry Building, Room 15-759, 300 E Chicago Ave, Chicago, 
IL, 60611, USA. ghayes@northwestern.edu.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as abnormal glucose tolerance with
onset or first recognition during pregnancy. Women with a history of GDM are at
long-term risk for developing type 2 diabetes (T2DM), raising the question to
what extent GDM and T2DM share a common genetic architecture. Meta-analysis of
candidate gene studies and genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) have
identified a number of genes which are reproducibly associated with GDM,
including TCF7L2, GCK, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, MTNR1B, and IRS1. These
genes are also associated with T2DM. Candidate gene and GWAS have also identified
genes associated with maternal metabolic traits, most of which are also
associated with metabolic traits in the general population. Two genes, BACE2 and 
HKDC1, are uniquely associated with maternal metabolic traits. These studies
suggest that there are similarities and differences between the genetic
architecture of GDM and T2DM and metabolic quantitative traits in pregnant and
non-pregnant populations.

PMID: 26803651  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 20;11(1):e0147323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147323.
eCollection 2016.

A HuGE Review and Meta-Analyses of Genetic Associations in New Onset Diabetes
after Kidney Transplantation.

Benson KA(1), Maxwell AP(1,)(2), McKnight AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(2)Regional Nephrology Unit, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: New onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a serious
complication following solid organ transplantation. There is a genetic
contribution to NODAT and we have conducted comprehensive meta-analysis of
available genetic data in kidney transplant populations.
METHODS: Relevant articles investigating the association between genetic markers 
and NODAT were identified by searching PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar.
SNPs described in a minimum of three studies were included for analysis using a
random effects model. The association between identified variants and NODAT was
calculated at the per-study level to generate overall significance values and
effect sizes.
RESULTS: Searching the literature returned 4,147 citations. Within the 36
eligible articles identified, 18 genetic variants from 12 genes were considered
for analysis. Of these, three were significantly associated with NODAT by
meta-analysis at the 5% level of significance; CDKAL1 rs10946398 p = 0.006 OR =
1.43, 95% CI = 1.11-1.85 (n = 696 individuals), KCNQ1 rs2237892 p = 0.007 OR =
1.43, 95% CI = 1.10-1.86 (n = 1,270 individuals), and TCF7L2 rs7903146 p = 0.01
OR = 1.41, 95% CI = 1.07-1.85 (n = 2,967 individuals).
CONCLUSION: Evaluating cumulative evidence for SNPs associated with NODAT in
kidney transplant recipients has revealed three SNPs associated with NODAT. An
adequately powered, dense genome-wide association study will provide more
information using a carefully defined NODAT phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4720424
PMID: 26789123  [PubMed - in process]


18. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 14;6:19223. doi: 10.1038/srep19223.

Wnt9a deficiency discloses a repressive role of Tcf7l2 on endocrine
differentiation in the embryonic pancreas.

Pujadas G(1,)(2,)(3), Cervantes S(1,)(2), Tutusaus A(1), Ejarque M(1,)(2,)(3),
Sanchez L(1), García A(1,)(2), Esteban Y(1,)(2), Fargas L(4), Alsina B(4),
Hartmann C(5), Gomis R(1,)(2,)(3), Gasa R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory, Institut d'Investigations
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, Barcelona,
Spain. (3)University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Facultat de la Salut i de la Vida, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Dept. of Bone and Skeletal Research, Institute
of Experimental Musculoskeletal Medicine (IEMM), University Hospital Muenster,
Muenster, Germany.

Transcriptional and signaling networks establish complex cross-regulatory
interactions that drive cellular differentiation during development. Using
microarrays we identified the gene encoding the ligand Wnt9a as a candidate
target of Neurogenin3, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that
functions as a master regulator of pancreatic endocrine differentiation. Here we 
show that Wnt9a is expressed in the embryonic pancreas and that its deficiency
enhances activation of the endocrine transcriptional program and increases the
number of endocrine cells at birth. We identify the gene encoding the endocrine
transcription factor Nkx2-2 as one of the most upregulated genes in Wnt9a-ablated
pancreases and associate its activation to reduced expression of the Wnt effector
Tcf7l2. Accordingly, in vitro studies confirm that Tcf7l2 represses activation of
Nkx2-2 by Neurogenin3 and inhibits Nkx2-2 expression in differentiated ß-cells.
Further, we report that Tcf7l2 protein levels decline upon initiation of
endocrine differentiation in vivo, disclosing the downregulation of this factor
in the developing endocrine compartment. These findings highlight the notion that
modulation of signalling cues by lineage-promoting factors is pivotal for
controlling differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC4725895
PMID: 26771085  [PubMed - in process]


19. Stroke. 2016 Feb;47(2):307-16. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.011328. Epub 2016 Jan
5.

Genome-Wide Association Analysis of Young-Onset Stroke Identifies a Locus on
Chromosome 10q25 Near HABP2.

Cheng YC(1), Stanne TM(1), Giese AK(1), Ho WK(1), Traylor M(1), Amouyel P(1),
Holliday EG(1), Malik R(1), Xu H(1), Kittner SJ(1), Cole JW(1), O'Connell JR(1), 
Danesh J(1), Rasheed A(1), Zhao W(1), Engelter S(1), Grond-Ginsbach C(1),
Kamatani Y(1), Lathrop M(1), Leys D(1), Thijs V(1), Metso TM(1), Tatlisumak T(1),
Pezzini A(1), Parati EA(1), Norrving B(1), Bevan S(1), Rothwell PM(1), Sudlow
C(1), Slowik A(1), Lindgren A(1), Walters MR(1); WTCCC-2 Consortium, Jannes J(1),
Shen J(1), Crosslin D(1), Doheny K(1), Laurie CC(1), Kanse SM(1), Bis JC(1),
Fornage M(1), Mosley TH(1), Hopewell JC(1), Strauch K(1), Müller-Nurasyid M(1),
Gieger C(1), Waldenberger M(1), Peters A(1), Meisinger C(1), Ikram MA(1),
Longstreth WT Jr(1), Meschia JF(1), Seshadri S(1), Sharma P(1), Worrall B(1),
Jern C(1), Levi C(1), Dichgans M(1), Boncoraglio GB(1), Markus HS(1), Debette
S(1), Rolfs A(1), Saleheen D(1), Mitchell BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Veterans Affairs Maryland Health Care System, Baltimore, MD (Y.-C.C.,
S.J.K., J.W.C., B.D.M.); University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore
(Y.-C.C., H.X., S.J.K., J.W.C., J.R.O., B.D.M.); The University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden (T.M.S., C.J.); University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
(A.-K.G., A. Rolfs); University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, Selangor Darul
Ehsa, Malaysia (W.K.H.); University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK (M.T., J.D.,
S.B., H.S.M., S.D., D.S.); Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France
(P.A.); University of Newcastle, Australia (E.G.H.);
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany (R.M., K.S., M.D.); Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK (J.D.); Center for Non-Communicable
Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan (A. Rasheed, D.S.); University of Pennsylvania (W.Z.,
D.S.); Basel University Hospital, Switzerland (S.E.); Heidelberg University
Hospital, Germany (C.G.-G.); Centre d'Étude du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris,
France (Y.K.); RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan
(Y.K.); National Genotyping Center, Evry, France (M.L.); Genome Quebec, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada (M.L.); Lille University Hospital, France (D.L.,
S.D.); KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (V.T.); Vesalius
Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium (V.T.); University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium (V.T.); Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
(T.M.M., T.T.); Università degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy (A. Pezzini);
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy (E.A.P., G.B.B.);
University of Lund, Sweden (B.N.); University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital 
(P.M.R.); University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK (C.S.); Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, Krakow, Poland (A.S.); Lund University, Lund, Sweden (A.L.);
Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden (A.L.); University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
UK (M.R.W.); University of Adelaide, Australia (J.J.); Mount Sinai Hos

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Although a genetic contribution to ischemic stroke is
well recognized, only a handful of stroke loci have been identified by
large-scale genetic association studies to date. Hypothesizing that genetic
effects might be stronger for early- versus late-onset stroke, we conducted a
2-stage meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies, focusing on stroke
cases with an age of onset <60 years.
METHODS: The discovery stage of our genome-wide association studies included 4505
cases and 21 968 controls of European, South-Asian, and African ancestry, drawn
from 6 studies. In Stage 2, we selected the lead genetic variants at loci with
association P<5×10(-6) and performed in silico association analyses in an
independent sample of =1003 cases and 7745 controls.
RESULTS: One stroke susceptibility locus at 10q25 reached genome-wide
significance in the combined analysis of all samples from the discovery and
follow-up stages (rs11196288; odds ratio =1.41; P=9.5×10(-9)). The associated
locus is in an intergenic region between TCF7L2 and HABP2. In a further analysis 
in an independent sample, we found that 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms in high
linkage disequilibrium with rs11196288 were significantly associated with total
plasma factor VII-activating protease levels, a product of HABP2.
CONCLUSIONS: HABP2, which encodes an extracellular serine protease involved in
coagulation, fibrinolysis, and inflammatory pathways, may be a genetic
susceptibility locus for early-onset stroke.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4729659 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26732560  [PubMed - in process]


20. Microrna. 2015;4(3):209-16.

Generation of Knock down Tools for Transcription Factor 7-like-2 (TCF7L2) and
Evaluation of its Expression Pattern in Developing Chicken Optic Tectum.

Ahmad N, Bano S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur 208016, U.P., India. nashrah@iitk.ac.in.

Retraction in
    Microrna. 2016;4(3):209.

Backgroud: TCF7L2 encodes for a transcription factor that plays a significant
role in the Wnt signaling pathway and has been implicated in schizophrenia and
blood glucose homeostasis. During embryonic development, TCF7L2 is expressed
widely in the midbrain and forebrain regions of mouse brain. However, expression 
data of TCF7L2 and its functional studies are much scarcer for chicken brain. Our
study demonstrated interesting expression pattern of TCF7L2 in the optic tectum
of developing chicken embryo. Further study was undertaken to develop and test
the knock down tools for TCF7L2 in the developing chicken embryo which would help
in its functional characterization.METHODS: An RNAi based strategy was chosen to 
knock down TCF7L2A. miRNA based construct was designed and developed to target
TCF7L2. However these miRNA construct may or may not be effective in knocking
down their target gene, therefore the efficiency of the miRNA construct in
knocking down TCF7L2 was tested. First the efficiency was measured in vitro using
a sensor assay. The efficient pre-miRNA was cloned in an avian retrovirus to
achieve in vivo knock down in the developing chicken embryo. RCAS-miRNA construct
targeting TCF7L2, was electroporated in the tectum of embryonic day 3.5 chicken
embryo. The extent of in vivo knock down of TCF7L2 by the RCAS-miRNA-TCF7L2 was
examined using RNA in situ hybridization technique.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 showed strong layer specific expression from embryonic day 5 to
embryonic day 13 which is also the important time window for tectal development. 
In addition to the layer specific expression, TCF7L2 is also strongly expressed
in the pre-tegmentum area of the tectum. The TCF7L2 transcript showed marked
decrease in the region that was electroporated with RCAS-miRNA-TCF7L2.
CONCLUSION: Therefore this study has led to the generation and validation of
RCAS-pre miRNA-TCF7L2 which effectively knocks down TCF7L2 in vivo and thus has
paved the way for further functional characterization of TCF7L2 in the chicken
optic tectum.

PMID: 26729022  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Clin Psychiatry. 2015 Dec;76(12):e1611-8. doi: 10.4088/JCP.14m09720.

Obesity genes and risk of major depressive disorder in a multiethnic population: 
a cross-sectional study.

Samaan Z(1,)(2,)(3), Lee YK, Gerstein HC, Engert JC, Bosch J, Mohan V, Diaz R,
Yusuf S, Anand SS, Meyre D; EpiDREAM Genetics Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University and Hamilton Health 
Sciences, Hamilton General Hospital, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Departments of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics. (3)Psychiatry 
and Behavioural Neurosciences.

OBJECTIVE: Observational studies have shown a positive association between
obesity (body mass index [BMI] = 30 kg/m(2)) and depression. Around 120
obesity-associated loci have been identified, but genetic variants associated
with depression remain elusive. Recently, our team reported that the fat mass and
obesity-associated (FTO) gene rs9939609 obesity-risk variant is paradoxically
inversely associated with the risk of depression. This finding raises the
question as to whether other obesity-associated genetic variants are also
associated with depression.
METHOD: Twenty-one obesity gene variants other than FTO were selected from a
custom ~50,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyping array
(ITMAT-Broad-CARe array). Associations of these 21 SNPs and an unweighted
genotype score with BMI and major depressive disorder (determined using the
DSM-IV diagnostic criteria) were tested in 3,209 cases and 14,195 noncases, using
baseline data collected from July 2001 to August 2003 from the multiethnic
EpiDREAM study.
RESULTS: Body mass index was positively associated with depression status (odds
ratio [OR] = 1.02; 95% CI, 1.02-1.03 per BMI unit; P = 2.9 × 10(-12), adjusted
for age, sex, and ethnicity). Six of 21 genetic variants (rs1514176 [TNN13K],
rs2206734 [CDKAL1], rs11671664 [GIPR], rs2984618 [TAL1], rs3824755 [NT5C2], and
rs7903146 [TCF7L2]) and the genotype score were significantly associated with BMI
(1.47 × 10(-14) = P = .04). Of the 21 SNPs, TAL1 rs2984618 obesity-risk allele
was associated with a higher risk of major depressive disorder (P = 1.79 ×
10(-4), adjusted for age, sex, BMI, and ethnicity), and BDNF rs1401635
demonstrated significant ethnic-dependent association with major depressive
disorder (OR = 0.88; 95% CI, 0.80-0.97; P = .01 in non-Europeans and OR = 1.11;
95% CI, 1.02-1.20; P = .02 in Europeans; Pinteraction = 2.73 × 10(-4)). The
genotype score, calculated with or without FTO rs9939609, and adjusted for the
same covariates, was not associated with depression status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the view that the association between obesity and
major depressive disorder at the observational level may be explained, at least
in part, by shared genetic factors.

© Copyright 2015 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

PMID: 26717541  [PubMed - in process]


22. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;32(4):854-61.

[T Cell Factor 4, beta-catenin and SFRP1 Expression of Wnt Signaling Pathway in
Colorectal Carcinoma and the Prognosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Ou Y, Jing G, Liu J, Gao S, Cheng Z, Dong X.

Abnormal activation of Wnt signaling pathway is closely related to the occurrence
of tumor, and T cell factor 4 (Tcf4 ) and beta-catenin are important signal
transmission factors of this pathway. The aim of the present study is to explore 
the significance and correlation between expression of Tcf4, beta-catenin and
secreted frizzled related protein 1(SFRP1), suppressor gene of Wnt signaling
pathway, in colorectal carcinoma and their correlations to the
clinicopathological factors. The expressions of Tcf4, beta-catenin and SFRP1 were
performed with immunohistochemistry staining in 97 cases of primary colorectal
carcinoma and 40 cases of normal colorectal mucosa tissues. The results showed
that the abnormal expression rates of Tcf4 and beta-catenin in colorectal
carcinoma were significantly higher than those in the control groups (P<0.01).
The positive rate of SFRP1 was significantly lower than those in the control
groups (P<0.01). The abnormal expression rates of Tcf4 and beta-catenin were also
related to the lymph node metastasis and Dukes stage (P<0.05). A significant
correlation was found between the expressions of SFRP1 and Tcf4, beta-catenin
(P<0.05). Overexpression of Tcf4 and beta-catenin was related to poor prognosis
(P<0.05). But the survival rates of the group with SFRP1 expressions were higher 
than those in group without SFRP1 expressions (P<0.05). Cox multifactor
regression analysis indicated that Dukes stage, expression of beta-catenin and
SFRP1 were independent risk factors of colorectal carcinoma (P<0.05). The results
suggested that the abnormal expression of Tcf4 and beta-catenin in colorectal
cancer may be related to the reduced or absent expression of SFRP1. beta-catenin 
accumulation in the nuclei formed complexes with Tcf4 is one of the important
molecular switch maintaining colorectal malignant phenotype. The combined
detection of these indexes may perform an important role in predicting the
progression and prognosis of colorectal cancer, and could provide new molecular
targets for gene treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 26710459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Endocrinology. 2016 Feb;157(2):536-47. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1725. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

a-Cell Dysfunctions and Molecular Alterations in Male Insulinopenic Diabetic Mice
Are Not Completely Corrected by Insulin.

Dusaulcy R(1), Handgraaf S(1), Heddad-Masson M(1), Visentin F(1), Vesin C(1),
Reimann F(1), Gribble F(1), Philippe J(1), Gosmain Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diabetes Laboratory (R.D., S.H., M.H.-M., F.V., J.P., Y.G.),
Division of Endocrinology-Diabetes-Hypertension and Nutrition, University
Hospital/University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland; Cambridge
Institute for Medical Research (F.R., F.G.), Wellcome Trust/Medical Research
Council, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom; and Department of
Cell Physiology and Metabolism (C.V.), University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 
Geneva, Switzerland.

Glucagon and a-cell dysfunction are critical in the development of hyperglycemia 
during diabetes both in humans and rodents. We hypothesized that a-cell
dysfunction leading to dysregulated glucagon secretion in diabetes is due to both
a lack of insulin and intrinsic defects. To characterize a-cell dysfunction in
diabetes, we used glucagon-Venus transgenic male mice and induced insulinopenic
hyperglycemia by streptozotocin administration leading to alterations of glucagon
secretion. We investigated the in vivo impact of insulinopenic hyperglycemia on
glucagon-producing cells using FACS-sorted a-cells from control and diabetic
mice. We demonstrate that increased glucagonemia in diabetic mice is mainly due
to increases of glucagon release and biosynthesis per cell compared with controls
without changes in a-cell mass. We identified genes coding for proteins involved 
in glucagon biosynthesis and secretion, a-cell differentiation, and potential
stress markers such as the glucagon, Arx, MafB, cMaf, Brain4, Foxa1, Foxa3,
HNF4a, TCF7L2, Glut1, Sglt2, Cav2.1, Cav2.2, Nav1.7, Kir6.2/Sur1, Pten, IR,
NeuroD1, GPR40, and Sumo1 genes, which were abnormally regulated in diabetic
mice. Importantly, insulin treatment partially corrected a-cell function and
expression of genes coding for proglucagon, or involved in glucagon secretion,
glucose transport and insulin signaling but not those coding for cMAF, FOXA1, and
a-cell differentiation markers as well as GPR40, NEUROD1, CAV2.1, and SUMO1. Our 
results indicate that insulinopenic diabetes induce marked a-cell dysfunction and
molecular alteration, which are only partially corrected by in vivo insulin
treatment.

PMID: 26696123  [PubMed - in process]


24. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 14;14(4):16856-62. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.14.12.

Meta-analysis of the association between the rs7903146 polymorphism at the TCF7L2
locus and type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility.

Liu XH(1,)(2), Xie CG(2), An Y(3), Zhang XX(2), Wu WB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chengdu University of TCM, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. (2)Affiliated Hospital of 
Chengdu University of TCM, Chengdu, China. (3)Department of Urology, Sichuan
Academy of Medical Sciences and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a chronic disease caused by genetic and
environmental factors. T2DM has been associated with specific polymorphisms in
the TCF7L2 gene. This study evaluates the relationship between the rs7903146
locus polymorphism of the TCF7L2 gene and T2DM susceptibility through
meta-analysis; the overall aim is to provide a basis for evidence-based medicinal
treatment of T2DM. Cohort and case-control studies from Medline, PubMed, EMBASE, 
CBM, CNKI, and academic conferences/dissertations that examined the correlation
between T2DM and rs7903146 polymorphisms were evaluated. We determined whether
the TCF7L2 rs7903146 locus was associated with T2DM susceptibility by comparing
alleles and genotypes. The Stata 11.0 software was applied for meta-analysis, and
a random-effects model was adopted for heterogeneity testing and odds ratio (OR) 
calculation. A fixed-effect model was used for quantitative analysis of the
heterogeneity between different studies, and for calculating the percentage of
variability I(2). A total of 10 studies related to the rs7903146 loci and T2DM
susceptibility were enrolled; this included 3404 cases of T2DM patients and 6473 
control cases. Meta-analysis showed that the T allele of rs7903146 was
significantly correlated with the risk of T2DM, with both a dominant fixed-effect
model (OR = 1.653, 95%CI = 1.416-1.653) and a co-dominant-fixed effect model (OR 
= 1.525, 95%CI = 1.350-1.723). Meta-analysis revealed that the T allele of
rs7903146 was also correlated with T2DM susceptibility.

PMID: 26681031  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Nov;9(11):GC01-5. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/14471.6855. Epub 
2015 Nov 1.

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and the Association of Candidate Genes in Asian Indian
Population from Hyderabad, India.

Khan IA(1), Poornima S(2), Jahan P(3), Rao P(4), Hasan Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)PhD Scholar, Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Kamineni
Hospitals, Hyderabad; Vasavi Medical and Research Centre, Khairathabad,
Hyderabad; Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Osmania University ,
Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India . (2)Post Graduate Student, Department of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, Kamineni Hospitals , Hyderabad, India . (3)PhD Scholar,
Professor, Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Osmania University ,
Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India . (4)PhD Scholar, Department of Biochemistry, Kasturba 
Medical College, Manipal University , Manipal, Karnataka, India . (5)PhD Scholar,
Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Kamineni Hospitals , Hyderabad;
Vasavi Medical and Research Centre, Khairathabad, Hyderabad, India .

INTRODUCTION: Genetic and environmental factors play an important role in
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Several genes have been
implicated in the development of T2DM. Genetic variants of candidate genes are,
therefore, prime targets for molecular analysis.
AIM: In this study, we have selected 3 candidate genes, namely, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, 
and IGF2, for assessing their association with T2DM in an Indian population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five hundred individuals were enrolled in this
case-control study- 250 T2DM patients and 250 healthy control individuals.
Clinical characteristics were obtained for all subjects, and genotype analysis
was performed by PCR-RFLP analysis.
RESULTS: Allele and genotyping frequencies, odds ratios, and 95% confidence
intervals were calculated for 3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 1 each
from TCF7L2 (rs7903146), SLC30A8 (rs13266634), and IGF2 (rs680) in T2DM patients.
The rs7903146 and rs680 polymorphisms were found to be significantly associated
with T2DM (p < 0.05), whereas the rs13266634 polymorphism was not (p > 0.05). The
multifactor dimensionality reduction method identified the particular
polymorphisms associated with an increased risk of disease.
CONCLUSION: The present study indicated that the gene-gene interaction model
successfully predicted T2DM risk based on TCF7L2 and SLC30A8 polymorphisms. These
results provide strong evidence of independent association between T2DM and the 3
SNPs analysed herein.

PMCID: PMC4668434
PMID: 26673680  [PubMed]


26. Front Genet. 2015 Nov 24;6:335. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2015.00335. eCollection 2015.

Evaluation of Genome Wide Association Study Associated Type 2 Diabetes
Susceptibility Loci in Sub Saharan Africans.

Adeyemo AA(1), Tekola-Ayele F(1), Doumatey AP(1), Bentley AR(1), Chen G(1), Huang
H(1), Zhou J(1), Shriner D(1), Fasanmade O(2), Okafor G(3), Eghan B Jr(4),
Agyenim-Boateng K(4), Adeleye J(5), Balogun W(5), Elkahloun A(6),
Chandrasekharappa S(6), Owusu S(7), Amoah A(7), Acheampong J(4), Johnson T(2),
Oli J(3), Adebamowo C(8), Collins F(9), Dunston G(10), Rotimi CN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Lagos Lagos, Nigeria. (3)Department of
Medicine, University of Nigeria Teaching Hospital Enugu, Nigeria. (4)Department
of Medicine, University of Science and Technology Kumasi, Ghana. (5)Department of
Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria. (6)National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Ghana Medical School
Accra, Ghana. (8)Institute of Human Virology, School of Medicine, University of
Maryland Baltimore, MD, USA. (9)National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA. 
(10)National Human Genome Center at Howard University Washington, DC, USA.

Genome wide association studies (GWAS) for type 2 diabetes (T2D) undertaken in
European and Asian ancestry populations have yielded dozens of robustly
associated loci. However, the genomics of T2D remains largely understudied in
sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), where rates of T2D are increasing dramatically and
where the environmental background is quite different than in these previous
studies. Here, we evaluate 106 reported T2D GWAS loci in continental Africans. We
tested each of these SNPs, and SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with these
index SNPs, for an association with T2D in order to assess transferability and to
fine map the loci leveraging the generally reduced LD of African genomes. The
study included 1775 unrelated Africans (1035 T2D cases, 740 controls; mean age 54
years; 59% female) enrolled in Nigeria, Ghana, and Kenya as part of the Africa
America Diabetes Mellitus (AADM) study. All samples were genotyped on the
Affymetrix Axiom PanAFR SNP array. Forty-one of the tested loci showed
transferability to this African sample (p < 0.05, same direction of effect), 11
at the exact reported SNP and 30 others at SNPs in LD with the reported SNP
(after adjustment for the number of tested SNPs). TCF7L2 SNP rs7903146 was the
most significant locus in this study (p = 1.61 × 10(-8)). Most of the loci that
showed transferability were successfully fine-mapped, i.e., localized to smaller 
haplotypes than in the original reports. The findings indicate that the genetic
architecture of T2D in SSA is characterized by several risk loci shared with
non-African ancestral populations and that data from African populations may
facilitate fine mapping of risk loci. The study provides an important resource
for meta-analysis of African ancestry populations and transferability of novel
loci.

PMCID: PMC4656823
PMID: 26635871  [PubMed]


27. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Dec 4. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10567. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of pancreatic ß cell gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells.

Mehrfarjam Z(1), Esmaeili F(2,)(3), Shabani L(3), Ebrahimie E(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Razi Herbal Medicines Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical
Sciences, P.O. Box 681499468, Khorramabad, Iran. (2)Department of Biology,
Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Isfahan, P.O. Box 8174673441, Isfahan,
Iran. (3)Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord University, P.O. Box
115, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran. (5)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, Division of 
Information Technology Engineering & Environment, University of South Australia, 
Aselaide, Australia. (6)Department of Genetics and Evolution, School of
Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (7)School
of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, 
Adelaide, Australia.

Transdifferentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
insulin-producing cells (IPCs) has been suggested recently. In our recent works, 
we demonstrated the high performance of mouse neonate pancreas extract (MPE) in
production of functional IPCs from carcinoma stem cells. In this study, MPE was
used to generate IPCs from MSCs without any genetic manipulation. To this end,
bone marrow MSCs were isolated and characterized. In order to differentiate, MSCs
were induced by selection of nestin-expressing cells and treatment with 100<U+2009>µg/ml
MPE. Morphological features of the differentiated cells were confirmed by
dithizone staining. Immunoreactivity to insulin receptor beta, proinsulin,
insulin and C-peptide was observed by immunoflourescence. We also quantified
glucose-dependent insulin production and secretion by ELISA. Real-time PCR
indicated the expressions of ß cell related genes, PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and
CREB1 in IPC cells. Possible pathways governed by CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1
transcription factors in differentiation of MSCs to IPCs were determined based on
Gene Set Enrichment (GSE) approach at p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05. Pathway discovery highlighted the
negative regulatory effects of MIR124-2, HDAC5 protein, REST and NR0B2
transcription factors on expression of CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1 and inhabitation
of IPC differentiations. In contrast, a crosstalk between FOXA2 and TCF7L2
transcription factors, DNA-PK complex, KAT2B protein positively interacting with 
PDX-1, CREB1, EP300 resulted in the induction of IPC and following insulin
production. In conclusion, we report an efficient, simple, and easy method for
production of functional IPCs from MSCs by MPE treatment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26634639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 1;14(4):15471-81. doi: 10.4238/2015.November.30.25.

Quantitative candidate gene association studies of metabolic traits in Han
Chinese type 2 diabetes patients.

Wei FJ(1), Cai CY(1), Yu P(1), Lv J(1), Ling C(1), Shi WT(1), Jiao HX(1), Chang
BC(2), Yang FH(1), Tian Y(1), Li MS(1), Wang YH(1), Zou L(1), Shi JM(1), Chen
LM(2), Li WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (3)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China liweidong98@tmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many loci associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hyperuricemia, and obesity in various ethnic
populations. However, quantitative traits have been less well investigated in Han
Chinese T2DM populations. We investigated the association between candidate gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and metabolic syndrome-related
quantitative traits in Han Chinese T2DM subjects. Unrelated Han Chinese T2DM
patients (1975) were recruited. Eighty-six SNPs were genotyped and tested for
association with quantitative traits including lipid profiles, blood pressure,
body mass index (BMI), serum uric acid (SUA), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma
glucose [fasting plasma glucose (FPG)], plasma glucose 120 min post-OGTT (P2PG;
OGTT = oral glucose tolerance test), and insulin resistance-related traits. We
found that CAMTA1, ABI2, VHL, KAT2B, PKHD1, ESR1, TOX, SLC30A8, SFI1, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with HbA1c, FPG, and/or P2PG; GCK, HHEX, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, and TBX5 polymorphisms were associated with insulin resistance-related
traits; ABCG2, SLC2A9, and PKHD1 polymorphisms were associated with SUA; CAMTA1, 
VHL, KAT2B, PON1, NUB1, SLITRK5, SMAD3, FTO, FANCA, and PCSK2 polymorphisms were 
associated with blood lipid traits; CAMTA1, SPAG16, TOX, KCNQ1, ACACB, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with blood pressure; and UBE2E3, SPAG16, SLC2A9,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, SMAD3, and PNPLA3 polymorphisms were associated with
BMI (all P values <0.05). Some of the candidate genes were associated with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in T2DM in Han Chinese. Although none of
these associations reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)), genes and
loci identified in this study are worthy of further replication and
investigation.

PMID: 26634513  [PubMed - in process]


29. Diabetes Metab J. 2015 Dec;39(6):512-7. doi: 10.4093/dmj.2015.39.6.512. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

Non-Association between rs7903146 and rs12255372 Polymorphisms in Transcription
Factor 7-Like 2 Gene and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Jahrom City, Iran.

Pourahmadi M(1,)(2), Erfanian S(3), Moradzadeh M(4), Jahromi AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Jahrom University of Medical Sciences, Jahrom, Iran.
(2)Research Center for Non-Communicable Diseases, Jahrom University of Medical
Sciences, Jahrom, Iran. (3)Research Center for Non-Communicable Diseases, Jahrom 
University of Medical Sciences, Jahrom, Iran. erfanian_85@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of New Sciences and Technology, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a transcription factor in
the Wnt signaling pathway. High levels of TCF7L2 have been reported in most human
tissues, including the heart, lung, brain, liver, kidney, placenta, adipose
tissues, and pancreatic ß-cells. The purpose of this study was to assess the
association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms (rs12255372 and rs7903146) and type 2
diabetes mellitus in the city of Jahrom, Iran.
METHODS: This case-control study was conducted with 200 patients referred to
Diabetes Clinics and 200 healthy subjects in Jahrom City. Biochemical
characteristics were first determined. TCF7L2 rs1255372 and rs7903146
polymorphisms were then genotyped using the polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism method.
RESULTS: T-allele frequencies of both single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
significantly higher in diabetic patients than in normal glucose-tolerant
subjects (rs12255372: 20.3% vs. 14.5%; rs7903146: 28.5% vs. 22.25%). The
rs12255372 (G/T) polymorphism analysis showed an odds ratio of 0.473 (95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.170 to 1.314; P=0.151) for the TT genotype and 0.646 
(95% CI, 0.410 to 1.019; P=0.060) for the TG genotype, compared with the GG
genotype. The rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism odds ratios for TT and TC genotypes
were 0.564 (95% CI, 0.280 to 1.135; P=0.109) and 0.751 (95% CI, 0.487 to 1.157;
P=0.194) compared with the CC genotype, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The rs12255372 and rs7903146 SNPs of the TCF7L2 gene were not
associated with insulin resistance in the evaluated population.

PMCID: PMC4696988
PMID: 26616591  [PubMed]


30. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Nov 25;8:717. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1661-3.

Association between the rs12255372 variant of the TCF7L2 gene and obesity in a
Cameroonian population.

Ngwa EN(1,)(2), Sobngwi E(3,)(4,)(5), Atogho-Tiedeu B(6,)(7), Noubiap JJ(8,)(9), 
Donfack OS(10,)(11), Guewo-Fokeng M(12,)(13), Mofo EP(14,)(15), Fosso
PP(16,)(17), Djahmeni E(18), Djokam-Dadjeu R(19,)(20), Evehe MS(21,)(22),
Aminkeng F(23), Mbacham WF(24,)(25), Mbanya JC(26,)(27,)(28).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. ngwaelvis73@yahoo.fr. (2)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and
Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
ngwaelvis73@yahoo.fr. (3)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
sobngwieugene@yahoo.fr. (4)Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties,
Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé,
Cameroon. sobngwieugene@yahoo.fr. (5)National Obesity Center, Yaoundé Central
Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon. sobngwieugene@yahoo.fr. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
mma_tiedeu@yahoo.com. (7)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
mma_tiedeu@yahoo.com. (8)Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. noubiapjj@yahoo.fr. (9)Medical 
Diagnostic Center, Yaoundé, Cameroon. noubiapjj@yahoo.fr. (10)Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
olivierdonfack@gmail.com. (11)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
olivierdonfack@gmail.com. (12)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. guewomagellan@yahoo.fr.
(13)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. guewomagellan@yahoo.fr.
(14)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. edithmofo8818@yahoo.fr. (15)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine 
and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
edithmofo8818@yahoo.fr. (16)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. pricillef@yahoo.com. (17)Laboratory
for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of
Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. pricillef@yahoo.com. (18)National Obesity Center,
Yaoundé Central Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon. ericnoel.djahmeni@yahoo.fr.
(19)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. rrdtamo@gmail.com. (20)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and
Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
rrdtamo@gmail.com. (21)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University
of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. seveheb@yahoo.com. (22)Laboratory for Molecular 
Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, 
Cameroon. seveheb@yahoo.com. (23)The Canadian Pharmacogenomics Network for Drug
Safety (CPNDS), Center for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
faminkeng@yahoo.com. (24)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. wfmbacham@yahoo.com. (25)Laboratory
for Public Health Research Biotechnologies, Biotechnology Center, University of
Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. wfmbacham@yahoo.com. (26)Laboratory for Molecular
Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, 
Cameroon. jcmbanya@yahoo.co.uk. (27)Department of Internal Medicine and
Specialties, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé
I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. jcmbanya@yahoo.co.uk. (28)National Obesity Center, Yaoundé 
Central Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon. jcmbanya@yahoo.co.uk.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is one of the genes that
have been identified as possible determinants of diabetes which is associated
with obesity. Data on the genetic causes of obesity in sub-Saharan African
populations are very scares. The aim of this study was to assess the association 
between the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism (rs12255372 
G/T) and obesity and weight-related traits in a Cameroonian population.
METHODS: A case-control study was conducted on 35 obese and 30 non-obese
Cameroonian adults. TCF7L2 rs12255372 genotypes were determined using PCR-RFLP
and correlated with BMI and weight-related traits.
RESULTS: No significant association was observed between the rs12255372 T allele 
(<U+03C7>(2) = 0.0684, p = 0.79) or the TT genotype (<U+03C7>(2) = 0.372, p = 0.54) of the
TCF7L2 gene and obesity in the Cameroonian population. However, amongst the
weight-related traits, triglycerides were significantly associated with the T
risk allele of the TCF7L2 gene (p = 0.012).
CONCLUSION: This study on Cameroonian subjects replicates the absence of
association between the TCF7L2 rs12255372 variant and obesity as observed in
European and American populations.

PMCID: PMC4658796
PMID: 26608632  [PubMed - in process]


31. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Oct 28;9:5835-41. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S82485. eCollection
2015.

Prevalence of the rs7903146C>T polymorphism in TCF7L2 gene for prediction of type
2 diabetes risk among Iranians of different ethnicities.

Allahdini M(1), Kamalidehghan B(2), Akbari L(3), Azadfar P(3), Rahmani A(1),
Ahmadipour F(2), Meng GY(4), Masserrat A(5), Houshmand M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Ahar Branch Islamic Azad University, Ahar,
Iran. (2)Pharmacy Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Biology, Sciences and Research Branch, Azad
University, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Taban Clinic, Tehran, Iran. (6)Department of
Medical Genetics, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(NIGEB), Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenetics is the study of genetic polymorphisms affecting
responses to drug therapy. The common rs7903146 (C>T) polymorphism of the TCF7L2 
gene has recently been associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). In this study,
prevalence of the rs7903146 (C>T) polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene for prediction 
of T2D risk was examined in an Iranian population of different ethnicities.
METHODS: The prevalence of rs7903146 (C>T) and the predicted phenotypes,
including extensive metabolizers, intermediate metabolizers, and poor
metabolizers were investigated in blood samples of 300 unrelated healthy
individuals in an Iranian population, including Fars, Turk, Lure, and Kurd, using
polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism and direct
genomic DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: The homozygous wild-type (C/C), heterozygous (C/T), and homozygous (T/T)
allelic frequencies of rs7903146 (C>T) in the TCF7L2 gene were 29% (extensive
metabolizers), 66.34% (intermediate metabolizers), and 4.66% (poor metabolizers),
respectively. The C/C, C/T, and T/T genotypic frequencies of the rs7903146 (C>T) 
allele were significantly different (P<0.01) among Iranians of different
ethnicities. The frequency of the homozygous T/T variant of the rs7903146 (C>T)
allele was significantly low in the Lure (P<0.01) and high in the Fars (P<0.001) 
ethnicities. Additionally, the frequency of the T/T variant of the rs7903146
(C>T) allele in the South of Iran was the highest (P<0.04), while the East of
Iran had the lowest frequency (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The prediction of rs7903146 (C>T) is required in drug research and
routine treatment, where the information would be helpful for clinicians to
optimize therapy and adverse drug reactions and predict drug response in
individuals at risk of T2D.

PMCID: PMC4629960
PMID: 26604685  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0143607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143607.
eCollection 2015.

The Association of Type 2 Diabetes Loci Identified in Genome-Wide Association
Studies with Metabolic Syndrome and Its Components in a Chinese Population with
Type 2 Diabetes.

Kong X(1), Zhang X(1), Xing X(1), Zhang B(1), Hong J(1), Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is prevalent in type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients. The
comorbidity of MetS and T2D increases the risk of cardiovascular complications.
The aim of the present study was to determine the T2D-related genetic variants
that contribute to MetS-related components in T2D patients of Chinese ancestry.
We successfully genotyped 25 genome wide association study validated T2D-related 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) among 5,169 T2D individuals and 4,560
normal glycemic controls recruited from the Chinese National Diabetes and
Metabolic Disorders Study (DMS). We defined MetS in this population using the
harmonized criteria (2009) combined with the Chinese criteria for abdominal
obesity. The associations between SNPs and MetS-related components, as well as
the associations between SNPs and risk for T2D with or without MetS, were
subjected to logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and sex. Results
showed that the T2D risk alleles of rs243021 located near BCL11A, rs10830963 in
MTNR1B, and rs2237895 in KCNQ1 were related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity
in T2D patients (rs243021: 0.92 (0.84, 1.00), P = 4.42 × 10-2; rs10830963: 0.92
(0.85, 1.00), P = 4.07 × 10-2; rs2237895: 0.89 (0.82, 0.98), P = 1.29 × 10-2).
The T2D risk alleles of rs972283 near KLF14 contributed to a higher risk of
elevated blood pressure (1.10 (1.00, 1.22), P = 4.48 × 10-2), while the T2D risk 
allele of rs7903146 in TCF7L2 was related to a lower risk for elevated blood
pressure (0.74 (0.61, 0.90), P = 2.56 × 10-3). The T2D risk alleles of rs972283
near KLF14 and rs11634397 near ZFAND6 were associated with a higher risk for
elevated triglycerides (rs972283: 1.11 (1.02, 1.24), P = 1.46 × 10-2; rs11634397:
1.14 (1.00, 1.29), P = 4.66 × 10-2), while the T2D risk alleles of rs780094 in
GCKR and rs7903146 in TCF7L2 were related to a lower risk of elevated
triglycerides (rs780094: 0.86 (0.80, 0.93), P = 1.35 × 10-4; rs7903146: 0.82
(0.69, 0.98), P = 3.18 × 10-2). The genotype risk score of the 25 T2D-related
SNPs was related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity (Ptrend = 1.29 × 10-2) and
lower waist circumference (P = 2.20 × 10-3). Genetic variants of WFS1, CDKAL1,
CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNQ1, TSPAN8/LGR5, FTO, and TCF2 were associated with
the risk for T2D with MetS, as well as the risk for development of T2D with at
least one of the MetS components (P < 0.05). In addition, genetic variants of
BCL11A, GCKR, ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, KLF14, CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, CDC123/CAMK1D, HHEX,
MTNR1B, and KCNQ1 contributed to the risk for T2D without MetS (P < 0.05). In
conclusion, these findings highlight the contribution of T2D-related genetic loci
to MetS in a Chinese Han population. The study also provides insight into the
pleotropic effects of genome-wide association loci of diabetes on metabolic
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4657988
PMID: 26599349  [PubMed - in process]


33. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0143734. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143734.
eCollection 2015.

The Functional SNPs in the 5' Regulatory Region of the Porcine PPARD Gene Have
Significant Association with Fat Deposition Traits.

Zhang Y(1), Gao T(1), Hu S(1), Lin B(1), Yan D(1), Xu Z(1), Zhang Z(2), Mao Y(2),
Mao H(2), Wang L(2), Wang G(2), Xiong Y(1), Zuo B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture and Key
Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education, College 
of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, P. R. China. (2)The Tianpeng Group, Jiangshan, Zhejiang, P. R. China.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARD) is a key regulator of
lipid metabolism, insulin sensitivity, cell proliferation and differentiation. In
this study, we identified two Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs, g.1015 A>G
and g.1018 T>C) constituting four haplotypes (GT, GC, AC and AT) in the 5'
regulatory region of porcine PPARD gene. Functional analysis of the four
haplotypes showed that the transcriptional activity of the PPARD promoter
fragment carrying haplotype AC was significantly lower than that of the other
haplotypes in 3T3-L1, C2C12 and PK-15 cells, and haplotype AC had the lowest
binding capacities to the nuclear extracts. Transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) enhanced the transcription activities of promoter fragments of PPARD
gene carrying haplotypes GT, GC and AT in C2C12 and 3T3-L1 cells, and increased
the protein expression of PPARD gene in C2C12 myoblasts. TCF7L2 differentially
bound to the four haplotypes, and the binding capacity of TCF7L2 to haplotype AC 
was the lowest. There were significant associations between -655A/G and fat
deposition traits in three pig populations including the Large White × Meishan F2
pigs, France and American Large White pigs. Pigs with genotype GG had
significantly higher expression of PPARD at both mRNA and protein level than
those with genotype AG. These results strongly suggested that the SNPs in 5'
regulatory region of PPARD genes had significant impact on pig fat deposition
traits.

PMCID: PMC4658063
PMID: 26599230  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Biochem. 2016 Jan;159(1):27-30. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvv117. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

Regulation of the TMEPAI promoter by TCF7L2: the C-terminal tail of TCF7L2 is
essential to activate the TMEPAI gene.

Nakano N(1), Kato M(2), Itoh S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Showa Pharmaceutical University, 3-3165
Higashi-Tamagawagakuen, Machida, Tokyo 194-8543, Japan; Laboratory of
Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8577, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, 
Showa Pharmaceutical University, 3-3165 Higashi-Tamagawagakuen, Machida, Tokyo
194-8543, Japan; sitoh@ac.shoyaku.ac.jp.

We previously found that TCF7L2 could activate the TMEPAI gene efficiently,
whereas LEF1 could not nearly augment its transcription. When we comprehended the
functional difference(s) between TCF7L2 and LEF1 with respect to the activation
of the TMEPAI gene, the C-terminal tail of TCF7L2 was needed to reveal its
transcriptional activity as well as its interaction with Smad3. Consistently,
both TCF7/TCF7L2 and LEF1/TCF7L2 chimeric proteins exhibited an activity similar 
to TCF7L2 in transcription and Smad3 binding in contrast with LEF1 and TCF7. Our 
data elaborated on the diverse activity among TCF/LEF family members with respect
to the transcriptional regulation of the TMEPAI gene.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26590303  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:585917. doi: 10.1155/2015/585917. Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Association between Genetic Variants and Diabetes Mellitus in Iranian
Populations: A Systematic Review of Observational Studies.

Khodaeian M(1), Enayati S(1), Tabatabaei-Malazy O(2), Amoli MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Diabetes mellitus as the most prevalent metabolic disease is a
multifactorial disease which is influenced by environmental and genetic factors. 
In this systematic review, we assessed the association between genetic variants
and diabetes/its complications in studies with Iranian populations.
METHODS: Google Scholar, PubMed, Scopus, and Persian web databases were
systematically searched up to January 2014. The search terms were "gene,"
"polymorphism," "diabetes," and "diabetic complications"; nephropathy,
retinopathy, neuropathy, foot ulcer, and CAD (coronary artery diseases); and
Persian equivalents. Animal studies, letters to editor, and in vitro studies were
excluded.
RESULTS: Out of overall 3029 eligible articles, 88 articles were included. We
found significant association between CTLA-4, IL-18, VDR, TAP2, IL-12, and CD4
genes and T1DM, HNFa and MODY, haptoglobin, paraoxonase, leptin, TCF7L2,
calreticulin, ERa, PPAR-<U+03B3>2, CXCL5, calpain-10, IRS-1 and 2, GSTM1, KCNJ11, eNOS, 
VDR, INSR, ACE, apoA-I, apo E, adiponectin, PTPN1, CETP, AT1R, resistin, MMP-3,
BChE K, AT2R, SUMO4, IL-10, VEGF, MTHFR, and GSTM1 with T2DM or its
complications.
DISCUSSION: We found some controversial results due to heterogeneity in ethnicity
and genetic background. We thought genome wide association studies on large
number of samples will be helpful in identifying diabetes susceptible genes as an
alternative to studying individual candidate genes in Iranian populations.

PMCID: PMC4637497
PMID: 26587547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:468627. doi: 10.1155/2015/468627. Epub 2015 Oct 4.

The Protective Effect of Transcription Factor 7-Like 2 Risk Allele rs7903146
against Elevated Fasting Plasma Triglyceride in Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analysis.

Wang S(1), Song K(2), Srivastava R(3), Fathzadeh M(3), Li N(3), Mani A(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Geriatric Cardiology Department, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China ; Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. (2)The
Geriatric Cardiology Department, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China ; Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, No. 28, Fuxing
Road, Beijing 100853, China. (3)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511,
USA. (4)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA ; Department of
Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

BACKGROUND: The results from published studies regarding association of
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variant rs7903146 with dyslipidemia have
been conflicting and inconclusive.
METHODS: We carried out a meta-analysis that aimed to investigate the association
of the rs7903146 variant with plasma lipid levels using electronic database and
published studies. Data was extracted by a standard algorithm. Dominant,
recessive, homozygote, and heterozygote comparison models were utilized.
RESULTS: 24 studies incorporating 52,785 subjects were included in this
meta-analysis. Overall, the minor allele (T) was associated with lower risk for
hypertriglyceridemia in subjects with type 2 diabetes (dominant model: SMD =
-0.04, 95% CI (-0.08, 0.00), P = 0.048, P heterogeneity = 0.47; recessive model: 
SMD = -0.10, 95% CI (-0.18, -0.02), P = 0.01, P heterogeneity = 0.56). No
association was found between minor (T) allele and plasma TC, LDL-c, or HDL-c
levels in subjects with type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome (MetS) and no
association was found between minor (T) allele and plasma TG levels in
nondiabetic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis indicated the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and low plasma triglyceride (TG) level in subjects with type 2
diabetes. No association was found between rs7903146 variant and plasma lipids in
nondiabetic subjects.

PMCID: PMC4631899
PMID: 26576435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Nov 13. doi: 10.1071/RD15157. [Epub ahead of print]

Is the association between insulin resistance and diabetogenic haematopoietically
expressed homeobox (HHEX) polymorphism (rs1111875) affected by polycystic ovary
syndrome status?

Tehrani FR, Zarkesh M, Tohidi M, Azizi F, Zadeh-Vakili A.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is frequently accompanied by insulin resistance 
(IR). The aim of the present study was to investigate whether the genetic
association between insulin resistance and two single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), namely rs7903146 (C/T) in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and
rs1111875 (A/G) in haematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX), is affected by
PCOS status in Iranian women. The study participants consisted of 582 women with 
PCOS (cases) referred to the Reproductive Endocrinology Research Center and 504
subjects without PCOS (controls), randomly selected from the Tehran Lipid and
Glucose Study. Cases and controls were further subdivided to two groups according
to IR status: those with and without IR. IR was identified on the basis of
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) =2.63. The SNPs in
TCF7L2 and HHEX were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism. There were no significant differences in the distribution of
genotypes and alleles between cases and controls (P < 0.05). Among cases, the
prevalence of the CC, CT and TT genotypes was 37.8%, 46.3% and 15.9%,
respectively, whereas the prevalence of the AA, AG and GG genotypes was 13.5%,
46.1% and 40.4%, respectively. In the control group, the prevalence of the CC, CT
and TT genotypes was 32.2%, 53.9% and 13.9%, respectively, whereas the prevalence
of the AA, AG and GG genotypes was 11.3%, 48.6% and 40.0%, respectively. After
adjustment for age and body mass index, the probability of IR was decreased by
49% among carriers of the A allele in the control group (95% confidence interval 
0.33-0.78; P = 0.002). The findings of the present study suggest that the
association between IR and diabetogenic polymorphisms may be affected by PCOS
status.

PMID: 26563606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Transplantation. 2015 Nov 21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Role of TCF7L2 rs7903146 in Diabetes After Kidney Transplant: Results From a 
Single-Center Cohort and Meta-Analysis of the Literature.

Quaglia M(1), Terrazzino S, Musetti C, Cargnin S, Merlotti G, Cena T, Stratta P, 
Genazzani A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Nephrology and Kidney Transplant Unit, Department of Translational Medicine,
University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy. 2 Dipartimento di Scienze del
Farmaco & Centro di Ricerca Interdipartimentale di Farmacogenetica e
Farmacogenomica (CRIFF), Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy. 3 Unit
of Medical Statistics and Cancer Epidemiology, University of Eastern Piedmont and
CPO Piemonte, Novara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Several genetic polymorphisms modulate the risk of posttransplant
diabetes mellitus (PTDM), a complication associated with an increased morbidity
and mortality after kidney transplantation; however, their clinical utility is
still undefined.
METHODS: Genetic analysis was performed in 464 kidney transplantation recipients 
to evaluate whether transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 gene
polymorphism is associated with the risk of PTDM and a meta-analysis of similar
studies including our results was performed (total kidney transplantation
recipients, n = 3105). A predictive model of PTDM was built on the basis of this 
polymorphism and clinical parameters.
RESULTS: In our cohort, 163 patients possessed the CC genotype of rs7903146
(35.1%), 237 were CT (51.1%), and 64 were TT (13.8%): their 2 years PTDM
incidence was, respectively, 7.8%, 11.9%, and 22.7%. At multivariate analysis,
age (per year; hazard ratio [HR], 1.029; 95% confidence interval [95% CI],
1.005-1.054; P = 0.017), body mass index (25.0-29.9 vs <25.0; HR, 2.43; 95% CI,
1.40-4.23; P = 0.0018; =30 vs <25.0; HR, 5.70; 95% CI, 2.77-11.74; P < 0.0001),
TCF7L2 rs7903146 (per each T allele; HR, 1.81; 95% CI, 1.26-2.59; P = 0.001) and 
previous transplants (HR, 2.80; 95% CI, 1.39-5.64; P = 0.004) emerged as
independent predictive factors for PTDM.Meta-analysis of present and 5 previous
studies showed higher risk of PTDM in carriers of rs7903146 TT genotype (odds
ratio, 1.95; 95% CI, 1.39-2.74; P < 0.0001) and absence of heterogeneity among
studies (I = 0%).Inclusion of this polymorphism in a predictive model appeared to
improve its ability to stratify patients according to the risk of PTDM.
CONCLUSIONS: In renal transplant patients, TCF7L2 rs7903146 is strongly and
independently associated with PTDM and might hold the potential to identify
patients at risk for this complication.This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
3.0 License, where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it
is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.

PMID: 26555947  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;67(4):228-35. doi: 10.1159/000439546. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Transcription Factor-7-Like 2 Gene Variants Affect the Metabolic Phenotypes of
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.

Gammoh E(1), Mahmood NA, Madan S, Ebrahim BH, Mustafa FE, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Bahrain.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrinopathy, which
shares genetic features with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Insofar as
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is consistently replicated T2DM
susceptibility locus, this study evaluates whether common TCF7L2 variants are
associated with PCOS and related metabolic features.
METHODS: The association between TCF7L2 rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and
rs12255372 SNPs and PCOS was tested in 242 women with PCOS and in 236 control
women.
RESULTS: The allelic distribution of rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and
rs12255372 TCF7L2 variants was not significantly different between women with
PCOS and control women. The genotype distribution of the 4 TCF7L2 loci was
comparable between PCOS cases and controls, irrespective of the genetic analysis 
model used (additive, dominant, recessive). Carriage of rs4506565 minor allele
correlated with free insulin and homeostasis model assessment of insulin
resistance, while the presence of rs12243326 and rs12255372 minor allele
correlated with waist changes. Four-locus (rs4506565-rs7903146, rs12243326, and
rs12255372) haplotype analysis identified PCOS-susceptible (ACTG) and -protective
(TTTG) haplotypes, which remained significant after controlling for multiple
comparisons and for key covariates.
CONCLUSIONS: Although individual TCF7L2 variants were not associated with the
presence of PCOS in Bahraini women, specific TCF7L2 haplotypes were identified,
which were both positively and negatively associated with PCOS.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26536002  [PubMed - in process]


40. Diabetes. 2016 Feb;65(2):371-80. doi: 10.2337/db15-1233. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

TCF7L2 Genotype and a-Cell Function in Humans Without Diabetes.

Shah M(1), Varghese RT(1), Miles JM(1), Piccinini F(2), Dalla Man C(2), Cobelli
C(2), Bailey KR(3), Rizza RA(1), Vella A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition Research, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN. (2)Department of Information Engineering, Università degli
Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and
Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, 
Metabolism, and Nutrition Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
vella.adrian@mayo.edu.

The diabetes-associated allele in TCF7L2 increases the rate of conversion to
diabetes; however, the mechanism by which this occurs remains elusive. We
hypothesized that the diabetes-associated allele in this locus (rs7903146)
impairs insulin secretion and that this defect would be exacerbated by acute free
fatty acid (FFA)-induced insulin resistance. We studied 120 individuals of whom
one-half were homozygous for the diabetes-associated allele TT at rs7903146 and
one-half were homozygous for the protective allele CC. After a screening
examination during which glucose tolerance status was determined, subjects were
studied on two occasions in random order while undergoing an oral challenge.
During one study day, FFA was elevated by infusion of Intralipid plus heparin. On
the other study day, subjects received the same amount of glycerol as present in 
the Intralipid infusion. ß-Cell responsivity indices were estimated with the oral
C-peptide minimal model. We report that ß-cell responsivity was slightly impaired
in the TT genotype group. Moreover, the hyperbolic relationship between insulin
secretion and ß-cell responsivity differed significantly between genotypes.
Subjects also exhibited impaired suppression of glucagon after an oral challenge.
These data imply that a genetic variant harbored within the TCF7L2 locus impairs 
glucose tolerance through effects on glucagon as well as on insulin secretion.

© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4747457 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26525881  [PubMed - in process]


41. PeerJ. 2015 Oct 20;3:e1304. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1304. eCollection 2015.

Interaction of Wnt pathway related variants with type 2 diabetes in a Chinese Han
population.

Zhou JB(1), Yang JK(2), Zhang BH(3), Lu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University , Beijing , China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Tongren
Hospital, Capital Medical University , Beijing , China ; Beijing Key Laboratory
of Diabetes Research and Care, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University , Beijing , China. (3)Hospital of Tsinghua University , Beijing ,
China. (4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Diabetes Research and Care, Beijing Tongren
Hospital, Capital Medical University , Beijing , China.

Aims. Epistasis from gene set based on the function-related genes may confer to
the susceptibility of type 2 diabetes (T2D). The Wnt pathway has been reported to
play an important role in the pathogenesis of T2D. Here we applied tag SNPs to
explore the association between epistasis among genes from Wnt and T2D in the Han
Chinese population. Methods. Variants of fourteen genes selected from Wnt
pathways were performed to analyze epistasis. Gene-gene interactions in
case-control samples were identified by generalized multifactor dimensionality
reduction (GMDR) method. We performed a case-controlled association analysis on a
total of 1,026 individual with T2D and 1,157 controls via tag SNPs in Wnt
pathway. Results. In single-locus analysis, SNPs in four genes were significantly
associated with T2D adjusted for multiple testing (rs7903146(C) in TCF7L2, p =
3.21*10(-3), OR = 1.39, 95% CI [1.31-1.47], rs12904944(G) in SMAD3, p =
2.51*10(-3), OR = 1.39, 95% CI [1.31-1.47], rs2273368(C) in WNT2B, p =
4.46*10(-3), OR = 1.23, 95% CI [1.11-1.32], rs6902123(C) in PPARD, p =
1.14*10(-2), OR = 1.40, 95% CI [1.32-1.48]). The haplotype TGC constructed by
TCF7L2 (rs7903146), DKK1 (rs2241529) and BTRC (rs4436485) showed a significant
association with T2D (OR = 0.750, 95% CI [0.579-0.972], P = 0.03). For epistasis 
analysis, the optimized combination was the two locus model of WNT2B rs2273368
and TCF7L2rs7903146, which had the maximum cross-validation consistency. This was
9 out of 10 for the sign test at 0.0107 level. The best combination increased the
risk of T2D by 1.47 times (95% CI [1.13-1.91], p = 0.0039). Conclusions.
Epistasis between TCF7L2 and WNT2B is associated with the susceptibility of T2D
in a Han Chinese population. Our results were compatible with the idea of the
complex nature of T2D that would have been missed using conventional tools.

PMCID: PMC4621788
PMID: 26509107  [PubMed]


42. Diabet Med. 2015 Oct 26. doi: 10.1111/dme.13012. [Epub ahead of print]

A replication study of 49 Type 2 diabetes risk variants in a Punjabi Pakistani
population.

Zia A(1), Wang X(2), Bhatti A(1), Demirci FY(2), Zhao W(3), Rasheed A(4), Samuel 
M(4), Kiani AK(1), Ismail M(5), Zafar J(6), John P(1), Saleheen D(3,)(7), Kamboh 
MI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Atta-Ur-Rahman School of Applied Biosciences (ASAB), National University of
Science and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan. (2)Department of Human
Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
USA. (3)Institute of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Department of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. (4)Center for
Non-Communicable Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan. (5)Institute of Biomedical and
Genetic Engineering (IBGE), Islamabad, Pakistan. (6)Pakistan Institute of Medical
Sciences (PIMS), Islamabad, Pakistanw. (7)Department of Biostatistics and
Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

AIM: The burden of Type 2 diabetes is alarmingly high in South Asia, a region
that has many genetically diverse ethnic populations. Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) conducted largely in European populations have identified a number
of loci predisposing to Type 2 diabetes risk, however, the relevance of such
genetic loci in many South Asian sub-ethnicities remains elusive. The aim of this
study was to replicate 49 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously
identified through GWAS in Punjabis living in Pakistan.
METHODS: We examined the association of 49 SNPs in 853 Type 2 diabetes cases and 
1945 controls using additive logistic regression models after adjusting for age
and gender.
RESULTS: Of the 49 SNPs investigated, eight showed a nominal association
(P < 0.05) that also remained significant after controlling for the false
discovery rate. The most significant association was found for rs7903146 at the
TCF7L2 locus. For a per unit increase in the risk score comprising of all the 49 
SNPs, the odds ratio in association with Type 2 diabetes risk was 1.16 (95% CI
1.13-1.19, P < 2.0E-16).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that some Type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci
are shared between Europeans and Punjabis living in Pakistan. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26499911  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2015 Dec;21(12):1435-40. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.10.010. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Association of type 2 diabetes GWAS loci and the risk of Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's diseases.

Chung SJ(1), Kim MJ(2), Kim J(3), Ryu HS(3), Kim YJ(3), Kim SY(4), Lee JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. Electronic address: sjchung@amc.seoul.kr.
(2)Department of Neurology, Bobath Memorial Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Insulin and insulin-like growth factor contribute to normal brain
function. Recent experimental and clinical studies showed that type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) and Parkinson's disease (PD) or Alzheimer's disease (AD) share
several dysregulated pathways.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether genome-wide significant loci of T2DM
are associated with the risk of PD and AD as well as the severity of cognitive
impairment.
METHODS: Study subjects were 500 PD patients, 400 AD patients, and 500 unrelated 
controls. We selected 32 genetic variants from 11 genes (CDC123, CDKAL1, CDKN2B, 
FTO, GLIS3, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2) and intergenic
regions based on results of recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in
T2DM. These variants were reported to be T2DM-susceptibility loci and have been
replicated in other independent studies. All association analyses were performed 
using logistic regression models, adjusting for age and sex.
RESULTS: KCNQ1 SNP rs163182 showed the strongest association with AD, but it was 
not significant after Bonferroni correction (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.07-1.59,
Pcorrected = 0.32). In PD patients, CDC123 SNP rs11257655 showed modest
association with MMSE score <26, and CDKN2B SNPs (rs2383208, rs10965250, and
rs10811661) showed modest association with MoCA score <26, which were not
significant after Bonferroni correction. Other genetic variants had no
association with the risk of PD or AD and the severity of cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genome-wide significant loci of T2DM play
no major role in the risk and cognitive impairment of PD and AD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26499758  [PubMed - in process]


44. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 27;13(4):746-59. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.028. Epub 2015 
Oct 17.

Impaired LRP6-TCF7L2 Activity Enhances Smooth Muscle Cell Plasticity and Causes
Coronary Artery Disease.

Srivastava R(1), Zhang J(1), Go GW(1), Narayanan A(1), Nottoli TP(2), Mani A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)Section of
Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA. (3)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of
Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
Electronic address: arya.mani@yale.edu.

Mutations in Wnt-signaling coreceptor LRP6 have been linked to coronary artery
disease (CAD) by unknown mechanisms. Here, we show that reduced LRP6 activity in 
LRP6(R611C) mice promotes loss of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)
differentiation, leading to aortic medial hyperplasia. Carotid injury augmented
these effects and led to partial to total vascular obstruction. LRP6(R611C) mice 
on high-fat diet displayed dramatic obstructive CAD and exhibited an accelerated 
atherosclerotic burden on LDLR knockout background. Mechanistically, impaired
LRP6 activity leads to enhanced non-canonical Wnt signaling, culminating in
diminished TCF7L2 and increased Sp1-dependent activation of PDGF signaling. Wnt3a
administration to LRP6(R611C) mice improved LRP6 activity, led to
TCF7L2-dependent VSMC differentiation, and rescued post-carotid-injury neointima 
formation. These findings demonstrate the critical role of intact Wnt signaling
in the vessel wall, establish a causal link between impaired LRP6/TCF7L2
activities and arterial disease, and identify Wnt signaling as a therapeutic
target against CAD.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4626307
PMID: 26489464  [PubMed - in process]


45. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):36587-602. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5500.

Novel RNA variants in colorectal cancers.

Hoff AM(1,)(2,)(3), Johannessen B(1,)(2,)(3), Alagaratnam S(1,)(2,)(3), Zhao
S(1,)(2,)(3), Nome T(1,)(2,)(3), Løvf M(1,)(2,)(3), Bakken AC(1,)(2,)(3), Hektoen
M(1,)(2,)(3), Sveen A(1,)(2,)(3), Lothe RA(1,)(2,)(3), Skotheim RI(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital-Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (2)KG Jebsen
Colorectal Cancer Research Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

With an annual estimated incidence of 1.4 million, and a five-year survival rate 
of 60%, colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major clinical burden. To identify novel RNA
variants in CRC, we analyzed exon-level microarray expression data from a cohort 
of 202 CRCs. We nominated 25 genes with increased expression of their 3' parts in
at least one cancer sample each. To efficiently investigate underlying transcript
structures, we developed an approach using rapid amplification of cDNA ends
followed by high throughput sequencing (RACE-seq). RACE products from the
targeted genes in 23 CRC samples were pooled together and sequenced. We
identified VWA2-TCF7L2, DHX35-BPIFA2 and CASZ1-MASP2 as private fusion events,
and novel transcript structures for 17 of the 23 other candidate genes. The
high-throughput approach facilitated identification of CRC specific RNA variants.
These include a recurrent read-through fusion transcript between KLK8 and KLK7,
and a splice variant of S100A2. Both of these were overrepresented in CRC tissue 
and cell lines from external RNA-seq datasets.

PMID: 26474385  [PubMed - in process]


46. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2016 Mar;20(3):255-67. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2016.1098618. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

Genes associated with diabetes: potential for novel therapeutic targets?

Hara K(1), Kadowaki T(2), Odawara M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism , Tokyo Medical
University , 6-7-1Nishi-shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku , Tokyo 160-0023 , Japan. (2)b
Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine ,
University of Tokyo , 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku , Tokyo 113-8655 , Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex disease caused by an interaction
between multiple genetic and environmental factors. T2D-associated loci
identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) harbor the genes targeted by
many clinically available drugs, supporting the idea that GWAS have the potential
to discover novel genes for drug development.
AREAS COVERED: This paper outlines, among the genes at those T2D-associated loci,
the functional analysis of FTO, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, and MTNR1B, illustrating caveats
we should be cautious about. This paper also reviews the current status of the
compounds targeting the T2D-associated genes GCK, GKRP, ADIPOQ, and ADRA2A in
clinical and preclinical phases.
EXPERT OPINION: Functional analysis of those loci has fallen too far behind
identification of T2D-associated loci. It is mandatory to define the true causal 
gene at the T2D-associated loci by using a variety of experimental techniques.
The biggest challenge lies in the limited access to human tissues relevant to the
pathogenesis of T2D. The ultimate goal of human genetic study is enabling
personalized medicine based on the genetic information of individuals. More
research will be needed to achieve this goal.

PMID: 26458049  [PubMed - in process]


47. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015 Sep 18;12(9):11797-814. doi:
10.3390/ijerph120911797.

Association of TCF7L2 Genetic Polymorphisms with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in the 
Uygur Population of China.

Yao H(1), Wang Z(2), Wang T(3), Ma Y(4), Su Y(5), Ma Q(6), Wang L(7), Zhu J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease Research, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China.
yaohua01@sina.com. (2)Department of Public Health, Xinjiang Medical University,
Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China. zhiqiangwang1987@sina.com. (3)Department of
Public Health, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China.
wangtingting2013@sina.com. (4)Department of Public Health, Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China. mayan16@sina.com. (5)Department of
Public Health, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China.
yinxia_su@163.com. (6)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease Research, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang
830054, China. maqi1212@126.com. (7)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease 
Research, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi,
Xinjiang 830054, China. wl78154189@sina.cn. (8)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of
Metabolic Disease Research, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China. zhujun6677@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene have been reported to be strongly associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in Icelandic, Danish and American populations and further replicated in
other European populations, African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Asian
populations. The aim of the present study was to investigate the association of
TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with T2DM in a Uygur population of China.
METHODS: 877 T2DM patients and 871 controls were selected for the present study. 
Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs12255372 and rs7901695) were
genotyped by using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry. The associations of SNPs and haplotypes with T2DM 
and linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure of the TCF7L2 gene were analyzed.
RESULTS: For total participants and male, the distribution of rs12255372 alleles 
and the dominant model (Guanine Guanine (GG) genotype vs. Guanine Thymine (GT)
genotype + Thymine Thymine (TT) genotype) showed significant difference between
T2DM and control subjects (for allele: p = 0.013 and p = 0.002, respectively; for
dominant model: p = 0.028 and p = 0.008, respectively). The distribution of
rs7901695 alleles and the dominant model (TT genotype vs. Thymine Cytosine (TC)
genotype + Cytosine Cytosine (CC) genotype) for total participants and male
showed significant difference between T2DM and control subjects (for allele: both
p = 0.001; for dominant model: p = 0.006 and p = 0.008, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggested that the genetic polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene
were associated with T2DM in the Uygur population of China.

PMCID: PMC4586708
PMID: 26393635  [PubMed - in process]


48. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Aug;19(16):3100-6.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility gene TCF7L2 is strongly associated with
hyperglycemia in the Saudi Arabia Population of the eastern province of Saudi
Arabia.

Acharya S(1), Al-Elq A, Al-Nafaie A, Muzaheed M, Al-Ali A.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Mohammed Centre for Research and Consultation Studies, University of
Dammam, Dammam, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. sabaikady@ud.edu.sa.

OBJECTIVE: We studied the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs4506565 in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
susceptibility gene, transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) with T2DM among the
population of the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a case-control study, blood samples were collected from 
359 T2DM patients and 351 age and sex-matched normoglycemic controls. Genotyping 
was done by allele specific PCR assay.
RESULTS: Our results revealed a strong association between risk T alleles in
variants rs12255372 (OR: G/T=1.4233; T/T=2.0395) and rs4506565 (OR: A/T=1.6066;
T/T=3.1301) and T2DM among the Saudi population of the Eastern Province of Saudi 
Arabia. This is the first time that this association has been identified in a
Saudi population. However, a common variant, rs7903146, often found to be
associated with T2DM in other populations failed to demonstrate any association
to T2DM with the present population. These data further strengthens the
hypothesis that Saudi populations might carry a distinct risk allele in T2DM
susceptibility gene TCF7L2.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results confirm that rs12255372 and rs4506565 variants
of TCF7L2 show an association, but not rs7903146, with T2DM for the Saudi
population of the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia.

PMID: 26367734  [PubMed - in process]


49. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Aug 21;14(3):10064-71. doi: 10.4238/2015.August.21.13.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
mellitus in a Chinese Hui population.

Yang Y(1), Xu JR(1), Wang YJ(1), Liu XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization
of Special Biological Resources in Western China, Ningxia University, Yinchuan,
China.

Diabetes is one of costly chronic diseases. Previous studies across several
ethnicities have shown that polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene were strongly associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
(T2DM). In the present study, the association between the TCF7L2 gene and the
susceptibility to T2DM in a Chinese Hui population was interrogated. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)- restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and
allelic specific PCR were employed for examining the TCF7L2 gene rs12255372 (G>T)
and rs290487 (C>T), and rs7901695 (T>C) polymorphisms, respectively, in 109
healthy individuals and 111 subjects with T2DM who were of Chinese Hui descent
and lived in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region of China. The results showed that 
the genotypic frequency of rs290487 and the allelic frequency distributions of
the rs7901695 and rs290487 loci were not significantly different between patients
and controls in this population. However, both the genotypic and the allelic
frequencies at rs12255372 exhibited statistical differences between the patients 
with T2DM and the unaffected cohort (P < 0.01). In addition, the frequency of the
G allele at the rs12255372 locus in the patients was higher than that in healthy 
individuals (OR = 1.198, 95%CI = 1.097-1.307). These findings suggest that the
TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G>T) polymorphism might be one of the most important genetic
factors associated with T2DM susceptibility, and that individuals in the Chinese 
Hui population who carry a G allele at this locus might be at risk to develop
T2DM.

PMID: 26345943  [PubMed - in process]


50. BMC Genet. 2015 Sep 3;16:107. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0266-0.

CDKN2A-rs10811661 polymorphism, waist-hip ratio, systolic blood pressure, and
dyslipidemia are the independent risk factors for prediabetes in a Vietnamese
population.

Binh TQ(1), Thu NT(2), Phuong PT(3), Nhung BT(4), Nhung TT(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 1 Yersin, Hanoi, 112800,
Vietnam. binhtq@nihe.org.vn. (2)Hanoi National University of Education, 136 Xuan 
Thuy Street, Hanoi, Vietnam. trungthu@hnue.edu.vn. (3)National Institute of
Hygiene and Epidemiology, 1 Yersin, Hanoi, 112800, Vietnam.
phuong.pham@nihe.org.vn. (4)National Institute of Nutrition, 48B Tang Bat Ho
Street, Hanoi, 112807, Vietnam. nhungvnnin@gmail.com. (5)National Institute of
Hygiene and Epidemiology, 1 Yersin, Hanoi, 112800, Vietnam.
tuyetnhung0608@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: People with prediabetes are at greater risk for heart attack, stroke,
kidney disease, vision problems, nerve damage and high blood pressure, compared
to those without the disease. Prediabetes is a complex disorder involving both
genetic and environmental factors in its pathogenesis. This cross-sectional study
aimed to investigate the independent risk factors for prediabetes, considering
the contribution of genetic factors (TCF7L2-rs7903146, IRS1-rs1801278,
INSR-rs3745551, CDKN2A-rs10811661, and FTO-rs9939609), socio-economic status, and
lifestyle factors.
RESULTS: Among the candidate genes studied, the CDKN2A-rs10811661 polymorphism
was found to be the most significant factor associated with prediabetes in the
model unadjusted and adjusted for age, sex, obesity-related traits, systolic
blood pressure, dyslipidemia, socio-economic status, and lifestyle factors. In
the final model, the CDKN2A-rs10811661 polymorphism (OR per T allele = 1.22, 95 %
CI = 1.04-1.44, P = 0.017), systolic blood pressure (OR per 10 mmHg = 1.14, 95 % 
CI = 1.08-1.20, P < 0.0001), waist-hip ratio (OR = 1.25, 95 % CI = 1.10-1.42, P <
0.0001), dyslipidemia (OR = 1.57, 95 % CI = 1.15-2.14, P = 0.004), and residence 
(OR = 1.93, 95 % CI = 2.82-4.14, P < 0.0001) were the most significant
independent predictors of prediabetes, in which the power of the adjusted
prediction model was 0.646.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggested that the CDKN2A-rs10811661 polymorphism,
waist-hip ratio, systolic blood pressure, and dyslipidemia were significantly
associated with the increased risk of prediabetes in a Vietnamese population. The
studied genetic variant had a small effect on prediabetes.

PMCID: PMC4559161
PMID: 26334876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1393-404. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3136. Epub 2015 Aug
27.

Multifaceted roles of 5'-regulatory region of the cancer associated gene B4GALT1 
and its comparison with the gene family.

Al-Obaide MA(1), Alobydi H(2), Abdelsalam AG(3), Zhang R(4), Srivenugopal KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA. (2)Biomedica, LLC, Sterling
Heights, MI, USA. (3)Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, College
of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. (4)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

ß1,4-Galactosylransferases are a family of enzymes encoded by seven B4GALT genes 
and are involved in the development of anticancer drug resistance and metastasis.
Among these genes, the B4GALT1 shows significant variations in the transcript
origination sites in different cell types/tissues and encodes an interesting
dually partitioning ß-1, 4-galactosyltransferase protein. We identified at 5'-end
of B4GALT1 a 1.454 kb sequence forming a transcription regulatory region,
referred to by us as the TR1-PE1, had all characteristics of a bidirectional
promoter directing the transcription of B4GALT1 in a divergent manner along with 
its long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) antisense counterpart B4GALT1-AS1. The TR1-PE1
showed unique dinucleotide base-stacking energy values specific to transcription 
factor binding sites (TFBSs), INR and BRE, and harbored CpG Island (CGI) that
showed GC skew with potential for R-loop formation at the transcription starting 
sites (TSSs). The 5'-regulatory axis of B4GALT1 also included five more novel
TFBSs for CTCF, GLI1, TCF7L2, GATA3 and SOX5, in addition to unique (TG)18
repeats in conjunction with 22 nucleotide TG-associated sequence (TGAS). The five
lncRNA B4GALT1-AS1 transcripts showed significant complementarity with B4GALT1
mRNA. In contrast, the rest of B4GALT genes showed fewer lncRNAs, and all lacked 
the (TG)18 and TGAS. Our results are strongly supported by the FANTOM5 study
which showed tissue-specific variations in transcript origination sites for this 
gene. We suggest that the unique expression patterns for the B4GALT1 in normal
and malignant tissues are controlled by a differential usage of 5'-B4GALT1
regulatory units along with a post-transcriptional regulation by the antisense
RNA, which in turn govern the cell-matrix interactions, neoplastic progression,
anticancer drug sensitivity, and could be utilized in personalized therapy.

PMID: 26315939  [PubMed - in process]


52. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jun 15;8(6):9355-61. eCollection 2015.

Association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and breast cancer susceptibility: a
meta-analysis.

Wang F(1), Jiang L(2), Li J(3), Yu X(4), Li M(5), Wu G(2), Yu Z(5), Zhou K(2),
Chu H(2), Zhai H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Disease, The Second Hospital of Shandong University 247
Beiyuan Street, Tianqiao District, Jinan 250033, Shandong, China ; Department of 
Breast Disease, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University Beijing
100050, China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Yantai Yuhuangding
Hospital 20 Yuhuangding East Road, Yantai 264000, Shandong, China. (3)Image
Diagnostic Center, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital 20 Yuhuangding East Road, Yantai
264000, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology, Yantai Yuhuangding
Hospital 20 Yuhuangding East Road, Yantai 264000, Shandong, China. (5)Department 
of Anesthesiology, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital 20 Yuhuangding East Road, Yantai
264000, Shandong, China.

AIM: Our aim was to investigate the relationship between transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms and breast cancer susceptibility.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase and CNKI databases were used to search the related
studies investigating the correlation between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and breast
cancer susceptibility. Pooled ORs and 95% CIs, based on five genetic models, were
applied to estimate the association betweenTCF7L2 polymorphisms and breast
cancer. A fixed-effect model or a random-effect model was applied according to
the between-study heterogeneity.
RESULTS: We analyzed six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 gene,
namely rs12255372, rs7903146, rs7900150, rs3750805, rs1225404 and rs7003146. The 
increased risk of breast cancer was associated with TCF7L2 polymorphisms (22 vs. 
11: OR=1.16, 95% CI=1.02-1.32; 22+12 vs. 11: OR=1.06, 95% CI=1.02-1.10; 22 vs.
11+12: OR=1.15, 95% CI=1.04-1.27; 2 vs. 1: OR=1.07, 95% CI=1.02-1.13; 12 vs. 11: 
OR=1.05, 95% CI=1.01-1.09). Among the locus, rs7903146 polymorphism was
significantly associated with the risk for breast cancer under five genetic
models (TT vs. CC: OR=1.29, 95% CI=1.08-1.53; TT+CT vs. CC: OR=1.09, 95%
CI=1.01-1.18; TT vs. CC+CT: OR=1.24, 95% CI=1.05-1.48; T vs. C: OR=1.11, 95%
CI=1.04-1.19; CT vs. CC: OR=1.08, 95% CI=1.00-1.17). Additionally, rs7900150 also
showed effects on the susceptibility of breast cancer (TT vs. AA: OR=1.22, 95%
CI=1.07-1.39; TT+AT vs. AA: OR=1.06, 95% CI=1.00-1.14; TT vs. AA+AT: OR=1.21, 95%
CI=1.07-1.37; T vs. A: OR=1.09, 95% CI=1.02-1.15; AT vs. AA: OR=1.04, 95%
CI=1.01-1.33). Meanwhile, we found that rs3750805 polymorphism could increased
the risk for breast cancer (TT+AT vs. AA: OR=1.12, 95% CI=1.01-1.24).
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis demonstrates that TCF7L2 polymorphisms may increase
the risk for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4537972
PMID: 26309596  [PubMed]


53. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:129695. doi: 10.1155/2015/129695. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Association of the Genetic Polymorphisms in Transcription Factor 7-Like 2 and
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors- <U+03B3> 2 with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
and is Interaction with Obesity Status in Emirati Population.

Al-Safar H(1), Hassoun A(2), Almazrouei S(1), Kamal W(3), Afandi B(4), Rais N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Khalifa University of Science,
Technology & Research, P.O. Box 127788, Abu Dhabi, UAE. (2)Dubai Diabetes Centre,
Dubai Health Authority, Dubai, UAE. (3)School of Life Sciences, Manipal
University, P.O. Box 345050, Dubai, UAE. (4)Diabetes Clinics, Tawam Hospital,
Al-Ain, UAE.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors-<U+03B3>2 (PPAR-<U+03B3>2) have a profound effect on the
incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and had previously been found to be 
associated with T2DM risk in various ppopulations. However, studies in the Arab
population are inconsistent. We conducted a case control study to confirm the
association of variants rs10885409 of TCF7L2 and Pro12Ala (rs1801282) of PPAR-<U+03B3>2 
with risk of T2DM and related complications in Emirati population of Arab origin.
We also investigated the interaction of these associations with obesity status.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from the saliva samples of 272 T2DM patients and 216
nondiabetic Emiratis. Genotyping for rs10885409 (TCF7L2) and rs1801282 (PPAR-<U+03B3>2
P12A) variants was accomplished with a TaqMan assay. The subgroups were
constituted according to obesity status.
RESULTS: In the nonobese group, the rs10885409 C allele in the recessive model
was significantly associated with the incidence of T2DM (OR 1.975 [95% CI
1.127-3.461], P = 0.017), but this association was not observed in the obese
group or when BMI was not considered. PPAR-<U+03B3>2 risk allele Pro12 frequency (0.96) 
was similar in the groups tested and more than 90% population was homozygous for 
this allele.
CONCLUSIONS: Our case-control study is the first of its kind in Emiratis which
establishes TCF7L2 rs10885409 C allele as a T2DM risk factor in Emiratis and this
association is modulated by obesity status. We also confirmed that Pro12Ala
mutation in PPAR-<U+03B3>2 is not associated with T2DM risk in this population.

PMCID: PMC4530252
PMID: 26273662  [PubMed - in process]


54. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2015 Aug;70(8):593-9. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2015(08)10.

The association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism of the TCF7L2 gene and
type 2 diabetes in the Chinese Han population: a meta-analysis.

Ma E(1), Wang H(2), Guo J(1), Tian R(3), Wei L(1).

Author information: 
(1)General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of
Nursing, Xi'an International University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Nursing, 
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 has been shown to be associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus in multiple ethnic groups in recent years. In the Chinese Han
population in particular, numerous studies have evaluated the association between
the rs11196218A/G polymorphism of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene and type
2 diabetes mellitus. However, the results have been inconsistent, so we performed
a meta-analysis to assess the association. Odds ratio and 95% confidence interval
values were calculated using a random-effects model or a fixed-effects model
based on heterogeneity analysis. The quality of the included studies was
evaluated using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Subgroup analyses were conducted
based on conformity with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group as well 
as on other variables, such as age, sex and body mass index. Sensitivity analysis
was also performed to detect heterogeneity and to assess the stability of the
results. In total, 10 case-control studies comprising 7,491 cases and 12,968
controls were included in this meta-analysis. The combined analysis indicated
that the rs11196218A/G polymorphism was not associated with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (G vs. A, OR=1.04, 95% CI=0.97-1.13, p=0.28). The subgroup analyses also
did not show any association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism and the risk 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Furthermore, the results of the subgroup analyses
indicated that the absence of an association was not influenced by age, sex or
body mass index. The results of the sensitivity analysis verified the reliability
and stability of this meta-analysis. In conclusion, this study indicated that
there is no significant association between the rs11196218A/G polymorphism and
the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC4518842
PMID: 26247673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Oct;36(10):1103-10. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv115. Epub 2015
Aug 4.

Patterns of somatic uniparental disomy identify novel tumor suppressor genes in
colorectal cancer.

Torabi K(1), Miró R(2), Fernández-Jiménez N(3), Quintanilla I(4), Ramos L(5),
Prat E(6), del Rey J(2), Pujol N(1), Killian JK(7), Meltzer PS(7), Fernández
PL(8), Ried T(7), Lozano JJ(9), Camps J(10), Ponsa I(11).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Genètica Mèdica, Departament de Biologia
Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain. (2)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i
Genètica Mèdica, Departament de Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia,
Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia
08193, Spain, Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain. (3)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i
Genètica Mèdica, Departament de Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia,
Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia
08193, Spain, Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain, Present address: Epigenetics
Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer 69008, Lyon, France.
(4)Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic Oncology Group, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Catalonia
08036, Spain. (5)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Genètica Mèdica, Departament de
Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain, Institut de
Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra,
Catalonia 08193, Spain, Present address: Unitat de Genòmica i Bioinformàtica,
Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer (IMPPC), Badalona,
Catalonia 08916, Spain. (6)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Genètica Mèdica,
Departament de Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Facultat de Medicina,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain, Institut
de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra,
Catalonia 08193, Spain, Present address: Laboratori de Genètica Molecular,
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Catalonia 08908, Spain. (7)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (8)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic/IDIBAPS, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia 08036, Spain and. (9)Bioinformatics Unit,
CIBERehd, Barcelona, Catalonia 08036, Spain. (10)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i
Genètica Mèdica, Departament de Biologia Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia,
Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia
08193, Spain, Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic Oncology Group, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Barcelona, Catalonia 08036, Spain, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (11)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Genètica Mèdica, Departament de Biologia
Cellular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193, Spain, Institut de Biotecnologia i
Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Catalonia 08193,
Spain, imma.ponsa@uab.cat.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is characterized by specific patterns of copy number
alterations (CNAs), which helped with the identification of driver oncogenes and 
tumor suppressor genes (TSGs). More recently, the usage of single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays provided information of copy number neutral loss of
heterozygosity, thus suggesting the occurrence of somatic uniparental disomy
(UPD) and uniparental polysomy (UPP) events. The aim of this study is to
establish an integrative profiling of recurrent UPDs/UPPs and CNAs in sporadic
CRC. Our results indicate that regions showing high frequencies of UPD/UPP mostly
coincide with regions typically involved in genomic losses. Among them,
chromosome arms 3p, 5q, 9q, 10q, 14q, 17p, 17q, 20p, 21q and 22q preferentially
showed UPDs/UPPs over genomic losses suggesting that tumor cells must maintain
the disomic state of certain genes to favor cellular fitness. A meta-analysis
using over 300 samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas confirmed our findings.
Several regions affected by recurrent UPDs/UPPs contain well-known TSGs, as well 
as novel candidates such as ARID1A, DLC1, TCF7L2 and DMBT1. In addition, VCAN,
FLT4, SFRP1 and GAS7 were also frequently involved in regions of UPD/UPP and
displayed high levels of methylation. Finally, sequencing and fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis of the gene APC underlined that a somatic UPD event
might represent the second hit to achieve biallelic inactivation of this TSG in
colorectal tumors. In summary, our data define a profile of somatic UPDs/UPPs in 
sporadic CRC and highlights the importance of these events as a mechanism to
achieve the inactivation of TSGs.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4598814 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26243311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Sep 15;26(18):3313-28. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-11-1534. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

The cellular prion protein PrPc is a partner of the Wnt pathway in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Besnier LS(1), Cardot P(1), Da Rocha B(1), Simon A(2), Loew D(3), Klein C(1),
Riveau B(1), Lacasa M(1), Clair C(1), Rousset M(1), Thenet S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Université Paris 06,
UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche 
des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France.
(2)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Centre de Recherche, F-75005 Paris,
France Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/UMR144, F-75005 Paris,
France. (3)Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique, Institut Curie,
F-75248 Paris, France. (4)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Université Paris 06, UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006
Paris, France Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UMRS
1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France Université Paris 
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers,
F-75006 Paris, France Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, PSL Research University, 
Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, F-75006 Paris, France
sophie.thenet@crc.jussieu.fr.

We reported previously that the cellular prion protein (PrP(c)) is a component of
desmosomes and contributes to the intestinal barrier function. We demonstrated
also the presence of PrP(c) in the nucleus of proliferating intestinal epithelial
cells. Here we sought to decipher the function of this nuclear pool. In human
intestinal cancer cells Caco-2/TC7 and SW480 and normal crypt-like HIEC-6 cells, 
PrP(c) interacts, in cytoplasm and nucleus, with <U+03B3>-catenin, one of its desmosomal
partners, and with ß-catenin and TCF7L2, effectors of the canonical Wnt pathway. 
PrP(c) up-regulates the transcriptional activity of the ß-catenin/TCF7L2 complex,
whereas <U+03B3>-catenin down-regulates it. Silencing of PrP(c) results in the
modulation of several Wnt target gene expressions in human cells, with different 
effects depending on their Wnt signaling status, and in mouse intestinal crypt
cells in vivo. PrP(c) also interacts with the Hippo pathway effector YAP,
suggesting that it may contribute to the regulation of gene transcription beyond 
the ß-catenin/TCF7L2 complex. Finally, we demonstrate that PrP(c) is required for
proper formation of intestinal organoids, indicating that it contributes to
proliferation and survival of intestinal progenitors. In conclusion, PrP(c) must 
be considered as a new modulator of the Wnt signaling pathway in proliferating
intestinal epithelial cells.

© 2015 Besnier et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4569320
PMID: 26224313  [PubMed - in process]


57. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jul 21:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Design of an allele-specific PCR assay to genotype the rs12255372 SNP in a pilot 
study of association between common TCF7L2 polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes in
Venezuelans.

Moran Y(1), Labrador L(1), Camargo ME(1), Fernández D(2), Chiurillo MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular "Dr. Jorge Yunis-Turbay", Decanato de
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Centroccidental Lisandro Alvarado,
Barquisimeto, Venezuela. (2)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Hospital Antonio
María Pineda, Universidad Centroccidental Lisandro Alvarado, Barquisimeto,
Venezuela.

Objective The global burden of diabetes mellitus will impact strongly American
countries in the coming decades. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a
multifactorial disease and the basis for its genetic susceptibility remains not
fully understood. Different population studies have demonstrated that variants of
the TCF7L2 gene are strongly associated with an increased risk of T2DM. Moreover,
institutions or countries with limited budget to conduct genetic research need
cost effective methods for detecting DNA variants. Subjects and methods We
standardized a rapid and simple allele-specific PCR method for genotyping the
rs12255372 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in a pilot study exploring the
association of three TCF7L2 polymorphisms (rs7903146, rs12255372 and DG10S478)
with T2DM in 70 patients and 73 controls from Venezuela. Results The performance 
of the designed allele-specific PCR reaction for rs12255372 genotyping was
reliable and accurate. Patients carrying the TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele (CT + TT
genotypes) and heterozygous CT genotype had a significantly higher risk for T2DM 
(OR = 2.9 and 2.3, respectively). Although rs12255372 and DG10S478 risk alleles
predominated in T2DM group no statistical significance was found. Conclusions We 
developed a novel allele-specific PCR method for easier and rapid detection of
rs12255372 polymorphism without the use of expensive instrumentation and
reagents. Our study in a relatively small sample of the Venezuelan population
replicated the association of the rs7903146 SNP with T2DM. Further studies with
larger sample size and more biochemical data should be conducted to explore the
genetic basis of T2DM susceptibility in Venezuela.

PMID: 26201011  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. Hum Genet. 2015 Oct;134(10):1037-53. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1584-z. Epub 2015
Jul 21.

Investigation of genes important in neurodevelopment disorders in adult human
brain.

Maussion G(1,)(2), Diallo AB(1,)(2), Gigek CO(2,)(3), Chen ES(2,)(3), Crapper
L(1,)(2), Théroux JF(1,)(2), Chen GG(1,)(2), Vasuta C(1,)(2), Ernst
C(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada.
(2)McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3,
Canada. (3)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina/Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada.
carl.ernst@mcgill.ca. (5)McGill Group for Suicide Studies, Douglas Hospital,
Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca. (6)Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca.
(7)Douglas Hospital Research Institute, 6875 LaSalle Boulevard, Frank Common
Building, Room 2101.2, Verdun, QC, H4H 1R3, Canada. carl.ernst@mcgill.ca.

Several neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are caused by mutations in genes
expressed in fetal brain, but little is known about these same genes in adult
human brain. Here, we test the hypothesis that genes associated with NDDs
continue to have a role in adult human brain to explore the idea that NDD
symptoms may be partially a result of their adult function rather than just their
neurodevelopmental function. To demonstrate adult brain function, we performed
expression analyses and ChIPseq in human neural stem cell(NSC) lines at different
developmental stages and adult human brain, targeting two genes associated with
NDDs, SATB2 and EHMT1, and the WNT signaling gene TCF7L2, which has not been
associated with NDDs. Analysis of DNA interaction sites in neural stem cells
reveals high (40-50 %) overlap between proliferating and differentiating cells
for each gene in temporal space. Studies in adult brain demonstrate that
consensus sites are similar to NSCs but occur at different genomic locations. We 
also performed expression analyses using BrainSpan data for NDD-associated genes 
SATB2, EHMT1, FMR1, MECP2, MBD5, CTNND2, RAI1, CHD8, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, TCF4, SCN2A,
and DYRK1A and find high expression of these genes in adult brain, at least
comparable to developing human brain, confirming that genes associated with NDDs 
likely have a role in adult tissue. Adult function of genes associated with NDDs 
might be important in clinical disease presentation and may be suitable targets
for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 26194112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2015 Feb 24;8:9. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-8-9. eCollection
2015.

Altering cancer transcriptomes using epigenomic inhibitors.

Gaddis M(1), Gerrard D(2), Frietze S(2), Farnham PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California,
1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9601 USA. (2)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO 80639 USA.

BACKGROUND: Due to the hyper-activation of WNT signaling in a variety of cancer
types, there has been a strong drive to develop pathway-specific inhibitors with 
the eventual goal of providing a chemotherapeutic antagonist of WNT signaling to 
cancer patients. A new category of drugs, called epigenetic inhibitors, are being
developed that hold high promise for inhibition of the WNT pathway. The canonical
WNT signaling pathway initiates when WNT ligands bind to receptors, causing the
nuclear localization of the co-activator ß-catenin (CTNNB1), which leads to an
association of ß-catenin with a member of the TCF transcription factor family at 
regulatory regions of WNT-responsive genes. The TCF/ß-catenin complex then
recruits CBP (CREBBP) or p300 (EP300), leading to histone acetylation and gene
activation. A current model in the field is that CBP-driven expression of WNT
target genes supports proliferation whereas p300-driven expression of WNT target 
genes supports differentiation. The small molecule inhibitor ICG-001 binds to
CBP, but not to p300, and competitively inhibits the interaction of CBP with
ß-catenin. Upon treatment of cancer cells, this should reduce expression of
CBP-regulated transcription, leading to reduced tumorigenicity and enhanced
differentiation.
RESULTS: We have compared the genome-wide effects on the transcriptome after
treatment with ICG-001 (the specific CBP inhibitor) versus C646, a compound that 
competes with acetyl-coA for the Lys-coA binding pocket of both CBP and p300. We 
found that both drugs cause large-scale changes in the transcriptome of HCT116
colon cancer cells and PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells and reverse some
tumor-specific changes in gene expression. Interestingly, although the epigenetic
inhibitors affect cell cycle pathways in both the colon and pancreatic cancer
cell lines, the WNT signaling pathway was affected only in the colon cancer
cells. Notably, WNT target genes were similarly downregulated after treatment of 
HCT116 with C646 as with ICG-001.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that treatment with a general HAT inhibitor
causes similar effects on the transcriptome as does treatment with a CBP-specific
inhibitor and that epigenetic inhibition affects the WNT pathway in HCT116 cells 
and the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway in PANC1 cells.

PMCID: PMC4506402
PMID: 26191083  [PubMed]


60. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 31;35(13):1679-91. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.232. Epub 2015 Jul
13.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling regulated SATB1 promotes colorectal cancer tumorigenesis 
and progression.

Mir R(1), Pradhan SJ(1), Patil P(2), Mulherkar R(3), Galande S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pashan, Pune, India.
(2)Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India. (3)Advanced Centre for Treatment
Research and Education in Cancer, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, India. (4)National
Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India.

The chromatin organizer SATB1 has been implicated in the development and
progression of multiple cancers including breast and colorectal cancers. However,
the regulation and role of SATB1 in colorectal cancers is poorly understood.
Here, we demonstrate that expression of SATB1 is induced upon hyperactivation of 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and repressed upon depletion of TCF7L2 (TCF4) and
ß-catenin. Using several colorectal cancer cell line models and the APC min
mutant zebrafish in vivo model, we established that SATB1 is a novel target of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We show that direct binding of TCF7L2/ß-catenin complex 
on Satb1 promoter is required for the regulation of SATB1. Moreover, SATB1 is
sufficient to regulate the expression of ß-catenin, members of TCF family,
multiple downstream effectors and mediators of Wnt pathway. SATB1 potentiates the
cellular changes and expression of key cancer-associated genes in non-aggressive 
colorectal cells, promotes their aggressive phenotype and tumorigenesis in vivo. 
Conversely, depletion of SATB1 from aggressive cells reprograms the expression of
cancer-associated genes, reverses their cancer phenotype and reduces the
potential of these cells to develop tumors in vivo. We also show that SATB1 and
ß-catenin bind to the promoters of TCF7L2 and the downstream targets of Wnt
signaling and regulate their expression. Our findings suggest that SATB1 shares a
feedback regulatory network with TCF7L2/ß-catenin signaling and is required for
Wnt signaling-dependent regulation of ß-catenin. Collectively, these results
provide unequivocal evidence to establish that SATB1 reprograms the expression of
tumor growth- and metastasis-associated genes to promote tumorigenesis and
functionally overlaps with Wnt signaling critical for colorectal cancer
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26165840  [PubMed - in process]


61. Ann Hum Genet. 2015 Jul 7. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12122. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of TCF7L2 Polymorphism with Diabetic Nephropathy in the South Indian 
Population.

Bodhini D(1), Chidambaram M(1,)(2), Liju S(1), Prakash VG(1), Gayathri V(1),
Shanthirani CS(1), Ranjith U(3), Anjana RM(1,)(3), Mohan V(1,)(3), Radha V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation, Chennai, India. (2)Qatar Cardiovascular
Research Centre, Qatar. (3)Dr. Mohan's Diabetes Specialities Centre, WHO
Collaborating Centre for Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention & Control, IDF
Centre of Education, Chennai, India.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene plays a significant role in the
development of type 2 diabetes and diabetic nephropathy. The aim of this study
was to investigate the association of TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G/T)polymorphism with
type 2 diabetic nephropathy in the South Indian population. A total of 2102
subjects, 927 normal glucose tolerant (NGT) subjects, 598 type 2 diabetic
subjects without nephropathy (DM), and 577 type 2 diabetic subjects with
nephropathy (DN) were genotyped by MassARRAY. As compared to the NGT group, the
odds ratio (adjusted for age, sex, BMI, HbA1c, and systolic BP) computed for the 
GT/TT genotype taking the GG genotype as reference was found to be 2.02 (95% CI: 
1.16-3.51, p = 0.013) for DN and 1.94 (95% CI: 1.36-2.78, p = 0.0002) for DM. The
genotype frequency was not significantly different between the DM and DN groups. 
In conclusion, the rs12255372 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene is associated with 
type 2 diabetes and DN but its association with DN is mediated through diabetes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 26155736  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


62. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2015 Nov;31(8):790-5. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2670. Epub 2015
Aug 18.

Role of high-risk variants in the development of impaired glucose metabolism was 
modified by birth weight in Han Chinese.

Zhang Y(1), Xiao X(1), Zhang Z(2), Ma X(3), Xu T(4), Li W(1), Feng K(1), Sun
Q(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of Health, Department of
Endocrinology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of
Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, PR China. (3)Department of Core Facility, National Institute
for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, PR China. (4)Epidemiology and Statistics, School of Basic Medicine,
Peking Union Medical College, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate the role of common variants 
in the genes SLC30A8, KCNQ1, and TCF7L2 in the association between birth weight
and increased risk of type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese.
METHODS: Seven variants (SLC30A8-rs13266634 and rs2466293; KCNQ1-rs2237895 and
rs2074196; and TCF7L2-rs11196218, rs7903146, and rs290487) were genotyped in 1181
individuals born in Peking Union Medical College Hospital from 1921 to 1954 by
Taqman allelic discrimination assay. All the subjects were stratified by birth
weight into groups of =3000 g and <3000 g. Associations of genetic variants with 
birth weight and with risk of type 2 diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance
(together as impaired glucose metabolism) were analysed.
RESULTS: After adjustment for sex, gestational weeks, parity, and maternal age,
the G allele of KCNQ1-rs2074196 was associated with higher birth weight
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032). KCNQ1-rs2074196, rs2234895, and TCF7L2-rs290487 were associated with
increased risk of impaired glucose metabolism. However, the associations were
modified by size at birth. The associations above were only found in subjects
with birth weights greater than (or equal to) 3000 g. In subjects with birth
weights less than 3000 g, impaired glucose metabolism was associated with
variants SLC30A8-rs2466293 and TCF7L2-rs11196218.
CONCLUSIONS: The role of common variants in susceptible genes in the development 
of impaired glucose metabolism was modified by birth weight in Han Chinese. This 
provides evidence that genetic variants influence birth weight and are involved
in development of type 2 diabetes. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26109524  [PubMed - in process]


63. Clin Biochem. 2015 Nov;48(16-17):1064-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2015.06.013. 
Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Polymorphisms in FTO and TCF7L2 genes of Euro-Brazilian women with gestational
diabetes.

de Melo SF(1), Frigeri HR(2), dos Santos-Weiss IC(1), Réa RR(3), de Souza EM(4), 
Alberton D(1), Gomes de Moraes Rego F(1), Picheth G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Science, Federal University of Parana,
Brazil. (2)Post-Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Science, Federal University of
Parana, Brazil; Health and Biosciences School, Pontifical Catholic University of 
Parana, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil. (3)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service
(SEMPR), Clinical Hospital, Federal University of Parana, Brazil. (4)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Federal University of Parana, Brazil.
(5)Post-Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Science, Federal University of Parana,
Brazil. Electronic address: gpicheth@ufpr.br.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between fat mass and obesity-associated
(FTO) gene polymorphisms rs8050136C>A and rs9939609T>A, and transcription factor 
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms rs12255372G>T and rs7903146C>T, in a sample 
group of pregnant Euro-Brazilian women with or without gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: Subjects were classified as either healthy pregnant control (n=200) or
GDM (n=200) according to the 2010 criteria of the American Diabetes Association. 
The polymorphisms were genotyped using fluorescent probes (TaqMan®).
RESULTS: All groups were in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The genotype and
allele frequencies of the examined polymorphisms did not exhibit significant
difference (P>0.05) between the groups. In the healthy and GDM pregnant women
groups, the A-allele frequencies (95% CI) of FTO polymorphisms rs8050136 and
rs9939609 were 39% (34-44%); 38% (33-43%) and 40% (35-45%); 41% (36-46%),
respectively; and the T-allele frequencies of TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs12255372 and
rs7903146 were 30% (26-35%), 32% (27-37%) and 29% (25-34%), 36% (31-41%),
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The examined polymorphisms were not associated with GDM in the
Euro-Brazilian population studied.

Copyright © 2015 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26102344  [PubMed - in process]


64. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 18;10(6):e0129359. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129359.
eCollection 2015.

Gene Expression Signature in Adipose Tissue of Acromegaly Patients.

Hochberg I(1), Tran QT(2), Barkan AL(3), Saltiel AR(4), Chandler WF(5), Bridges
D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Rambam Health Care
Campus, Haifa, Israel; Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, United States of America. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States of
America. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, United States of America; Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States of America. (4)Life Sciences
Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America;
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United
States of America. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States of America. (6)Department of
Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United
States of America; Children's Foundation Research Institute, Le Bonheur
Children's Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States of America; Life Sciences
Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America.

To study the effect of chronic excess growth hormone on adipose tissue, we
performed RNA sequencing in adipose tissue biopsies from patients with acromegaly
(n = 7) or non-functioning pituitary adenomas (n = 11). The patients underwent
clinical and metabolic profiling including assessment of HOMA-IR. Explants of
adipose tissue were assayed ex vivo for lipolysis and ceramide levels. Patients
with acromegaly had higher glucose, higher insulin levels and higher HOMA-IR
score. We observed several previously reported transcriptional changes (IGF1,
IGFBP3, CISH, SOCS2) that are known to be induced by GH/IGF-1 in liver but are
also induced in adipose tissue. We also identified several novel transcriptional 
changes, some of which may be important for GH/IGF responses (PTPN3 and PTPN4)
and the effects of acromegaly on growth and proliferation. Several differentially
expressed transcripts may be important in GH/IGF-1-induced metabolic changes.
Specifically, induction of LPL, ABHD5, and NRIP1 can contribute to enhanced
lipolysis and may explain the elevated adipose tissue lipolysis in acromegalic
patients. Higher expression of TCF7L2 and the fatty acid desaturases FADS1, FADS2
and SCD could contribute to insulin resistance. Ceramides were not different
between the two groups. In summary, we have identified the acromegaly gene
expression signature in human adipose tissue. The significance of altered
expression of specific transcripts will enhance our understanding of the
metabolic and proliferative changes associated with acromegaly.

PMCID: PMC4472931
PMID: 26087292  [PubMed - in process]


65. Nutrients. 2015 Jun 15;7(6):4763-77. doi: 10.3390/nu7064763.

Association of Canonical Wnt/ß-Catenin Pathway and Type 2 Diabetes: Genetic
Epidemiological Study in Han Chinese.

Wang J(1,)(2), Zhao J(3), Zhang J(4), Luo X(5), Gao K(6), Zhang M(7), Li L(8),
Wang C(9), Hu D(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, Preventive Medicine
Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Zhengzhou 450008, China. wangjinjin510@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Epidemiology, 
Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, China.
wangjinjin510@yahoo.com. (3)Military Hospital of Henan Province, Zhengzhou
450000, China. jingzhi_zhao@sina.com. (4)Henan Armed Police Corps Hospital,
Zhengzhou 450000, China. jeefzhang106@yahoo.com. (5)Department of Epidemiology,
Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, China.
lxp2005@szu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Epidemiology, Shenzhen University School of 
Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, China. gao_kp@szu.edu.cn. (7)Department of
Epidemiology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, China.
zhangming@szu.edu.cn. (8)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China. lilinlin@zzu.edu.cn. (9)Department
of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou
450001, China. jwcj2008@zzu.edu.cn. (10)Department of Epidemiology, Shenzhen
University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, China. dongsheng_hu@hotmail.com.

We aimed to investigate the associations of polymorphisms in Canonical
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway (WNT) signaling genes (including low-density
lipoprotein-related protein 5 [LRP5] and transcription factor 7-like 2 [TCF7L2]
gene) and the downstream gene glucagon (GCG) and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in a Han Chinese population. We genotyped the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) for LRP5, TCF7L2 and GCG gene were genotyped in 1842
patients with T2DM and 7777 normal glucose-tolerant healthy subjects. We used
multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and multiplicative logistic regression
adjusting for sex, age, anthropometric measurements and lipid levels to
investigate the gene-gene interactions for the risk of T2DM. Among the five SNPs 
in LRP5, the recessive model of rs7102273 and the haplotype GCTCC were associated
with T2DM risk; the haplotype GCTTC was associated with decreased risk. For
TCF7L2, the rs11196218 genotype GA and the haplotype CCG, TTG, TTA were
associated with T2DM risk; whereas, the haplotype CTG and TCG were associated
with decreased risk. Both MDR and multiplicative logistic regression revealed
potential gene-gene interactions among LRP5, TCF7L2, and GCG associated with
T2DM. The WNT signaling pathway may play a significant role in risk of T2DM in
Han Chinese people.

PMCID: PMC4488812
PMID: 26083111  [PubMed - in process]


66. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 1;75(17):3446-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3051. Epub
2015 Jun 9.

Correlation between Density of CD8+ T-cell Infiltrate in Microsatellite Unstable 
Colorectal Cancers and Frameshift Mutations: A Rationale for Personalized
Immunotherapy.

Maby P(1), Tougeron D(2), Hamieh M(1), Mlecnik B(3), Kora H(1), Bindea G(3),
Angell HK(4), Fredriksen T(3), Elie N(5), Fauquembergue E(1), Drouet A(1),
Leprince J(6), Benichou J(7), Mauillon J(8), Le Pessot F(9), Sesboüé R(1), Tuech 
JJ(10), Sabourin JC(11), Michel P(12), Frébourg T(13), Galon J(3), Latouche
JB(14).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. (2)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in
Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France. Department of Gastroenterology, Poitiers
University Hospital, Poitiers, France. Laboratoire Inflammation Tissus
Epithéliaux et Cytokines, Poitiers University, Poitiers, France. (3)Inserm U1138,
Laboratory of Integrative Cancer Immunology, Paris, France. Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France. Cordeliers Research Centre, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie, Paris 6, Paris, France. (4)Inserm U1138, Laboratory of Integrative Cancer 
Immunology, Paris, France. Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. Cordeliers 
Research Centre, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, Paris, France.
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (5)Imaging 
Core Facility, CMABIO, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France. (6)Inserm U982,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen University,
France. (7)Biostatistics Unit, Inserm U657, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen
University, Rouen, France. (8)Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, 
Rouen, France. Department of Gastroenterology, Le Havre Hospital, Le Havre,
France. (9)Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(10)Department of Digestive Surgery, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(11)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(13)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 
(14)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 
jean-baptiste.latouche@chu-rouen.fr.

Colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI) represent 15% of all
colorectal cancers, including Lynch syndrome as the most frequent hereditary form
of this disease. Notably, MSI colorectal cancers have a higher density of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) than other colorectal cancers. This feature 
is thought to reflect the accumulation of frameshift mutations in sequences that 
are repeated within gene coding regions, thereby leading to the synthesis of
neoantigens recognized by CD8(+) T cells. However, there has yet to be a clear
link established between CD8(+) TIL density and frameshift mutations in
colorectal cancer. In this study, we examined this link in 103 MSI colorectal
cancers from two independent cohorts where frameshift mutations in 19 genes were 
analyzed and CD3(+), CD8(+), and FOXP3(+) TIL densities were quantitated. We
found that CD8(+) TIL density correlated positively with the total number of
frameshift mutations. TIL densities increased when frameshift mutations were
present within the ASTE1, HNF1A, or TCF7L2 genes, increasing even further when at
least one of these frameshift mutations was present in all tumor cells. Through
in vitro assays using engineered antigen-presenting cells, we were able to
stimulate peripheral cytotoxic T cells obtained from colorectal cancer patients
with peptides derived from frameshift mutations found in their tumors. Taken
together, our results highlight the importance of a CD8(+) T cell immune response
against MSI colorectal cancer-specific neoantigens, establishing a preclinical
rationale to target them as a personalized cellular immunotherapy strategy, an
especially appealing goal for patients with Lynch syndrome.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26060019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Arch Iran Med. 2015 Jun;18(6):376-8. doi: 015186/AIM.0010.

Association of rs12255372 (TCF7L2) and D76N (PDX-1) Polymorphisms with Type 2
Diabetes in a Population Living in Northeast Iran.

Rafati R(1), Jalal R(2), Asoodeh A(3), Matin MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad,
Mashhad, Iran. (2)1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. 2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research
Group, Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad,
Iran.razieh@um.ac.ir. (3)1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. 2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research
Group, Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)2)Cell and Molecular Biotechnology Research Group, Institute of Biotechnology,
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.3)Department of Biology, Faculty of
Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the rs12255372 (TCF7L2) and D76N
(PDX-1) polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in
Mashhad, northeast Iran. A hundred twenty seven patients with T2DM and 71
non-diabetic controls in Mashhad were genotyped by PCR-RFLP and ARMS-PCR methods.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were confirmed by sequencing in some
samples and allelic and genotypic frequencies were then analyzed in each group.
The T-allele of the SNP rs12255372 of TCF7L2 (OR = 2.70, 95% CI = 1.12-6.49, P = 
0.027) and the A-allele of PDX-1 D76N (OR = 3.93, 95% CI = 1.60-7.68, P = 0.002) 
were significantly associated with an increased risk of T2DM. The rs12255372 SNP 
of TCF7L2 and D76N of PDX-1 genes may confer susceptibility to T2DM in the
population living in Mashhad.

PMID: 26058934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):E1160-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1172. Epub
2015 Jun 5.

Glucose Metabolism in High-Risk Subjects for Type 2 Diabetes Carrying the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 Gene Variant.

Daniele G(1), Gaggini M(1), Comassi M(1), Bianchi C(1), Basta G(1), Dardano A(1),
Miccoli R(1), Mari A(1), Gastaldelli A(1), Del Prato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (G.D., M.C., C.B., A.D.,
R.M., S.D.P.), University of Pisa, and Institute of Clinical Physiology (M.G.,
G.B., A.G.), 56124 Pisa, Italy; and Metabolic Unit (A.M.), Institute of
Neuroscience, National Research Council, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127 Padova,
Italy.

CONTEXT: The mechanisms responsible for contribution of variants in the gene
TFC7L2 to the risk for type 2 diabetes (T2DM) remains far from being completely
understood, and available studies have generated nonunivocal results.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the postprandial glucose metabolism in subjects at
risk for T2DM carrying the TCF7L2 risk allele.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-three subjects carrying the
risk-conferring TCF7L2 genotypes (11 TT and 12 CT at rs7901346) and 13 subjects
with wild-type genotype (CC) underwent a standard mixed-meal test (MMT) in
combination with stable isotope tracers.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: We evaluated endogenous and exogenous glucose fluxes and
hormonal responses.
RESULTS: Fasting plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, glycated hemoglobin,
endogenous glucose production, and plasma glucose clearance were similar in the
three groups, whereas plasma glucagon levels were lower in both CT and TT than in
CC (64 ± 20, 63 ± 18 and 90 ± 29 pg/mL, respectively; both P = .01). In response 
to the MMT, TT subjects had lower plasma glucose levels than CC subjects [mean
area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) 6.1 ± 3.9 vs 7.1 ± 12.0 mmol/L, P =
.04] and lower insulin secretion rate (mean AUC 385 ± 95 vs 530 ± 159 pmol/m(2) ·
min, P = .02). Initial (0-60 min) rate of appearance (Ra) of oral glucose was
lower in TT compared with CT/CC (AUC 2.7 ± 1.1 vs 3.8 ± 1.2 µmol/kg · min, P =
.02) with no difference among the three groups in endogenous glucose production. 
The AUC0-60min for Ra of exogenous glucose (Raex) was positively correlated with 
the plasma glucose AUC0-60min. Total Raex AUC0-120min was correlated with total
AUC0-120min of plasma glucose (r = 0.45, P < .01). Plasma glucagon-like peptide-1
and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide levels in response to the MMT were
not affected by genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: In subjects at risk for T2DM, the TCF7L2 polymorphisms were
associated with reduced Raex into systemic circulation, causing reduced
postprandial blood glucose increase and, in turn, lower insulin secretion rate
with no impairment in ß-cell function. The reduced Raex is likely due to greater 
glucose retention in the splanchnic area.

PMID: 26046964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Meta Gene. 2015 May 21;5:9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2015.05.001. eCollection
2015.

Gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in the etiology of type 2 diabetes
mellitus in the population of Hyderabad, India.

Uma Jyothi K(1), Reddy BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Anthropology Unit (Molecular Anthropology Group), Indian
Statistical Institute, Hyderabad, India.

Fifteen SNPs from nine different genes were genotyped on 1379 individuals, 758
T2DM patients and 621 controls, from the city of Hyderabad, India, using Sequenom
Massarray platform. These data were analyzed to examine the role of gene-gene and
gene-environment interactions in the manifestation of T2DM. The multivariate
analysis suggests that TCF7L2, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, HHEX and PPARG genes are
significantly associated with T2DM, albeit only the first two of the above 5 were
associated in the univariate analysis. Significant gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions were also observed with reference to TCF7L2, CAPN10 and CDKAL1
genes, highlighting their importance in the pathophysiology of T2DM. In the
analysis for cumulative effect of risk alleles, SLC30A8 steps in as significant
contributor to the disease by its presence in all combinations of risk alleles. A
striking difference between risk allele categories, 1-4 and 5-6, was evident in
showing protective and susceptible roles, respectively, while the latter was
characterized by the presence of TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 variants. Overall, these two
genes TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 showed strong association with T2DM, either individually 
or in interaction with the other genes. However, we need further studies on
gene-gene and gene-environment interactions among heterogeneous Indian
populations to obtain unequivocal conclusions that are applicable for the Indian 
population as a whole.

PMCID: PMC4443428
PMID: 26042206  [PubMed]


70. Clin Transl Med. 2015 Apr 23;4:17. doi: 10.1186/s40169-015-0058-1. eCollection
2015.

Association between the TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G/T) gene polymorphism and type 2
diabetes mellitus in a Cameroonian population: a pilot study.

Nanfa D(1), Sobngwi E(2), Atogho-Tiedeu B(1), Noubiap JJ(3), Donfack OS(1), Mofo 
EP(1), Guewo-Fokeng M(1), Nguimmo Metsadjio A(4), Ndonwi Ngwa E(1), Pokam Fosso
P(1), Djahmeni E(5), Djokam-Dadjeu R(1), Evehe MS(1), Aminkeng F(6), Mbacham
WF(7), Mbanya JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (2)Laboratory
for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of
Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties,
Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé,
Cameroon ; National Obesity Center, Yaoundé Central Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon. 
(3)Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa ; Medical Diagnostic Center, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. (5)Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. (6)The Canadian
Pharmacogenomics Network for Drug Safety (CPNDS), Center for Molecular Medicine
and Therapeutics, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University 
of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Laboratory for Public Health Research
Biotechnologies, Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé,
Cameroon.

BACKGROUND: To study the relationship between the rs12255372 (G/T) polymorphism
of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
in a Cameroonian population.
METHODS: This case-control study included 60 T2DM patients and 60 healthy
normoglycemic controls, all unrelated and of Cameroonian origin, aged above
40 years (range 40-87). The Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism - Polymerase
Chain Reaction (RFLP-PCR) was used for genotyping.
RESULTS: The T allele frequency was significantly higher in the diabetic group
(0.44) than in the control group (0.17). This allele was significantly associated
to a greater risk of developing T2DM as compared to the G allele (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.92, 95% 
CI 2.04 - 7.67, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). The codominant (additive) model explained best the
risk of developing the disease, as the TT genotype was significantly associated
to T2DM when compared to the GG genotype (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.45, 95% CI 1.64 - 12.83,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0014). By logistic regression adjusted for age, this OR was 4.33 (95% CI:
1.57 - 11.92, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the rs12255372 (G/T) polymorphism of the
TCF7L2 gene is an important risk factor for T2DM in the Cameroonian population.

PMCID: PMC4434239
PMID: 25995831  [PubMed]


71. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2015 May;4(2):87-92. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2015.01008.

Validation of the association of TCF7L2 and SLC30A8 gene polymorphisms with
post-transplant diabetes mellitus in Asian Indian population.

Khan IA(1), Jahan P(2), Hasan Q(3), Rao P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular medicine, Kamineni Hospitals, Hyderabad, 
India; ; Department of Genetics, Vasavi Medical and Research Centre,
Khairathabad, Hyderabad, India; ; Department of Genetics and Biotechnology,
Osmania University, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India; (2)Department of Genetics and
Biotechnology, Osmania University, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India; (3)Department of
Genetics and Molecular medicine, Kamineni Hospitals, Hyderabad, India; ;
Department of Genetics, Vasavi Medical and Research Centre, Khairathabad,
Hyderabad, India; (4)Department of Biochemistry, Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.

The rs7903146 and rs13266634 polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 and SLC30A8 genes,
respectively, have been reported to be associated with type 2 diabetes. However, 
little is known about the association of these polymorphisms with post-transplant
diabetes mellitus (PTDM). To study this linkage, we determined a distribution of 
allele and genotype frequencies in Asian Indians. 42 PTDM and 98 non-PTDM
subjects were recruited. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis was performed to detect for rs7903146 and
rs13266634 polymorphisms. The clinical details and statistical analysis for PTDM 
and non-PTDM subjects were recorded. Our results observed higher frequencies of
the minor alleles in rs7903146 and rs13266634 polymorphisms in the PTDM group
compared to the non-PTDM subjects. The allele frequencies also found to be
significantly associated with PTDM (rs7903146: T vs C: OR-2.6; (95%CI: 1.2-5.6); 
p = 0.01; rs13266634: T vs C: OR-2.0; (95%CI: 1.1-3.4); p = 0.01). These findings
suggest that rs7903146 and rs13266634 polymorphisms are associated with PTDM in
the Asian Indian population despite a relatively small study group.

PMCID: PMC4428192
PMID: 25984427  [PubMed]


72. PLoS One. 2015 May 14;10(5):e0126408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126408.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic determinants for gestational diabetes mellitus and related metabolic
traits in Mexican women.

Huerta-Chagoya A(1), Vázquez-Cárdenas P(1), Moreno-Macías H(2), Tapia-Maruri
L(1), Rodríguez-Guillén R(1), López-Vite E(3), García-Escalante G(4),
Escobedo-Aguirre F(5), Parra-Covarrubias A(6), Cordero-Brieño R(7),
Manzo-Carrillo L(7), Zacarías-Castillo R(7), Vargas-García C(8), Aguilar-Salinas 
C(9), Tusié-Luna T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, UNAM / Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador
Zubirán, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (2)Departamento de Economía, Universidad
Autónoma Metropolitana, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (3)Departamento de
Ginelocología y Obstetricia, Hospital General O´Horan, Mérida, Yucatán, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Yucatán,
México. (5)Departamento de Ginecología y Medicina Perinatal, Centro Médico
Nacional 20 de Noviembre, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (6)Departamento de
Endocrinología, Instituto Nacional de Perinatología, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico.
(7)Departamento de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital General Manuel Gea
González, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico. (8)Departamento de Ginecología y
Obstetricia, Centro de Investigación Materno Infantil GEN, D.F., Mexico City,
Mexico. (9)Departamento de Endocrinología y Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salcador Zubirán, D.F., Mexico City, Mexico.

Epidemiological and physiological similarities among Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus (GDM) and Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) suggest that both diseases, share a
common genetic background. T2D risk variants have been associated to GDM
susceptibility. However, the genetic architecture of GDM is not yet completely
understood. We analyzed 176 SNPs for 115 loci previously associated to T2D, GDM
and body mass index (BMI), as well as a set of 118 Ancestry Informative Markers
(AIMs), in 750 pregnant Mexican women. Association with GDM was found for two of 
the most frequently replicated T2D loci: a TCF7L2 haplotype (CTTC: rs7901695,
rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326; P=2.16 x 10(-06); OR=2.95) and a KCNQ1
haplotype (TTT: rs2237892, rs163184, rs2237897; P=1.98 x 10(-05); OR=0.55). In
addition, we found two loci associated to glycemic traits: CENTD2 (60' OGTT
glycemia: rs1552224, P=0.03727) and MTNR1B (HOMA B: rs1387153, P=0.05358).
Remarkably, a major susceptibility SLC16A11 locus for T2D in Mexicans was not
shown to play a role in GDM risk. The fact that two of the main T2D associated
loci also contribute to the risk of developing GDM in Mexicans, confirm that both
diseases share a common genetic background. However, lack of association with a
Native American contribution T2D risk haplotype, SLC16A11, suggests that other
genetic mechanisms may be in play for GDM.

PMCID: PMC4431878
PMID: 25973943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Metab. 2015 Mar 17;4(5):365-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2015.03.002. eCollection
2015.

Beyond association: A functional role for Tcf7l2 in ß-cell development.

Migliorini A(1), Lickert H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell Research (ISF), Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany ;
Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration (IDR), Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany. 
(2)Institute of Stem Cell Research (ISF), Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany ;
Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration (IDR), Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany ;
Technical University Munich (TUM), Germany ; German Center for Diabetes Research 
(DZD), Germany ; Helmholtz Alliance ICEMED - Imaging and Curing Environmental
Metabolic Diseases.(ICEMED), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches
Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

PMCID: PMC4421078
PMID: 25973384  [PubMed]


74. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 May 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular anatomy of the thalamic complex and the underlying transcription
factors.

Nagalski A(1,)(2), Puelles L(3), Dabrowski M(4), Wegierski T(1), Kuznicki J(1),
Wisniewska MB(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Warsaw, 02-109, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Centre 
of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 00-927, Poland. (3)Department 
of Human Anatomy, University of Murcia and IMIB, Murcia, 30071, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center of Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, Warsaw, 02-093, Poland. (5)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration,
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, 02-109, Poland.
m.wisniewska@cent.uw.edu.pl. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Centre of
New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 00-927, Poland.
m.wisniewska@cent.uw.edu.pl.

Thalamocortical loops have been implicated in the control of higher-order
cognitive functions, but advances in our understanding of the molecular
underpinnings of neocortical organization have not been accompanied by similar
analyses in the thalamus. Using expression-based correlation maps and the manual 
mapping of mouse and human datasets available in the Allen Brain Atlas, we
identified a few individual regions and several sets of molecularly related
nuclei that partially overlap with the classic grouping that is based on
topographical localization and thalamocortical connections. These new molecular
divisions of the adult thalamic complex are defined by the combinatorial
expression of Tcf7l2, Lef1, Gbx2, Prox1, Pou4f1, Esrrg, and Six3 transcription
factor genes. Further in silico and experimental analyses provided the evidence
that TCF7L2 might be a pan-thalamic specifier. These results provide substantial 
insights into the "molecular logic" that underlies organization of the thalamic
complex.

PMID: 25963709  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1746. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.107.

Geniposide promotes beta-cell regeneration and survival through regulating
ß-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway.

Yao DD(1), Yang L(1), Wang Y(2), Liu C(3), Wei YJ(1), Jia XB(1), Yin W(4), Shu
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of New Drug Delivery System of Chinese Materia Medica, Jiangsu 
Province Academy of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory
of Xenotransplantation, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department
of Endocrinology, Jiangsu Province Hospital on Integration of Chinese and Western
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China.

T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is an important transcription factor of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has critical roles in ß-cell survival and
regeneration. In preliminary screening assay, we found geniposide, a naturally
occurring compound, was able to increase TCF7L2 mRNA level in Min6 cells. Here we
aimed to investigate the role of geniposide in ß-cell and underlying mechanism
involved. Geniposide was found to promote ß-cell survival by increasing ß-cell
proliferation and decreasing ß-cell apoptosis in cultured mouse islets after
challenge with diabetic stimuli. Geniposide protected ß-cell through activating
Wnt signaling, enhanced expressions of TCF7L2 and GLP-1R, activated AKT,
inhibited GSK3ß activity, and promoted ß-catenin nuclear translocation. The
protective effect of geniposide was remarkably suppressed by siRNAs against
ß-catenin, or by ICG001 (ß-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription inhibitor).
Moreover, geniposide promoted ß-cell regeneration in vivo to normalize blood
glucose in high-fat diet and db/db mice. Increased ß-cell proliferation was
observed in pancreatic sections of geniposide-treated diabetic mice. Most
importantly, geniposide triggered small islet-like cell clusters formation as a
result of ß-cell neogenesis from ductal epithelium, which was well correlated
with the increase in TCF7L2 expression. In exocrine cells isolated from mouse
pancreas, geniposide could induce duct cell differentiation through upregulating 
TCF7L2 expression and activating JAK2/STAT3 pathway. Taken together, we
identified a novel role of geniposide in promoting ß-cell survival and
regeneration by mechanisms involving the activation of ß-catenin/TCF7L2
signaling. Our finding highlights the potential value of geniposide as a possible
treatment for type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4669687
PMID: 25950476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Immunol Invest. 2015;44(4):321-30. doi: 10.3109/08820139.2014.1003650.

Association between CD24-P226-C/T polymorphism and multiple sclerosis: a
meta-analysis.

Jiang L(1), Bai X, Wang Y, Wei M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacology, China Medical University ,
Shenyang, Liaoning , China.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a progressive inflammatory and
neurodegenerative disease of the central nervous system (CNS), the etiology of
which is still uncertain. Several case-control studies investigated the
association between CD24-P226-C/T polymorphism and MS risk, and these studies
have shown inconsistent results.
OBJECTIVE: To address the association of CD24-P226-C/T polymorphism with MS risk 
by meta-analysis.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted to identify all eligible studies of
CD24-P226-C/T polymorphism and MS risk up to July 2013. The odds ratios (ORs) of 
CD24 allele distributions in MS were analyzed against controls.
RESULTS: In total, seven case-control studies with 949 cases of MS and 1177
controls were included in this meta-analysis. The overall results showed a
significant association between CD24-P226-C/T polymorphism and MS susceptibility 
under homozygote comparison model (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.496, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.813-3.435, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005),
dominant model (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.367, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.147-1.629, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005), recessive model
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.305, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.700-3.126, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005) and allelic model (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.422, 95%
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.244-1.625, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005). However, no significant association was observed
under heterozygous comparison model (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.182, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.982-1.423,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.078).
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis indicates that CD24 P266-C/T polymorphism is more
associated with the risk of MS than healthy controls. However, due to the small
sample size in most of the included studies, additional large-scale and
well-designed case-control studies were required for the validation of this
association.

PMID: 25942344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2015 Jul-Aug;58(1):50-60. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2015.04.003.
Epub 2015 May 1.

Benefits of the Mediterranean Diet: Insights From the PREDIMED Study.

Martínez-González MA(1), Salas-Salvadó J(2), Estruch R(3), Corella D(4), Fitó
M(5), Ros E(6); PREDIMED INVESTIGATORS.

Collaborators: Buil-Cosiales P, Diez-Espino J, Toledo E, Garcia-Arellano A,
Ruiz-Canela M, Sanjulian B, Marti A, Basterra-Gortari FJ, Estremera-Urabayen V,
Sola-Larraza A, Barcena-Amigo F, Oreja-Arrayago C, Serrano-Martínez M,
Lasanta-Saez MJ, Quintana-Pedraza L, Amezcueta-Goñi C, Cia-Lecumberri P,
Artal-Moneva F, Esparza-López JM, Figuerido-Garmendia E, Ruiz-Millan H,
Oses-Primo R, Tabar-Sarrias JA, Fernandez-Urzainqui L, Ariz-Arnedo MJ,
Forcen-Alonso T, Pascual-Pascual P, Garces ML, Extremera V, Garcia-Perez L, Babio
N, Bullo M, Basora J, Gonzalez N, Molina C, Marquez F, Martínez P, Ibarrola N,
Sorli M, García Roselló J, Castro A, Martin F, Tort N, Isach A, Guasch-Ferre M,
Baldrich M, Cabre JJ, Mestres G, Paris F, Llauradó M, Pedret R, Basells J,
Vizcaino J, Fernandez-Ballart J, Covas MI, Tello S, Vila J, de la Torre R,
Munoz-Aguayo D, Elosua R, Marrugat J, Ferrer M, Sorli JV, Carrasco P, Osma R,
Guillen M, Guillem-Saiz P, Portoles O, Pascual V, Riera C, Valderrama J, Serrano 
A, Lazaro E, Sanmartin A, Girbes A, Santamaria V, Sanchez C, Pla Z, Asensio E,
Gomez-Gracia E, Fernandez-Crehuet J, Wärnberg J, Benitez Pont R, Bianchi Alba M, 
Gomez-Huelgas R, Martínez-Gonzalez J, Velasco García V, de Diego Salas J, Baca
Osorio A, Gil Zarzosa J, Sanchez Luque JJ, Vargas López E, Serra M, Perez-Heras
A, Sola R, Ortega E, Vinas C, Casas R, de Santamaria L, Romero S, Baena JM,
García M, Oller M, Amat J, Duaso I, García Y, Iglesias C, Simon C, Quinzavos L,
Parra L, Liroz M, Benavent J, Clos J, Pla I, Amoros M, Bonet MT, Martin MT,
Sanchez MS, Altirruba J, Manzano E, Altes A, Cofan M, Valls-Pedret C, Sala-Vila
A, Domenech M, Arós F, Salaverria I, del Hierro T, Algorta J, Francisco S, Alonso
A, San Vicente J, Casi A, Sanz E, Felipe I, Loma-Osorio A, Fiol M, Romaguera D,
García-Valdueza M, Monino M, Proenza A, Prieto R, Frontera G, Ginard M, Fiol F,
Jover A, Romaguera D, García J, Lapetra J, Leal M, Martínez E, Ortega-Calvo M,
Roman P, Jose García F, Iglesias P, Corchado Y, Mayoral E, Mellado L, Miró L,
Lozano JM, Lama C, Serra-Majem L, Sanchez-Villegas A, Alvarez-Perez J, Benitez E,
Castaño I, Diaz I, Férnandez-Rodríguez MJ, Sarmiendo de la Fe F, García C,
FalconSanabria I, MaciasGutierrez B, Santana J, Pinto X, de la Cruz E, Galera A, 
Soler Y, Trias F, Sarasa I, Padres E, Corbella E, Lamuela-Raventos RM, López-
Sabater MC, Castellote-Bargallo AI, Medina-Remon A, Tresserra-Rimbau A, Cabezas
C, Vinyoles E, Rovira MA, García L, Flores G, Verdu JM, Baby P, Ramos A, Mengual 
L, Roura P, Yuste MC, Guarner A, Rovira A, Santamaria MI, Mata M, de Juan C, Brau
A.

The PREDIMED (PREvención con DIeta MEDiterránea) multicenter, randomized, primary
prevention trial assessed the long-term effects of the Mediterranean diet
(MeDiet) on clinical events of cardiovascular disease (CVD). We randomized 7447
men and women at high CVD risk into three diets: MeDiet supplemented with
extra-virgin olive oil (EVOO), MeDiet supplemented with nuts, and control diet
(advice on a low-fat diet). No energy restriction and no special intervention on 
physical activity were applied. We observed 288 CVD events (a composite of
myocardial infarction, stroke or CVD death) during a median time of 4.8years;
hazard ratios were 0.70 (95% CI, 0.53-0.91) for the MeDiet+EVOO and 0.70 (CI,
0.53-0.94) for the MeDiet+nuts compared to the control group. Respective hazard
ratios for incident diabetes (273 cases) among 3541 non-diabetic participants
were 0.60 (0.43-0.85) and 0.82 (0.61-1.10) for MeDiet+EVOO and MeDiet+nuts,
respectively versus control. Significant improvements in classical and emerging
CVD risk factors also supported a favorable effect of both MeDiets on blood
pressure, insulin sensitivity, lipid profiles, lipoprotein particles,
inflammation, oxidative stress, and carotid atherosclerosis. In nutrigenomic
studies beneficial effects of the intervention with MedDiets showed interactions 
with several genetic variants (TCF7L2, APOA2, MLXIPL, LPL, FTO, M4CR, COX-2, GCKR
and SERPINE1) with respect to intermediate and final phenotypes. Thus, the
PREDIMED trial provided strong evidence that a vegetable-based MeDiet rich in
unsaturated fat and polyphenols can be a sustainable and ideal model for CVD
prevention.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25940230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biomech. 2015 Jul 16;48(10):1915-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.04.015. Epub 
2015 Apr 16.

Embryonic stem cell-derived osteocytes are capable of responding to mechanical
oscillatory hydrostatic pressure.

Ehnes DD(1), Price FD(2), Shrive NG(3), Hart DA(3), Rancourt DE(2), zur Nieden
NI(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of California Riverside, Department of Cell Biology & Neuroscience 
and Stem Cell Center, College of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, 1113
Biological Sciences Building, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. (2)The Alberta Children's
Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Heritage Medical Research
Building, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1. (3)McCaig
Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Heritage Medical
Research Building, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1.
(4)University of California Riverside, Department of Cell Biology & Neuroscience 
and Stem Cell Center, College of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, 1113
Biological Sciences Building, Riverside, CA 92521, USA; The Alberta Children's
Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Heritage Medical Research
Building, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1. Electronic
address: nicole.zurnieden@ucr.edu.

Osteoblasts can be derived from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) by a 30 day
differentiation process, whereupon cells spontaneously differentiate upon removal
of LIF and respond to exogenously added 1,25a(OH)2 vitamin D3 with enhanced
matrix mineralization. However, bone is a load-bearing tissue that has to perform
under dynamic pressure changes during daily movement, a capacity that is executed
by osteocytes. At present, it is unclear whether ESC-derived osteogenic cultures 
contain osteocytes and whether these are capable of responding to a relevant
cyclic hydrostatic compression stimulus. Here, we show that
ESC-osteoblastogenesis is followed by the generation of osteocytes and then
mechanically load ESC-derived osteogenic cultures in a compression chamber using 
a cyclic loading protocol. Following mechanical loading of the cells, iNOS mRNA
was upregulated 31-fold, which was consistent with a role for iNOS as an
immediate early mechanoresponsive gene. Further analysis of matrix and
bone-specific genes suggested a cellular response in favor of matrix remodeling. 
Immediate iNOS upregulation also correlated with a concomitant increase in Ctnnb1
and Tcf7l2 mRNAs along with increased nuclear TCF transcriptional activity, while
the mRNA for the repressive Tcf7l1 was downregulated, providing a possible
mechanistic explanation for the noted matrix remodeling. We conclude that
ESC-derived osteocytes are capable of responding to relevant mechanical cues, at 
least such that mimic oscillatory compression stress, which not only provides new
basic understanding, but also information that likely will be important for their
use in cell-based regenerative therapies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25936968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Jul;109(1):117-23. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.04.020. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated
with impaired proinsulin conversion--A meta-analysis.

Shen J(1), Fang Y(1), Ge W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of
Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of
Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu, China.
Electronic address: njglgeweihong@163.com.

AIMS: Available evidence supports the emerging hypothesis that the T-Allele of
the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 may be associated with the
risk of impaired proinsulin conversion, but no consensus was available up to now.
METHODS: A computer-based search of electronic databases (PubMed, EMBASE,
Cochrane Library) and reference lists of relevant articles was carried out, and
then 19 studies involving 15830 subjects were identified. The combined weighted
mean difference (WMD) and their corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were
calculated by a fixed or random effect.
RESULTS: In the overall analysis, the T-Allele was observed to be significantly
associated with the risk of impaired proinsulin conversion (up-regulate fasting
proinsulin concentration WMD -0.40 pM/L (95% CI -0.57 to -0.23); down-regulate
fasting insulin concentration 3.86 pM/L (95% CI 1.91 to 5.81)). Subgroup analyse 
stratified by subjects population characteristics and ethnicity were performed.
The results indicated the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with the
risk of impaired proinsulin conversion in various population characteristics
study. With only a few of subjects in Asians and Africans were available, we
failed to detect significant ethnic difference about TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and the risk of impaired proinsulin conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that the T-Allele of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 is a
significantly risk factor for impaired proinsulin conversion. Future research
should gather more data about the effect of TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism on
Asians and Africans.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Apr;127(4):446-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jphs.2015.03.005. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

Differentiation-inducing factor-3 inhibits intestinal tumor growth in vitro and
in vivo.

Kubokura N(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F(2), Arioka M(3), Yoshihara T(3), Igawa K(4),
Tomooka K(4), Morimoto S(3), Nakatsu Y(5), Tsuzuki T(5), Nakabeppu Y(6),
Matsumoto T(7), Kitazono T(8), Sasaguri T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan; Department of Medicine and Clinical
Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan; Global Medical Science Education Unit,
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
Electronic address: yanaga@clipharm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Clinical
Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan. (4)Department of Molecular and Material Science, Institute for Materials
Chemistry and Engineering, Kyushu University, Kasuga, 816-8580, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Biophysics and Radiation Biology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. (6)Division of
Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and Neuroscience, Medical
Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, 020-0023, Japan. (8)Department of
Medicine and Clinical Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) produced by Dictyostelium discoideum
strongly inhibits the proliferation of various types of cancer cells by
suppression of the Wnt/ß-catenin signal transduction pathway. In the present
study, we examined the effect of differentiation-inducing factor-3 (DIF-3), a
monochlorinated metabolite of DIF-1 that is also produced by D. discoideum, on
human colon cancer cell lines HCT-116 and DLD-1. DIF-3 strongly inhibited cell
proliferation by arresting the cell cycle at the G0/G1 phase. DIF-3 reduced the
expression levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc by facilitating their degradation via
activation of GSK-3ß in a time and dose-dependent manner. In addition, DIF-3
suppressed the expression of T-cell factor 7-like 2, a key transcription factor
in the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, thereby reducing the mRNA levels of
cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Subsequently, we examined the in vivo effects of DIF-3 in
Mutyh(-/-) mice with oxidative stress-induced intestinal cancers. Repeated oral
administration of DIF-3 markedly reduced the number and size of cancers at a
level comparable to that of DIF-1. These data suggest that DIF-3 inhibits
intestinal cancer cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo, probably by mechanisms
similar to those identified in DIF-1 actions, and that DIF-3 may be a potential
novel anti-cancer agent.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 25913757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2015 Apr 14;14:26. doi: 10.1186/s40200-015-0148-z.
eCollection 2015.

Contribution of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 (C/T) gene polymorphism to the
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus in Cameroon.

Guewo-Fokeng M(1), Sobngwi E(2), Atogho-Tiedeu B(1), Donfack OS(1), Noubiap
JJ(3), Ngwa EN(1), Mato-Mofo EP(1), Fosso PP(1), Djahmeni E(4), Djokam-Dadjeu
R(1), Evehe MS(1), Aminkeng F(5), Mbacham WF(6), Mbanya JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (2)Laboratory
for Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Biotechnology Center, University of
Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties,
Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé,
Cameroon ; National Obesity Center, Yaoundé Central Hospital, University of
Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (3)Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital
and University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa ; Medical Diagnostic Center,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. (4)National Obesity Center, Yaoundé Central Hospital,
University of Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (5)The Canadian Pharmacogenomics
Network for Drug Safety (CPNDS), Center for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, 
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada. (6)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé 
I, Yaoundé, Cameroon ; Laboratory for Public Health Research Biotechnologies,
Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.

BACKGROUND: Data on the genetic variants for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in
sub-Saharan African populations are very scarce. This study aimed to investigate 
the association of transcription factor 7-like (TCF7L2) with T2DM in a
Cameroonian population and explore possible genotype-phenotype correlation.
METHODS: This is a case-control study involving 37 T2DM patients and 37
non-diabetic volunteers of Cameroonian ethnicity aged 40 years old and above. We 
collected clinical and biological data to determine phenotypic traits. TCF7L2 was
analyzed by genotyping for rs7903146 (C/T) using PCR-RFLP. Biochemical analyses
were performed using a spectrophotometer with Chronolab kits. Statistical
analyses were carried out using IBM SPSS, PS and Quanto.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 was associated with T2DM in this Cameroonian population
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013 for alleles, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013 for genotypes). The risk allele was C (9.5%
patients vs. 0% healthy controls, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>16.56) and the protective allele was T
(90.5% patients vs. 100.0% healthy controls, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.06). The risk genotype was
C/T (18.9% patients vs. 0% healthy controls, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>18.44), while the protective
genotype was T/T (81.1% patients vs. 100.0% healthy controls, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.054). The
statistical power was 99.99%. TCF7L2 was not preferentially associated with a
specific disease phenotype.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 is associated with T2DM in this Cameroonian population. The
association is not dependent on a specific T2DM phenotype. Clinical genetic
testing for TCF7L2 can help to predict the occurrence of T2DM in Cameroon.

PMCID: PMC4403887
PMID: 25897419  [PubMed]


82. Pathog Dis. 2015 Jul;73(5). pii: ftv031. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftv031. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

Host gene expression for Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis infection in
human THP-1 macrophages.

Shin MK(1), Shin SW(2), Jung M(2), Park H(2), Park HE(2), Yoo HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742 Korea Dairy and Swine Research and
Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3,
Canada. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742 Korea. (3)Department of Infectious
Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742 Korea Institute of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National
University, Pyeongchang, 232-916, Korea yoohs@snu.ac.kr.

Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) is the causative agent of
Johne's disease, which causes considerable economic loss in the dairy industry
and has a possible relationship to Crohn's disease (CD) in humans. As MAP has
been detected in retail pasteurized milk samples, its transmission via milk is of
concern. Despite its possible role in the etiology of CD, there have been few
studies examining the interactions between MAP and human cells. In the current
study, we applied Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to the transcription profiles
generated from a murine model with MAP infection as part of a previously
conducted study. Twenty-one genes were selected as potential host immune
responses, compared with the transcriptional profiles in naturally MAP-infected
cattle, and validated in MAP-infected human monocyte-derived macrophage THP-1
cells. Of these, the potential host responses included up-regulation of genes
related to immune response (CD14, S100A8, S100A9, LTF, HP and CHCIL3),
up-regulation of Th1-polarizing factor (CCL4, CCL5, CXCL9 and CXCL10),
down-regulation of genes related to metabolism (ELANE, IGF1, TCF7L2 and MPO) and 
no significant response of other genes (GADD45a, GPNMB, HMOX1, IFNG and NQO1) in 
THP-1 cells infected with MAP.

© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25877879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Mar 31;14(1):2860-7. doi: 10.4238/2015.March.31.16.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to breast cancer: a meta-analysis.

Lu XP(1), Hu GN(2), Du JQ(3), Li HQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Dongyang People's Hospital, Dong
Yang, China luxiping112@126.com. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Dongyang
People's Hospital, Dong Yang, China. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Dongyang People's Hospital, Dong Yang, China.

Numerous studies have evaluated the association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) and breast cancer risk. However, the results have been
inconsistent. Therefore, in the current study, we performed a meta-analysis. A
systematically literature search of the PubMed and EMBASE databases was conducted
in November 2013, and the reference lists of articles were retrieved. A summary
odds ratio (OR) with its 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated to evaluate
the strength of association. Publication bias was investigated using Begg's
funnel plot. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA package version 12.0. A
total of 4 case-control studies met our inclusion criteria, including 4600 cases 
and 5289 controls. Overall, TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms were significantly
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in genetic comparison models
(rs12255372 for GG vs GT: OR = 0.90, 95%CI = 0.83-0.98; rs7903146 for CC vs TT:
OR = 0.75, 95%CI = 0.63-0.90, CC vs CT: OR = 0.88, 95%CI = 0.81-0.97, dominant
model: OR = 1.16, 95%CI = 1.06-1.27, recessive model: OR = 0.79, 95%CI =
0.67-0.94). This meta-analysis demonstrated that TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) are associated with an increased susceptibility to
breast cancer. However, further studies including large sample sizes are needed
to validate this association.

PMID: 25867435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hum Immunol. 2015 May;76(5):339-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 8.

Association of LRP5, TCF7L2, and GCG variants and type 2 diabetes mellitus as
well as fasting plasma glucose and lipid metabolism indexes.

Wang J(1), Yan G(2), Zhang J(3), Gao K(4), Zhang M(5), Li L(6), Wang Y(7), Wang
Q(8), Zhai Y(9), You H(10), Ren Y(11), Wang B(12), Hu D(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, Preventive Medicine
Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Zhengzhou 450008, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
wangjinjin510@163.com. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, 
Preventive Medicine Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450008, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: 784493811@qq.com. (3)Henan Armed Police Corps Hospital, Zhengzhou
450000, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: besdwujing1@163.com.
(4)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of 
China. Electronic address: gao_kaiping@hotmail.com. (5)Shenzhen University School
of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
caroline.zhang@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public
Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: lilinlin@zzu.edu.cn. (7)Department of Epidemiology, College
of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: wangyan870828@126.com. (8)Department of Epidemiology, 
College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: zzuwq2010@163.com. (9)Department of
Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: zhaiyujiamodi@163.com.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
youhaifei1987@yahoo.com.cn. (11)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public
Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: ryc12@sina.com. (12)Department of Epidemiology, College of
Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: wangby95@163.com. (13)Shenzhen University School of
Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
dongsheng_hu@hotmail.com.

Recent data puts WNT signaling pathway in a pivotal role in regulating pancreas
development as well as islet function, insulin production and secretion. The key 
effectors in the WNT signaling pathway are low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5), transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), and
downstream-regulated glucagon (GCG). Our previous studies suggest that the WNT
signaling pathway plays a significant role in risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in Chinese population. The main purpose of the present study was to
investigate the associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in LRP5,
TCF7L2 and glucagon (GCG) and quantitative traits in a healthy population. We
used tag SNP to screen candidate SNPs for LRP5 and GCG; for TCF7L2, used the
confirmed SNP rs11196218. A total of 1842 patients with T2DM and 7777 healthy
controls underwent genotyping for the SNPs. We found a significant association of
rs3758644 in LRP5 and fasting plasma glucose (p=0.006), and rs11196218 in TCF7L2 
and triglycerides level (p=0.004). Among the SNPs in LRP5, TCF7L2, and GCG
analyzed, only rs3758644 of LRP5 and rs11196218 of TCF7L2 were significantly
associated with fasting plasma glucose and triglycerides index, respectively, in 
a healthy population.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25863010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gene. 2015 Jul 1;565(1):68-75. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.065. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Diabetes susceptibility in Mayas: Evidence for the involvement of polymorphisms
in HHEX, HNF4a, KCNJ11, PPAR<U+03B3>, CDKN2A/2B, SLC30A8, CDC123/CAMK1D, TCF7L2, ABCA1
and SLC16A11 genes.

Lara-Riegos JC(1), Ortiz-López MG(2), Peña-Espinoza BI(1), Montúfar-Robles I(2), 
Peña-Rico MA(1), Sánchez-Pozos K(1), Granados-Silvestre MA(1), Menjivar M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México - Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Mexico. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Hospital Juárez de
México, Mexico. (3)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud,
Facultad de Química Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México - Instituto Nacional 
de Medicina Genómica, Mexico. Electronic address: menjivar@unam.mx.

Association of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with common variants in HHEX, HNF4a, KCNJ11,
PPAR<U+03B3>, CDKN2A/2B, SLC30A8, CDC123/CAMK1D, TCF7L2, ABCA1 and SLC16A11 genes have
been reported, mainly in populations of European and Asian ancestry and to a
lesser extent in Latin Americans. Thus, we aimed to investigate the contribution 
of rs1111875 (HHEX), rs1800961 (HNF4a), rs5219 (KCNJ11), rs1801282 (PPAR<U+03B3>),
rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs13266634 (SLC30A8), rs12779790 (CDC123/CAMK1D),
rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs9282541 (ABCA1) and rs13342692 (SLC16A11) polymorphisms in 
the genetic background of Maya population to associate their susceptibility to
develop T2D. This is one of the first studies designed specifically to
investigate the inherited component of T2D in the indigenous population of
Mexico. SNPs were genotyped by allelic discrimination method in 575 unrelated
Maya individuals. Two SNPs rs10811661 and rs928254 were significantly associated 
with T2D after adjusting for BMI; rs10811661 in a recessive and rs9282541 in a
dominant model. Additionally, we found phenotypical alterations associated with
genetic variants: HDL to rs9282541 and insulin to rs13342692. In conclusion,
these findings support an association of genetic polymorphisms to develop T2D in 
Maya population.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25839936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Metab. 2015 Feb 4;4(4):344-52. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2015.01.008. eCollection
2015.

The expression of dominant negative TCF7L2 in pancreatic beta cells during the
embryonic stage causes impaired glucose homeostasis.

Shao W(1), Xiong X(1), Ip W(2), Xu F(1), Song Z(1), Zeng K(3), Hernandez M(4),
Liang T(5), Weng J(3), Gaisano H(5), Nostro MC(6), Jin T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada. (2)Institute of Medical 
Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 2J7, Canada. (3)Third Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Division of Experimental
Therapeutics, Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada ; McEwen Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada. (5)Department of
Physiology, University of Toronto, Medical Sciences Building, Room 7368, 1 King's
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. (6)Division of Experimental
Therapeutics, Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada ; McEwen Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada ; Department of
Physiology, University of Toronto, Medical Sciences Building, Room 7368, 1 King's
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. (7)Division of Advanced
Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada ; Institute of Medical Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 2J7, Canada ; McEwen Centre for Regenerative Medicine, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Disruption of TCF7L2 in mouse pancreatic ß-cells has generated
different outcomes in several investigations. Here we aim to clarify role of
ß-cell TCF7L2 and Wnt signaling using a functional-knockdown approach.
METHODS: Adenovirus-mediated dominant negative TCF7L2 (TCF7L2DN) expression was
conducted in Ins-1 cells. The fusion gene in which TCF7L2DN expression is driven 
by P TRE3G was utilized to generate the transgenic mouse line TCF7L2DN Tet . The 
double transgenic line was created by mating TCF7L2DN Tet with Ins2-rtTA,
designated as ßTCFDN. ß-cell specific TCF7L2DN expression was induced in ßTCFDN
by doxycycline feeding.
RESULTS: TCF7L2DN expression in Ins-1 cells reduced GSIS, cell proliferation and 
expression of a battery of genes including incretin receptors and ß-cell
transcription factors. Inducing TCF7L2DN expression in ßTCFDN during adulthood or
immediately after weaning generated no or very modest metabolic defect, while its
expression during embryonic development by doxycycline feeding in pregnant
mothers resulted in significant glucose intolerance associated with altered
ß-cell gene expression and reduced ß-cell mass.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations support a cell autonomous role for TCF7L2 in
pancreatic ß-cells suggested by most, though not all, investigations. ßTCFDN is a
novel model for further exploring the role of TCF7L2 in ß-cell genesis and
metabolic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4354927
PMID: 25830097  [PubMed]


87. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0121553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121553.
eCollection 2015.

The study to understand the genetics of the acute response to metformin and
glipizide in humans (SUGAR-MGH): design of a pharmacogenetic resource for type 2 
diabetes.

Walford GA(1), Colomo N(2), Todd JN(3), Billings LK(4), Fernandez M(5), Chamarthi
B(6), Warner AS(5), Davis J(5), Littleton KR(5), Hernandez AM(5), Fanelli RR(5), 
Lanier A(5), Barbato C(7), Ackerman RJ(5), Khan SQ(5), Bui R(7), Garber L(7),
Stolerman ES(5), Moore AF(1), Huang C(8), Kaur V(5), Harden M(9), Taylor A(5),
Chen L(5), Manning AK(5), Huang P(8), Wexler D(10), McCarthy RM(11), Lo J(8),
Thomas MK(10), Grant RW(12), Goldfine A(13), Hudson MS(11), Florez JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Diabetes Research Center, Diabetes Unit,
Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America. (2)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition. Hospital Universitario Regional de Málaga. Instituto
de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA). Málaga, Spain. (3)Center for Human 
Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America; Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Diabetes Research Center,
Diabetes Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, Illinois, United
States of America. (5)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (7)Joslin
Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (8)Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (9)Genomics
Platform, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(10)Diabetes Research Center, Diabetes Unit, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(11)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (12)Division of
Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, California, United
States of America. (13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies have uncovered a large number of
genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes or related phenotypes. In many
cases the causal gene or polymorphism has not been identified, and its impact on 
response to anti-hyperglycemic medications is unknown. The Study to Understand
the Genetics of the Acute Response to Metformin and Glipizide in Humans
(SUGAR-MGH, NCT01762046) is a novel resource of genetic and biochemical data
following glipizide and metformin administration. We describe recruitment,
enrollment, and phenotyping procedures and preliminary results for the first 668 
of our planned 1,000 participants enriched for individuals at risk of requiring
anti-diabetic therapy in the future.
METHODS: All individuals are challenged with 5 mg glipizide × 1; twice daily 500 
mg metformin × 2 days; and 75-g oral glucose tolerance test following metformin. 
Genetic variants associated with glycemic traits and blood glucose, insulin, and 
other hormones at baseline and following each intervention are measured.
RESULTS: Approximately 50% of the cohort is female and 30% belong to an ethnic
minority group. Following glipizide administration, peak insulin occurred at 60
minutes and trough glucose at 120 minutes. Thirty percent of participants
experienced non-severe symptomatic hypoglycemia and required rescue with oral
glucose. Following metformin administration, fasting glucose and insulin were
reduced. Common genetic variants were associated with fasting glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS: SUGAR-MGH represents a viable pharmacogenetic resource which, when
completed, will serve to characterize genetic influences on pharmacological
perturbations, and help establish the functional relevance of newly discovered
genetic loci to therapy of type 2 diabetes.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01762046.

PMCID: PMC4374872
PMID: 25812009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurosci. 2015 Mar 25;35(12):5007-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4787-14.2015.

The Wnt effector transcription factor 7-like 2 positively regulates
oligodendrocyte differentiation in a manner independent of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling.

Hammond E(1), Lang J(1), Maeda Y(1), Pleasure D(2), Angus-Hill M(3), Xu J(1),
Horiuchi M(4), Deng W(5), Guo F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for
Children, Sacramento, California 95817. (2)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative
Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento, California 95817,
Departments of Neurology. (3)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, Utah 84112. (4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, and. (5)Institute 
for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
California 95817, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, and. (6)Institute for
Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
California 95817, Departments of Neurology, fzguo@ucdavis.edu.

Genetic or pharmacological activation of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
inhibits oligodendrocyte differentiation. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7l2),
also known as TCF4, is a Wnt effector induced transiently in the oligodendroglial
lineage. A well accepted dogma is that TCF7l2 inhibits oligodendrocyte
differentiation through activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We report that
TCF7l2 is upregulated transiently in postmitotic, newly differentiated
oligodendrocytes. Using in vivo gene conditional ablation, we found surprisingly 
that TCF7l2 positively regulates neonatal and postnatal mouse oligodendrocyte
differentiation during developmental myelination and remyelination in a manner
independent of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. We also reveal a novel role
of TCF7l2 in repressing a bone morphogenetic protein signaling pathway that is
known to inhibit oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, our study provides novel 
data justifying therapeutic attempts to enhance, rather than inhibit, TCF7l2
signaling to overcome arrested oligodendroglial differentiation in multiple
sclerosis and other demyelinating diseases.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/355007-16$15.00/0.

PMID: 25810530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. World J Diabetes. 2015 Mar 15;6(2):358-66. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v6.i2.358.

Association of gene variants with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes among Omanis.

Al-Sinani S(1), Woodhouse N(1), Al-Mamari A(1), Al-Shafie O(1), Al-Shafaee M(1), 
Al-Yahyaee S(1), Hassan M(1), Jaju D(1), Al-Hashmi K(1), Al-Abri M(1), Al-Rassadi
K(1), Rizvi S(1), Loic Y(1), Froguel P(1), Bayoumi R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sawsan Al-Sinani, Nicolas Woodhouse, Ali Al-Mamari, Omaima Al-Shafie, Mohammed
Al-Shafaee, Said Al-Yahyaee, Mohammed Hassan, Deepali Jaju, Khamis Al-Hashmi,
Mohammed Al-Abri, Khalid Al-Rassadi, Syed Rizvi, Riad Bayoumi, Department of
Biochemistry, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, 
Muscat 123, Sultanate of Oman.

AIM: To investigate the association of 10 known common gene variants with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) among Omanis.
METHODS: Using case-control design, a total of 992 diabetic patients and 294
normoglycemic Omani Arabs were genotyped, by an allelic discrimination
assay-by-design TaqMan method on fast real time polymerase chain reaction system,
for the following gene variants: KCNJ11 (rs5219), TCF7L2 (rs7903146), CDKAL1
(rs10946398), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), FTO (rs9939609 and rs8050136), IGF2BP2
(rs4402960), SLC30A8 (rs13266634) CAPN10 (rs3792267) and HHEX (rs1111875). T2D
patients were recruited from the Diabetes Clinic (n = 243) and inpatients (n =
749) at Sultan Qaboos Univesity Hospital (SQUH), Muscat, Oman. Adult control
participants (n = 294) were volunteers from the community and from those visiting
Family Medicine Clinic at SQU, for regular medical checkup. The difficulty in
recruiting Omani participants with no family history of diabetes was the main
reason behind the small number of control participants in this study. Almost all 
volunteers questioned had a relative with diabetes mellitus. Inspite of the small
number of normoglycemic controls in this study, this sample was sufficient for
detection of genes and loci for common alleles influencing T2D with an odds ratio
of = 1.3 reaching at least 80% power. Data was collected from June 2010 to
February 2012.
RESULTS: Using binary logistic regression analysis, four gene variants showed
significant association with T2D risk: KCNJ11 (rs5219, P = 5.8 × 10(-6), OR =
1.74), TCF7L2 (rs7903146, P = 0.001, OR = 1.46), CDKAL1 (rs10946398, P = 0.002,
OR = 1.44) and CDKN2A/B (rs10811661, P = 0.020, OR = 1.40). The fixation index
analysis of these four gene variants indicated significant genetic
differentiation between diabetics and controls {[KCNJ11 (rs5219), P < 0.001],
[TCF7L2 (rs7903146), P < 0.001], [CDKAL1 (rs10946398), P < 0.05], [CDKN2A/B
(rs10811661), P < 0.05]}. The highest genotype variation % between diabetics and 
controls was found at KCNJ11 (2.07%) and TCF7L2 (1.62%). This study was not able 
to detect an association of T2D risk with gene variants of IGF2BP2 (rs4402960),
SLC30A8 (rs13266634), CAPN10 (rs3792267) and HHEX (rs1111875). Moreover, no
association was found between FTO gene variants (rs9939609 and rs8050136) and T2D
risk. However, T2D risk was found to be significantly associated with obesity (P 
= 0.002, OR = 2.22); and with the Waist-to-Hip ratio (n = 532, P = 1.9 ×10(-7),
OR = 2.4), [among males (n = 234, P = 1.2 × 10(-4), OR = 2.0) and females (n =
298, P = 0.001, OR = 6.3)].
CONCLUSION: Results confirmed the association of KCNJ11 (rs5219), TCF7L2
(rs7903146), CDKAL1 (rs10946398) and CDKN2A/B (rs10811661) gene variants with
susceptibility to T2D among Omani Arabs.

PMCID: PMC4360431
PMID: 25789119  [PubMed]


90. Glia. 2015 Oct;63(10):1671-93. doi: 10.1002/glia.22813. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Canonical Wnt signaling in the oligodendroglial lineage--puzzles remain.

Guo F(1), Lang J(1), Sohn J(1), Hammond E(1), Chang M(1), Pleasure D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, School of Medicine at UC Davis Medical Center, Institute
for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento,
Northern California, Sacramento, California.

The straightforward concept that accentuated Wnt signaling via the
Wnt-receptor-ß-catenin-TCF/LEF cascade (also termed canonical Wnt signaling or
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling) delays or blocks oligodendrocyte differentiation is very
appealing. According to this concept, canonical Wnt signaling is responsible for 
remyelination failure in multiple sclerosis and for persistent hypomyelination in
periventricular leukomalacia. This has given rise to the hope that
pharmacologically inhibiting this signaling will be of therapeutic potential in
these disabling neurological disorders. But current studies suggest that
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays distinct roles in oligodendrogenesis,
oligodendrocyte differentiation, and myelination in a context-dependent manner
(central nervous system regions, developmental stages), and that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling interplays with, and is subjected to regulation by, other central
nervous system factors and signaling pathways. On this basis, we propose the more
nuanced concept that endogenous Wnt/ß-catenin activity is delicately and
temporally regulated to ensure the seamless development of oligodendroglial
lineage cells in different contexts. In this review, we discuss the role
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in oligodendrocyte development, focusing on the
interpretation of disparate results, and highlighting areas where important
questions remain to be answered about oligodendroglial lineage Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25782433  [PubMed - in process]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 11;10(3):e0119333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119333.
eCollection 2015.

First genome-wide association study in an Australian aboriginal population
provides insights into genetic risk factors for body mass index and type 2
diabetes.

Anderson D(1), Cordell HJ(2), Fakiola M(3), Francis RW(1), Syn G(1), Scaman
ES(1), Davis E(4), Miles SJ(5), McLeay T(5), Jamieson SE(1), Blackwell JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western
Australia, 6008, Australia. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom. (3)Telethon Kids
Institute, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, 6008,
Australia; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Department of Medicine, and 
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western
Australia, 6008, Australia; Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Princess
Margaret Hospital for Children, Subiaco, Western Australia, 6008, Australia.
(5)Ngangganawili Aboriginal Health Service, Wiluna, Western Australia, 6646,
Australia.

A body mass index (BMI) >22kg/m2 is a risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
Aboriginal Australians. To identify loci associated with BMI and T2D we undertook
a genome-wide association study using 1,075,436 quality-controlled single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyped (Illumina 2.5M Duo Beadchip) in 402
individuals in extended pedigrees from a Western Australian Aboriginal community.
Imputation using the thousand genomes (1000G) reference panel extended the
analysis to 6,724,284 post quality-control autosomal SNPs. No associations
achieved genome-wide significance, commonly accepted as P<5x10-8. Nevertheless,
genes/pathways in common with other ethnicities were identified despite the
arrival of Aboriginal people in Australia >45,000 years ago. The top hit
(rs10868204 Pgenotyped = 1.50x10-6; rs11140653 Pimputed_1000G = 2.90x10-7) for
BMI lies 5' of NTRK2, the type 2 neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor for
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) that regulates energy balance downstream
of melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R). PIK3C2G (rs12816270 Pgenotyped = 8.06x10-6;
rs10841048 Pimputed_1000G = 6.28x10-7) was associated with BMI, but not with T2D 
as reported elsewhere. BMI also associated with CNTNAP2 (rs6960319 Pgenotyped =
4.65x10-5; rs13225016 Pimputed_1000G = 6.57x10-5), previously identified as the
strongest gene-by-environment interaction for BMI in African-Americans. The top
hit (rs11240074 Pgenotyped = 5.59x10-6, Pimputed_1000G = 5.73x10-6) for T2D lies 
5' of BCL9 that, along with TCF7L2, promotes beta-catenin's transcriptional
activity in the WNT signaling pathway. Additional hits occurred in genes
affecting pancreatic (KCNJ6, KCNA1) and/or GABA (GABRR1, KCNA1) functions.
Notable associations observed for genes previously identified at genome-wide
significance in other populations included MC4R (Pgenotyped = 4.49x10-4) for BMI 
and IGF2BP2 Pimputed_1000G = 2.55x10-6) for T2D. Our results may provide novel
functional leads in understanding disease pathogenesis in this Australian
Aboriginal population.

PMCID: PMC4356593
PMID: 25760438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Investig Med. 2015 Jun;63(5):758-64. doi: 10.1097/JIM.0000000000000191.

Thiazolidinediones Inhibit Mouse Osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 Cell Proliferation in Part
Through the Wnt Signaling Pathway.

Duan M(1), Zhou B, Zhou X, Yuan G.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology; Department of
Endocrinology, Wuhan No. 1 Hospital; and Department of Endocrinology, Wuhan No. 
6 Hospital, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and Wnt play
different roles in bone homeostasis. Thiazolidinediones are PPAR<U+03B3> agonists that
cause bone mineral density loss. This study investigated the relationship between
PPAR<U+03B3> and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells.
METHODS: MC3T3-E1 cells were treated with either pioglitazone (Pio) or
rosiglitazone (Rosi), thiazolidinediones, for 24 hours at 10 to 40-µM
concentrations. Recombinant mouse Wnt3a protein (50 ng/mL) for 6 hours was also
used to treat the 20-µM Pio and Rosi pretreated cells. Cell proliferation was
measured by MTT, and apoptosis with flow cytometry using annexin V/propidium
iodide staining; reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction measured mRNA
expression levels of LRP5/6 (low-density lipoprotein-related protein 5/6),
glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß), TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2),
PPAR<U+03B3>, and cyclin D1, and Western blots detected ß-catenin and p-GSK3ß proteins.
RESULTS: Pioglitazone and Rosi decreased MC3T3-E1 cell viability by 28.07% and
18.14% at 20 µM, respectively (P < 0.05). Apoptosis increased compared with
controls (7.21%), after 20-µM treatment with Pio or Rosi, to 10.45% and 12.10%,
respectively (P < 0.05). Both Pio and Rosi decreased ß-catenin protein levels and
increased p-GSK3ß, but the LRP5/6, GSK3ß, and TCF7L2 mRNA levels were constant.
Upon activation of the Wnt pathway by mouse Wnt3a protein, ß-catenin and p-GSK3ß 
protein levels were reversed, accompanied with increased proliferation, but
apoptosis remained high.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of PPAR<U+03B3> in osteoblasts accompanied Wnt signaling
suppression. Activation of Wnt signaling alleviated the PPAR<U+03B3> proliferation
decreases but not the apoptosis increases. The thiazolidinedione PPAR<U+03B3> agonists
act in part through inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway, showing there is a
relationship between PPAR<U+03B3> and Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25756249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):3004. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv075. Epub 2015 Mar 8.

Decreased TCF7L2 protein levels in type 2 diabetes mellitus correlate with
downregulation of GIP- and GLP-1 receptors and impaired beta-cell function.

Shu L, Matveyenko AV, Kerr-Conte J, Cho JH, McIntosh CH, Maedler K.

Erratum for
    Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2388-99.

In this article, Figure 2F was incorrect. The correct panel is shown below. The
authors sincerely apologise for this error.

PMCID: PMC4566118
PMID: 25753258  [PubMed]


94. Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 15;75(8):1725-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2111. Epub
2015 Mar 5.

IKKß Enforces a LIN28B/TCF7L2 Positive Feedback Loop That Promotes Cancer Cell
Stemness and Metastasis.

Chen C(1), Cao F(1), Bai L(1), Liu Y(1), Xie J(1), Wang W(1), Si Q(1), Yang J(2),
Chang A(2), Liu D(3), Liu D(3), Chuang TH(4), Xiang R(2), Luo Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (2)Department of Immunology, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (3)Xuanwu 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (4)Immunology Research
Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. yunpingluo@hotmail.com.

Considerable evidence suggests that proinflammatory pathways drive self-renewal
of cancer stem-like cells (CSC), but the underlying mechanisms remain mainly
undefined. Here we report that the let7 repressor LIN28B and its regulator IKBKB 
(IKKß) sustain cancer cell stemness by interacting with the Wnt/TCF7L2 (TCF4)
signaling pathway to promote cancer progression. We found that LIN28B expression 
correlated with clinical progression and stemness marker expression in breast
cancer patients. Functional studies demonstrated that the stemness properties of 
LIN28B-expressing human breast and lung cancer cells were enhanced by IKKß,
whereas loss of LIN28B abolished stemness properties in these settings. These
phenomena were driven through interactions with TCF7L2, which enhanced LIN28B
expression by direct binding to intron 1 of the LIN28B gene, which in turn
promoted TCF7L2 mRNA translation through a positive feedback loop. Notably,
RNAi-mediated silencing of LIN28B or pharmacologic inhibition of IKKß was
sufficient to suppress primary and metastatic tumor growth in vivo. Together, our
results establish the LIN28B/TCF7L2 interaction loop as a central mediator of
cancer stemness driven by proinflammatory processes during progression and
metastasis, possibly offering a new therapeutic target for generalized
interventions in advanced cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25744721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Int J Organ Transplant Med. 2015;6(1):14-22.

Polymorphism of Transcription Factor-7-Like 2 (TCF7L2) Gene and New-Onset
Diabetes after Liver Transplantation.

Musavi Z(1), Azarpira N(2), Sangtarash MH(1), Kordi M(3), Kazemi K(2),
Geramizadeh B(2), Malek-Hosseini SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran ; Department of Genetic, Sistan and Baluchestan University of Sciences,
Zahedan, Iran. (2)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. (3)Department of Genetic, Sistan and Baluchestan
University of Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a serious
complication in transplant recipients. Transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is 
a Wnt signaling-associated transcription factor that plays an important role in
ß-cell proliferation and insulin secretion. The association between TCF7L2 SNP
rs7903146 and NODAT was documented in renal transplant patients.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 variants and the
risk of NODAT after liver transplantation.
METHODS: This study was conducted on 140 liver transplant recipients who had
received tacrolimus-based immunosuppressive drugs. The patients were divided into
NODAT (n=70) and non-NODAT (n=70) groups and were genotyped using PCR-RFLP. In
addition, 100 normal subjects were considered as the comparison group.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference (p<0.05) between the two study groups
regarding donor and recipient age, recipient body mass index, and recipient
fasting plasma glucose before the transplantation. No significant relationship
was observed between TCF7L2 rs7903146 genotypes and development of NODAT. No
significant difference was also found between the two groups in terms of the
tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil daily dosage as well as tacrolimus blood
level. However, the prednisolone daily dosage was significantly (p=0.01) higher
in the NODAT group compared to those without NODAT. The majority of the patients 
in the NODAT group also had an episode of acute rejection. Furthermore, a
significant difference was found between the transplant recipients and the
comparison subjects regarding T allele (p<0.001, OR=1.96) and TT genotype
(p<0.001, OR=3.47) frequencies.
CONCLUSION: No correlation was found between TCF7L2 genotypes and development of 
NODAT. Acute rejection and prednisolone pulse therapy predisposed the susceptible
patients to NODAT.

PMCID: PMC4346459
PMID: 25737773  [PubMed]


96. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Jul;42(7):1233-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3862-1. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

Transcriptomic study of mouse embryonic neural stem cell differentiation under
ethanol treatment.

Mandal C(1), Park JH, Choi MR, Kim SH, Badejo AC, Chai JC, Lee YS, Jung KH, Chai 
YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Life Science, Hanyang University, 1271 Sa-dong,
Ansan, Republic of Korea.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) can be differentiated into one of three cell lineages:
neurons, astrocytes or, oligodendrocytes. Some neurotoxins have the ability to
deregulate this dynamic process. NSC cell fate can be altered by ethanol as
reported previously. Our aim was to investigate the alteration of genes by
ethanol during NSC differentiation and to explore the molecular mechanism
underlying this phenomenon. Here, mouse fetal forebrain derived NSCs were
differentiated for 2 days with or without of ethanol (50 mM). We performed a
comparative microarray analysis at day two using GeneChip(®) Mouse Genome 430A
2.0 arrays. Microarray analysis showed that the expressions of 496 genes were
altered by ethanol (56 and 440 were up- and down-regulated, respectively). Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis revealed the association of
the following altered genes in the Wnt signaling pathway: Wnt5a, Csnk2a1, Tcf7l2,
Ccnd2, Nlk, Tbl1x, Tbl1xr1, Rac2 and Nfatc3. Quantitative real time PCR analysis 
also demonstrated the relative expression levels of these genes. As Wnt signaling
is a player of brain development, ethanol-induced alterations may contribute to
improper development of the brain. Our data could be a useful resource for
elucidating the mechanism behind the ethanol neurotoxicity in developing brain.

PMID: 25697417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 20;458(4):836-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.040. Epub 2015 Feb 14.

G protein coupled receptor 50 promotes self-renewal and neuronal differentiation 
of embryonic neural progenitor cells through regulation of notch and
wnt/ß-catenin signalings.

Ma YX(1), Wu ZQ(1), Feng YJ(1), Xiao ZC(2), Qin XL(3), Ma QH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy for
Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, 
Jiangsu Province 215021, China. (2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (3)Xuzhou Central
Hospital, Jiangsu Province 221009, China. (4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and Institute of
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province 215021, China.
Electronic address: maquanhong@suda.edu.cn.

G protein-coupled receptor 50 (GPR50), a risk factor for major depressive
disorder and bipolar affective disorder, is expressed in both the developmental
and adult brain. However, the function of GPR50 in the brain remains unknown. We 
here show GPR50 is expressed by neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the ventricular
zone of embryonic brain. Knockdown of GPR50 with a small interference RNA (siRNA)
decreased self-renewal and neuronal differentiation, but not glial
differentiation of NPCs. Moreover, overexpression of either full-length GPR50 or 
the intracellular domain of GPR50, rather than the truncated GPR50 in which the
intracellular domain is deleted in, increased neuronal differentiation,
indicating that GPR50 promotes neuronal differentiation of NPCs in an
intracellular domain-dependent manner. We further described that the
transcriptional activity of the intracellular domain of notch on Hes1 gene was
repressed by overexpression of GPR50. In addition, decreased levels of
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) mRNA was observed in GPR50
siRNA-transfected NPCs, suggesting that knockdown of GPR50 impairs wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling. Moreover, the mRNA levels of neurogenin (Ngn) 1, Ngn2 and cyclin D1,
the target genes of notch and wnt/ß-catenin signalings, in NPCs were reduced by
knockdown of GPR50. Therefore, GPR50 promotes self-renewal and neuronal
differentiation of NPCs possibly through regulation of notch and wnt/ß-catenin
signalings.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25689717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int J Med Sci. 2015 Feb 5;12(3):243-7. doi: 10.7150/ijms.10953. eCollection 2015.

Genetic interaction analysis of TCF7L2 for biochemical recurrence after radical
prostatectomy in localized prostate cancer.

Chen CS(1), Huang CY(2), Huang SP(3), Lin VC(4), Yu CC(5), Chang TY(6), Bao
BY(7).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)2.
Department of Urology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)3. Department of Urology,
Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan ; 4. Department of
Urology, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)5. Department of Urology, E-Da Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
; 6. School of Medicine for International Students, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (5)7. Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans
General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan ; 8. Department of Urology, School of
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan ; 9. Department of
Pharmacy, Tajen University, Pingtung, Taiwan. (6)10. Department of Occupational
Safety and Health, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (7)1. Department
of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan ; 11. Sex Hormone
Research Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan ; 12.
Department of Nursing, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Backgroud: Accumulated evidence has demonstrated a significant role of the Wnt
pathway in human prostate cancer. We hypothesize that genetic variants in the Wnt
pathway effector, Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), may influence clinical 
outcomes in prostate cancer.METHODS: We comprehensively selected 12 tagged
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to capture majority of common variants
across TCF7L2, and genotyped in 458 localized prostate cancer patients treated
with radical prostatectomy (RP). Kaplan-Meier analysis, Cox proportional hazard
model, and survival tree analyses were performed to identify significant SNPs
that correlated with biochemical recurrence (BCR) after surgery.
RESULTS: A higher-order SNP-SNP interaction profile consisting of TCF7L2
rs7094463, rs10749127, and rs11196224 was significantly associated with BCR (P
trend = 0.001). After adjusting for possible confounders, the genetic profile
remained significant (P trend = 0.007). None of the studied SNPs were
individually associated with BCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a genetic interaction in the TCF7L2 SNPs as a
predictor of disease recurrence after curative RP in localized prostate cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC4323362
PMID: 25678841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Endocrine. 2015 Aug;49(3):635-42. doi: 10.1007/s12020-015-0541-x. Epub 2015 Feb
13.

Association between rs7903146 and rs12255372 polymorphisms of transcription
factor 7-like 2 gene and polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Ramos RB(1), Fabris VC, Brondani Lde A, Spritzer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecological Endocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Hospital de
Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, 90035-003,
Brazil.

The present systematic review and meta-analysis of case-control studies examines 
the associations between rs7903146 and rs12255372 polymorphisms of the TCF7L2
gene and PCOS. A search of the literature published until August 2014 was carried
out in PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, EMBASE, and
LILACS. There were no other limits except for the end date. We included
observational studies with women of any age diagnosed with PCOS and healthy
controls that analyzed polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372. We included
case-control or cross-sectional studies analyzing polymorphism rs7903146 or
rs12255372 in women with PCOS and healthy controls. Eighteen studies were
identified after the primary literature search and seven articles were included
in the meta-analysis. All employed Rotterdam criteria for the diagnosis of PCOS. 
The genotypic distributions in the control groups were in agreement with
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all studies. The pooled population included Asian
descendents (Chinese, Korean), Caucasians from southern Brazil, Tunisian, and
European populations (British/Irish, Northern Finns, Greeks, Czechs), including
1,892 women with PCOS and 2,695 controls. There were no significant associations 
between PCOS and TCF7L2 rs7903146 or rs12255372 polymorphisms, irrespective of
whether allele contrast, additive, dominant, or recessive models of inheritance
were used. Furthermore, no significant associations were found after
stratification for ethnicity (Asian or non-Asian). There was no significant
heterogeneity between studies and no publication bias. The present results
suggest that rs7903146 T allele or rs12255372 is not associated with risk for
PCOS in non-Asian or Asian women. This systematic review and meta-analysis are
registered in PROSPERO under number CRD42013005930.

PMID: 25678248  [PubMed - in process]


100. Sci Signal. 2015 Feb 3;8(362):ra12. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005654.

FOXP1 potentiates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Walker MP(1), Stopford CM(2), Cederlund M(3), Fang F(4), Jahn C(3), Rabinowitz
AD(1), Goldfarb D(5), Graham DM(1), Yan F(1), Deal AM(6), Fedoriw Y(7), Richards 
KL(8), Davis IJ(4), Weidinger G(3), Damania B(2), Major MB(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA. (2)Division of Microbiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (3)Institute for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081 Ulm, Germany. (4)Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (5)Department of Computer Science, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, USA. (6)UNC Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center Biostatistics Core Facility, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (8)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (9)Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. Division of Microbiology,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. benmajor@med.unc.edu.

The transcription factor FOXP1 (forkhead box protein P1) is a master regulator of
stem and progenitor cell biology. In diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), copy 
number amplifications and chromosomal translocations result in overexpression of 
FOXP1. Increased abundance of FOXP1 in DLBCL is a predictor of poor prognosis and
resistance to therapy. We developed a genome-wide, mass spectrometry-coupled,
gain-of-function genetic screen, which revealed that FOXP1 potentiates
ß-catenin-dependent, Wnt-dependent gene expression. Gain- and loss-of-function
studies in cell models and zebrafish confirmed that FOXP1 was a general and
conserved enhancer of Wnt signaling. In a Wnt-dependent fashion, FOXP1 formed a
complex with ß-catenin, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2), and the
acetyltransferase CBP [CREB (adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response
element-binding protein)-binding protein], and this complex bound the promoters
of Wnt target genes. FOXP1 promoted the acetylation of ß-catenin by CBP, and
acetylation was required for FOXP1-mediated potentiation of ß-catenin-dependent
transcription. In DLBCL, we found that FOXP1 promoted sensitivity to Wnt pathway 
inhibitors, and knockdown of FOXP1 or blocking ß-catenin transcriptional activity
slowed xenograft tumor growth. These data connect excessive FOXP1 with
ß-catenin-dependent signal transduction and provide a molecular rationale for
Wnt-directed therapy in DLBCL.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4356208
PMID: 25650440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 2;5:8155. doi: 10.1038/srep08155.

SMK-17, a MEK1/2-specific inhibitor, selectively induces apoptosis in
ß-catenin-mutated tumors.

Kiga M(1), Nakayama A(2), Shikata Y(2), Sasazawa Y(2), Murakami R(3), Nakanishi
T(3), Tashiro E(2), Imoto M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan [2] Shinagawa R&D Center, Daiichi
Sankyo Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Biosciences and Informatics,
Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan. (3)Shinagawa
R&D Center, Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan.

Although clinical studies have evaluated several MEK1/2 inhibitors, it is
unlikely that MEK1/2 inhibitors will be studied clinically. BRAF mutations have
been proposed as a responder marker of MEK1/2 inhibitors in a preclinical study. 
However, current clinical approaches focusing on BRAF mutations have shown only
moderate sensitivity of MEK1/2 inhibitors. This has led to insufficient support
for their promoted clinical adoption. Further characterization of tumors
sensitive to MEK inhibitors holds great promise for optimizing drug therapy for
patients with these tumors. Here, we report that ß-catenin mutations accelerate
apoptosis induced by MEK1/2 inhibitor. SMK-17, a selective MEK1/2 inhibitor,
induced apoptosis in tumor cell lines harboring ß-catenin mutations at its
effective concentration. To confirm that ß-catenin mutations and mutant
ß-catenin-mediated TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4) transcriptional activity is a
predictive marker of MEK inhibitors, we evaluated the effects of
dominant-negative TCF7L2 and of active, mutated ß-catenin on apoptosis induced by
MEK inhibitor. Indeed, dominant-negative TCF7L2 reduced apoptosis induced by MEK 
inhibitor, whereas active, mutated ß-catenin accelerated it. Our findings show
that ß-catenin mutations are an important responder biomarker for MEK1/2
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4313120
PMID: 25640451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2014 Dec;58(9):918-25. doi:
10.1590/0004-2730000003510.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism is associated with risk to type 2
diabetes mellitus in Southern-Brazil.

Assmann TS(1), Duarte GC(1), Rheinheimer J(1), Cruz LA(1), Canani LH(1), Crispim 
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Division, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the
rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes mellitus, in 
a Southern-Brazilian population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was genotyped in 953
type 2 diabetic patients and 535 non-diabetic subjects. All subjects were white. 
The polymorphism was genotyped by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan MGB probes (Life
Technologies). Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated
for additive, recessive and dominant inheritance models.
RESULTS: Genotype and allele frequencies of the rs7903146 polymorphism differed
significantly between type 2 diabetic patients and non-diabetic subjects (P =
0.001 and P = 0.0001, respectively). The frequency of the minor allele was 38% in
type 2 diabetes group and 31% in non-diabetic subjects, and this allele was
significantly associated with type 2 diabetes risk (OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.15 - 1.76
for the dominant model of inheritance). Moreover, the T/T genotype was associated
with a higher risk for type 2 diabetes (OR = 1.83, 95% CI 1.3-2.5) than the
presence of only one copy of the T allele (OR = 1.31, 95% CI 1.1-1.6). Both
results were adjusted for age and gender.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm the association between the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and increase risk for type 2 diabetes in Southern-Brazil.

PMID: 25627047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 24;10(1):e0116753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116753.
eCollection 2015.

A pathway-centric survey of somatic mutations in Chinese patients with colorectal
carcinomas.

Ling C(1), Wang L(2), Wang Z(2), Xu L(2), Sun L(2), Yang H(3), Li WD(4), Wang
K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United States of America; Laboratory of
Clinical Genetics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China;
Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,
300070, China. (2)Center for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Union 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei, 430022, China. (3)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America. (4)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, 300070, China. (5)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America; USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United
States of America; Department of Psychiatry, Keck School of Medicine, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United States of America.

Previous genetic studies on colorectal carcinomas (CRC) have identified multiple 
somatic mutations in four candidate pathways (TGF-ß, Wnt, P53 and RTK-RAS
pathways) on populations of European ancestry. However, it is under-studied
whether other populations harbor different sets of hot-spot somatic mutations in 
these pathways and other oncogenes. In this study, to evaluate the mutational
spectrum of novel somatic mutations, we assessed 41 pairs of tumor-stroma tissues
from Chinese patients with CRC, including 29 colon carcinomas and 12 rectal
carcinomas. We designed Illumina Custom Amplicon panel to target 43 genes,
including genes in the four candidate pathways, as well as several known
oncogenes for other cancers. Candidate mutations were validated by Sanger
sequencing, and we further used SIFT and PolyPhen-2 to assess potentially
functional mutations. We discovered 3 new somatic mutations in gene APC, TCF7L2, 
and PIK3CA that had never been reported in the COSMIC or NCI-60 databases.
Additionally, we confirmed 6 known somatic mutations in gene SMAD4, APC, FBXW7,
BRAF and PTEN in Chinese CRC patients. While most were previously reported in
CRC, one mutation in PTEN was reported only in malignant endometrium cancer. Our 
study confirmed the existence of known somatic mutations in the four candidate
pathways for CRC in Chinese patients. We also discovered a number of novel
somatic mutations in these pathways, which may have implications for the
pathogenesis of CRC.

PMCID: PMC4305320
PMID: 25617745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Meta Gene. 2014 May 4;2:332-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2014.04.006. eCollection
2014.

Association of the rs11196218 polymorphism in TCF7L2 with type 2 diabetes
mellitus in Asian population.

Zhai Y(1), Zhao J(2), You H(1), Pang C(2), Yin L(2), Guo T(3), Feng T(2), Wang
C(1), Gao K(3), Luo X(3), Zhang M(3), Wang J(4), Li L(1), Wang B(1), Ren Y(1),
Shen Y(3), Zhu T(3), Hu D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, College of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, People's Republic of China. (2)Military
Hospital of Henan Province, Zhengzhou 450003, People's Republic of China.
(3)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 518060, People's Republic of 
China. (4)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prevention, Preventive
Medicine Research Evaluation Center, Henan University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Zhengzhou 450008, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To clarify the association of rs11196218 polymorphism in transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in Asian population 
by a case-control study and meta-analysis.
METHODS: In the case-control study, 1842 patients with T2DM and 7777 normal
glucose-tolerant controls in the Henan province of China were genotyped for
rs11196218 in TCF7L2 by PCR-ligase detection reaction. We used allele,
co-dominant, dominant and recessive models to evaluate the risk association and
performed a meta-analysis of the results of different genetic models in previous 
studies and the current study.
RESULTS: The AG genotype of rs11196218 was associated with risk of T2DM in the
Henan population (odds ratio 1.37, 95% confidence interval 1.06-1.78), and
dominant model showed marginal significant association (1.28, 0.99-1.67).
Meta-analysis of 10 studies revealed the dominant model associated with T2DM in
the overall population (1.20, 1.05-1.36). When stratified by region (southern and
northern China and Japan), both the AG genotype and the dominant model were
associated with risk of T2DM in southern Chinese (1.31, 1.03-1.66; 1.27,
1.01-1.60, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The rs11196218 polymorphism in TCF7L2 is associated with risk of T2DM
in Asian population.

PMCID: PMC4287822
PMID: 25606417  [PubMed]


105. Diabetes. 2015 Jun;64(6):1923-32. doi: 10.2337/db14-1329. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Liver-specific expression of dominant-negative transcription factor 7-like 2
causes progressive impairment in glucose homeostasis.

Ip W(1), Shao W(2), Song Z(2), Chen Z(2), Wheeler MB(3), Jin T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute, University 
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Division of Advanced Diagnostics,
Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. (3)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada tianru.jin@utoronto.ca.

Investigations on the metabolic role of the Wnt signaling pathway and hepatic
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have generated opposing views. While some 
studies demonstrated a repressive effect of TCF7L2 on hepatic gluconeogenesis, a 
recent study using liver-specific Tcf7l2(-/-) mice suggested the opposite. As a
consequence of redundant and bidirectional actions of transcription factor (TCF) 
molecules and other complexities of the Wnt pathway, knockout of a single Wnt
pathway component may not effectively reveal a complete metabolic picture of this
pathway. To address this, we generated the liver-specific dominant-negative (DN) 
TCF7L2 (TCF7L2DN) transgenic mouse model LTCFDN. These mice exhibited progressive
impairment in response to pyruvate challenge. Importantly, LTCFDN hepatocytes
displayed elevated gluconeogenic gene expression, gluconeogenesis, and loss of
Wnt-3a-mediated repression of gluconeogenesis. In C57BL/6 hepatocytes,
adenovirus-mediated expression of TCF7L2DN, but not wild-type TCF7L2, increased
gluconeogenesis and gluconeogenic gene expression. Our further mechanistic
exploration suggests that TCF7L2DN-mediated inhibition of Wnt signaling causes
preferential interaction of ß-catenin (ß-cat) with FoxO1 and increased binding of
ß-cat/FoxO1 to the Pck1 FoxO binding site, resulting in the stimulation of Pck1
expression and increased gluconeogenesis. Together, our results using TCF7L2DN as
a unique tool revealed that the Wnt signaling pathway and its effector ß-cat/TCF 
serve a beneficial role in suppressing hepatic gluconeogenesis.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25576056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Metab. 2015 Jan 6;21(1):138-49. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.12.014.

Mouse-human experimental epigenetic analysis unmasks dietary targets and genetic 
liability for diabetic phenotypes.

Multhaup ML(1), Seldin MM(2), Jaffe AE(3), Lei X(2), Kirchner H(4), Mondal P(5), 
Li Y(5), Rodriguez V(1), Drong A(6), Hussain M(5), Lindgren C(6), McCarthy M(7), 
Näslund E(8), Zierath JR(4), Wong GW(2), Feinberg AP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Epigenetics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
(2)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Metabolism and Obesity
Research, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (3)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, 855 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Mental Health, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery Karolinska
Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
(6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (7)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK; Oxford Centre for
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital,
Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LI, UK; Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre,
Churchill Hospital, Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LI, UK. (8)Department of
Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, 182 88 Stockholm,
Sweden. (9)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Center for Epigenetics, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 855 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. Electronic address: afeinberg@jhu.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 May;11(5):261-2.

Using a functional approach to investigate the epigenetics of type 2 diabetes
(T2D), we combine three lines of evidence-diet-induced epigenetic dysregulation
in mouse, epigenetic conservation in humans, and T2D clinical risk evidence-to
identify genes implicated in T2D pathogenesis through epigenetic mechanisms
related to obesity. Beginning with dietary manipulation of genetically
homogeneous mice, we identify differentially DNA-methylated genomic regions. We
then replicate these results in adipose samples from lean and obese patients pre-
and post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, identifying regions where both the location
and direction of methylation change are conserved. These regions overlap with 27 
genetic T2D risk loci, only one of which was deemed significant by GWAS alone.
Functional analysis of genes associated with these regions revealed four genes
with roles in insulin resistance, demonstrating the potential general utility of 
this approach for complementing conventional human genetic studies by integrating
cross-species epigenomics and clinical genetic risk.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4340475
PMID: 25565211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):587-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.12.012. Epub 2014
Dec 27.

Acute Wnt pathway activation positively regulates leptin gene expression in
mature adipocytes.

Chen ZL(1), Shao WJ(2), Xu F(1), Liu L(2), Lin BS(1), Wei XH(1), Song ZL(2), Lu
HG(3), Fantus IG(3), Weng JP(4), Jin TR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Diabetology, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto
General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
(3)Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Diabetology, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China. Electronic address: wjianp@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (5)Division of Advanced
Diagnostics, Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: tianru.jin@utoronot.ca.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed the implication of several
Wnt signaling pathway components, including its effector transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in diabetes and other metabolic disorders. As TCF7L2 is
expressed in adipocytes, we investigated its expression and function in rodent
fat tissue and mature adipocytes. We found that TCF7L2 mRNA expression in C57BL/6
mouse epididymal fat tissue was up-regulated by feeding but down-regulated by
intraperitoneal insulin injection. In high-fat diet (HFD) fed mice, db/db mice
and Zucker (fa/fa) rats, epididymal fat TCF7L2 mRNA levels were lower than the
corresponding controls. Treating rat adipocytes with 100nM insulin repressed
TCF7L2 mRNA and protein levels, associated with the repression of leptin mRNA
level. The treatment with 1nM insulin, however, stimulated TCF7L2 and leptin mRNA
levels. This stimulation could be attenuated by iCRT14, an inhibitor of
ß-catenin/TCF-responsive transcription. Wnt3a stimulated leptin mRNA level, which
was also blocked by iCRT14 co-treatment. Utilizing the leptin-expressing cell
line HTR8 as a tool, we defined an evolutionarily conserved CREB binding motif
that mediated Wnt3a activation. Although Wnt activation is known to repress the
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells towards mature adipocytes, short-term Wnt3a
treatment of differentiated 3T3-L1 cells stimulated leptin mRNA levels. Thus, wnt
pathway plays a dual function in adipocytes, including the well-known repressive 
effect on adipogenesis and the stimulation of leptin production in mature
adipocytes in response to nutritional status.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25550093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2016 Mar 1;15:4. doi: 10.1186/s40200-016-0225-y.
eCollection 2015.

Candidate gene analysis supports a role for polymorphisms at TCF7L2 as risk
factors for type 2 diabetes in Sudan.

Ibrahim AT(1), Hussain A(2), Salih MA(1), Ibrahim OA(3), Jamieson SE(4), Ibrahim 
ME(2), Blackwell JM(4), Mohamed HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Ministry of Science and Technology, Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Institute of Endemic Disease, University of Khartoum, P. O. Box 102 Khartoum, 
Sudan. (3)Tuti Health Centre, Khartoum, Sudan. (4)Telethon Kids Institute,
University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes (T2D) is multifactorial. A 
growing number of genes have been identified as risk factors for T2D across
multiple ethnicities in trans-ancestry meta-analysis of large-scale genome-wide
association studies. Few studies have looked at these genes in Sub-Saharan
African populations. This study was undertaken to look for associations between
T2D and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a number of the top candidate
genes in a selected Sudanese population.
METHODS: A total 240 T2D cases and 128 unrelated healthy control subjects were
included in this study. Age, sex, weight and height were recorded, blood pressure
and biochemical profiles of glucose and lipids were analysed. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) genotyping was performed using the Sequenom MassARRAY® system.
Fourteen SNPs were selected across 7 genes: CAPN10 (rs2975760 and rs5030952),
PPARG (rs17036314 and rs1801282), IGF2BP2 (rs4402960 and rs1470579), CDKAL1
(rs9465871), HHEX (rs1111875), TCF7L2 (rs7903146, rs11196205 and rs12255372), and
KCNJ11 (rs5215, rs1800467 and rs5219). Allelic and haplotype association analyses
were performed under additive models in PLINK. P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007 (=0.05/7 genes) was the 
P-value required to achieve correction for multiple testing.
RESULTS: A significant genetic association between the SNPs rs7903146 (odds ratio
1.69, 95 % confidence interval 1.21-2.38, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and rs12255372 (odds ratio
1.70, 95 % confidence interval 1.20-2.41, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) at TCF7L2 and T2D was found 
in Sudanese population. These associations were retained after adjusting for age,
sex and BMI (e.g. rs7903146: odds ratio 1.70, P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). The
strongest haplotype association (odds ratio 2.24; P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003)
comprised the two point haplotype T_C across rs7903146 and rs11196205. Stepwise
logistic regression demonstrated that SNP rs7903146 added significant main
effects to rs11196205 or rs12255372, whereas the reverse was not true, indicating
that the main effect for association with T2D in this population is most strongly
tagged by SNP rs7903146. Adjusted analyses also provided support for protection
from T2D associated with minor alleles at SNPs rs2975760 at CAPN10 (odds ratio
0.44, 95 % confidence interval 0.20-0.97, P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.042) and
rs1111876 at HHEX (odds ratio 0.60, 95 % confidence interval 0.39- 0.93, P
adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Multiethnic associations between T2D and SNPs at TCF7L2, CAPN10 and 
HHEX extend to Sub-Saharan Africa, specifically Sudan.

PMCID: PMC4774008
PMID: 26937418  [PubMed]


109. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec 14;20(46):17456-62. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i46.17456.

Case-control study of diabetes-related genetic variants and pancreatic cancer
risk in Japan.

Kuruma S(1), Egawa N(1), Kurata M(1), Honda G(1), Kamisawa T(1), Ueda J(1), Ishii
H(1), Ueno M(1), Nakao H(1), Mori M(1), Matsuo K(1), Hosono S(1), Ohkawa S(1),
Wakai K(1), Nakamura K(1), Tamakoshi A(1), Nojima M(1), Takahashi M(1), Shimada
K(1), Nishiyama T(1), Kikuchi S(1), Lin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sawako Kuruma, Terumi Kamisawa, Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo
Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Tokyo 113-8677, Japan.

AIM: To examine whether diabetes-related genetic variants are associated with
pancreatic cancer risk.
METHODS: We genotyped 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in PPARG2
(rs1801282), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), ADRB3 (rs4994), KCNQ1 (rs2237895), KCNJ11
(rs5219), TCF7L2 (rs7903146), and CDKAL1 (rs2206734), and examined their
associations with pancreatic cancer risk in a multi-institute case-control study 
including 360 cases and 400 controls in Japan. A self-administered questionnaire 
was used to collect detailed information on lifestyle factors. Genotyping was
performed using Fluidigm SNPtype assays. Unconditional logistic regression
methods were used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) for the association between these diabetes-associated variants and
pancreatic cancer risk.
RESULTS: With the exception of rs1501299 in the ADIPOQ gene (P = 0.09), no
apparent differences in genotype frequencies were observed between cases and
controls. Rs1501299 in the ADPIOQ gene was positively associated with pancreatic 
cancer risk; compared with individuals with the AA genotype, the age- and
sex-adjusted OR was 1.79 (95%CI: 0.98-3.25) among those with the AC genotype and 
1.86 (95%CI: 1.03-3.38) among those with the CC genotype. The ORs remained
similar after additional adjustment for body mass index and cigarette smoking. In
contrast, rs2237895 in the KCNQ1 gene was inversely related to pancreatic cancer 
risk, with a multivariable-adjusted OR of 0.62 (0.37-1.04) among individuals with
the CC genotype compared with the AA genotype. No significant associations were
noted for other 5 SNPs.
CONCLUSION: Our case-control study indicates that rs1501299 in the ADIPOQ gene
may be associated with pancreatic cancer risk. These findings should be
replicated in additional studies.

PMCID: PMC4265605
PMID: 25516658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Bone. 2015 Mar;72:123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.11.024. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

The type 2 diabetes associated rs7903146 T allele within TCF7L2 is significantly 
under-represented in Hereditary Multiple Exostoses: insights into pathogenesis.

Sgariglia F(1), Pedrini E(2), Bradfield JP(3), Bhatti TR(4), D'Adamo P(5),
Dormans JP(1), Gunawardena AT(1), Hakonarson H(6), Hecht JT(7), Sangiorgi L(2),
Pacifici M(1), Enomoto-Iwamoto M(1), Grant SF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Medical Genetics and
Skeletal Rare Diseases, IRCCS Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute (IOR), Bologna,
Italy. (3)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology &
Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
(5)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste,
Italy; Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of
Trieste, Trieste, Italy. (6)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human
Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department 
of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric
Research, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA.
(8)Center for Applied Genomics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic 
address: grants@chop.edu.

Hereditary Multiple Exostoses (HME) is an autosomal-dominant disorder
characterized by benign cartilage tumors (exostoses) forming near the growth
plates, leading to severe health problems. EXT1 and EXT2 are the two genes known 
to harbor heterozygous loss-of-function mutations that account for the vast
majority of the primary genetic component of HME. However, patients present with 
wide clinical heterogeneity, suggesting that modifier genes play a role in
determining severity. Our previous work has pointed to an imbalance of ß-catenin 
signaling being involved in the pathogenesis of osteochondroma formation. TCF7L2 
is one of the key 'gate-keeper' TCF family members for Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway, and TCF7L2 and EXT2 are among the earliest associated loci reported in
genome wide appraisals of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Thus we investigated if the key 
T allele of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 within the TCF7L2
locus, which is strongly over-represented among T2D cases, was also associated
with HME. We leveraged genotype data available from ongoing GWAS efforts from
genomics and orthopedic centers in the US, Canada and Italy. Collectively 213
cases and 1890 controls were analyzed and, surprisingly, the T allele was in fact
significantly under-represented in the HME patient group [P = 0.009; odds ratio =
0.737 (95% C.I. 0.587-0.926)]; in addition, the direction of effect was
consistent within each individual cohort. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed
that TCF7L2 is differentially expressed and distributed in normal human growth
plate zones, and exhibits substantial variability in human exostoses in terms of 
staining intensity and distribution. In summary, the data indicate that there is 
a putative genetic connection between TCF7L2 and EXT in the context of HME. Given
this observation, we suggest that these loci could possibly modulate shared
pathways, in particular with respect to ß-catenin, and their respective variants 
interplay to influence HME pathogenesis as well as T2D.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4300120
PMID: 25498973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Genet. 2014 Dec 10;15:134. doi: 10.1186/s12863-014-0134-3.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, dietary intakes and type 2 diabetes risk in an
Algerian population.

Ouhaibi-Djellouli H(1,)(2), Mediene-Benchekor S(3,)(4), Lardjam-Hetraf SA(5),
Hamani-Medjaoui I(6), Meroufel DN(7), Boulenouar H(8), Hermant X(9), Saidi-Mehtar
N(10), Amouyel P(11), Houti L(12,)(13), Goumidi L(14), Meirhaeghe A(15).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria.
djellouli.ouhaibi@gmail.com. (2)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des
Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
djellouli.ouhaibi@gmail.com. (3)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, 
Oran, Algeria. sonia_mediene@yahoo.fr. (4)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté 
des Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
sonia_mediene@yahoo.fr. (5)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de
la Nature et de la Vie, Université d'Oran, Oran, Algeria.
lardjamhetraf.sarah@gmail.com. (6)Caisse Nationale des Assurances Sociales des
Travailleurs Salariés, Clinique Spécialisée en Orthopédie et Rééducation des
Victimes des Accidents de Travail, Oran, Algeria. amanim20002000@yahoo.fr.
(7)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria. meroufeln@yahoo.fr.
(8)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et
de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algeria.
boulenouar.houssam@gmail.com. (9)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
xavier.hermant@pasteur-lille.fr. (10)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf, 
Oran, Algeria. nmehtar2002@yahoo.fr. (11)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
philippe.amouyel@pasteur-lille.fr. (12)Faculté de Médecine, Université Djillali
Liabes de Sidi Bel Abbès, Sidi Bel Abbès, Algeria. leilahouti@yahoo.fr.
(13)Laboratoire des Systèmes d'Information en Santé, Université d'Oran, Oran,
Algeria. leilahouti@yahoo.fr. (14)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
louisa.goumidi@pasteur-lille.fr. (15)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, F-59019, Lille, France.
aline.meirhaeghe@pasteur-lille.fr.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is the most
significant genetic risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Association analyses
were performed on participants (n = 751, aged between 30 and 64) in the ISOR
population-based study in the city of Oran. Dietary intakes were estimated using 
a weekly food frequency questionnaire.
RESULTS: The T allele of the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was
associated with lower body weight (p = 0.02), lower BMI (p = 0.009), lower waist 
circumference (p = 0.01) and a lower waist-to-hip ratio (p = 0.02). The T allele 
was associated with a significantly higher risk of T2D (odds ratio (OR) (95%
confidence interval) = 1.55 (1.09-2.20), p = 0.01) and this association was
independent of BMI. When considering the T2D risk, there were nominal
interactions between the rs7903146 SNP and dessert (p = 0.05) and milk intakes (p
= 0.01). The T2D risk was greater in T allele carriers with high dessert and milk
intakes (OR = 2.61 (1.51-4.52), p = 0.0006, and 2.46 (1.47-4.12), p = 0.0006,
respectively). In subjects with a high dessert intake, the T allele was also
associated with higher fasting plasma glucose concentrations (4.89 ± 0.46 mmol/L 
in TT subjects, 4.72 ± 0.48 mmol/L in CT subjects and 4.78 ± 0.51 mmol/L in CC
subjects; p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The T allele of the rs7903146 SNP is associated with a significantly
higher risk of T2D in an Algerian population. This association was further
strengthened by a high dessert intake, suggesting that gene-diet interactions
increase the T2D risk.

PMCID: PMC4266211
PMID: 25491720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nucleus. 2014;5(6):508-19. doi: 10.4161/nucl.36360. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Implications of polyadenylation in health and disease.

Curinha A(1), Oliveira Braz S, Pereira-Castro I, Cruz A, Moreira A.

Author information: 
(1)a Gene Regulation Group; IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular ;
Universidade do Porto ; Porto , Portugal.

Polyadenylation is the RNA processing step that completes the maturation of
nearly all eukaryotic mRNAs. It is a two-step nuclear process that involves an
endonucleolytic cleavage of the pre-mRNA at the 3'-end and the polymerization of 
a polyadenosine (polyA) tail, which is fundamental for mRNA stability, nuclear
export and efficient translation during development. The core molecular machinery
responsible for the definition of a polyA site includes several recognition,
cleavage and polyadenylation factors that identify and act on a given polyA
signal present in a pre-mRNA, usually an AAUAAA hexamer or similar sequence. This
mechanism is tightly regulated by other cis-acting elements and trans-acting
factors, and its misregulation can cause inefficient gene expression and may
ultimately lead to disease. The majority of genes generate multiple mRNAs as a
result of alternative polyadenylation in the 3'-untranslated region. The variable
lengths of the 3' untranslated regions created by alternative polyadenylation are
a recognizable target for differential regulation and clearly affect the fate of 
the transcript, ultimately modulating the expression of the gene. Over the past
few years, several studies have highlighted the importance of polyadenylation and
alternative polyadenylation in gene expression and their impact in a variety of
physiological conditions, as well as in several illnesses. Abnormalities in the
3'-end processing mechanisms thus represent a common feature among many
oncological, immunological, neurological and hematological disorders, but slight 
imbalances can lead to the natural establishment of a specific cellular state.
This review addresses the key steps of polyadenylation and alternative
polyadenylation in different cellular conditions and diseases focusing on the
molecular effectors that ensure a faultless pre-mRNA 3' end formation.

PMCID: PMC4615197
PMID: 25484187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 8;4:7351. doi: 10.1038/srep07351.

T2DM GWAS in the Lebanese population confirms the role of TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 in
disease susceptibility.

Ghassibe-Sabbagh M(1), Haber M(1), Salloum AK(1), Al-Sarraj Y(2), Akle Y(3),
Hirbli K(4), Romanos J(1), Mouzaya F(1), Gauguier D(5), Platt DE(6), El-Shanti
H(7), Zalloua PA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon.
(2)Shafallah Medical Genetics Center, Doha, Qatar. (3)Centre Hospitalier du
Nord-CHN, Zgharta, Lebanon. (4)1] Lebanese American University, School of
Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon [2] University Medical Center - Rizk Hospital
(UMC-RH), Lebanon. (5)INSERM, UMRS872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France. (6)Bioinformatics and Pattern Discovery, IBM T. J. Watson Research
Centre, Yorktown Hgts, NY 10598, USA. (7)1] Shafallah Medical Genetics Center,
Doha, Qatar [2] University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City. (8)1]
Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon [2]
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston MA 02215, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of multiple populations with distinctive
genetic and lifestyle backgrounds are crucial to the understanding of Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) pathophysiology. We report a GWAS on the genetic basis
of T2DM in a 3,286 Lebanese participants. More than 5,000,000 SNPs were directly 
genotyped or imputed using the 1000 Genomes Project reference panels. We identify
genome-wide significant variants in two loci CDKAL1 and TCF7L2, independent of
sex, age and BMI, with leading variants rs7766070 (OR = 1.39, P = 4.77 × 10(-9)) 
and rs34872471 (OR = 1.35, P = 1.01 × 10(-8)) respectively. The current study is 
the first GWAS to find genomic regions implicated in T2DM in the Lebanese
population. The results support a central role of CDKAL1 and TCF7L2 in T2DM
susceptibility in Southwest Asian populations and provide a plausible component
for understanding molecular mechanisms involved in the disease.

PMID: 25483131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2014 Dec 1;2(1):e000052. doi:
10.1136/bmjdrc-2014-000052. eCollection 2014.

Two novel type 2 diabetes loci revealed through integration of TCF7L2 DNA
occupancy and SNP association data.

Johnson ME(1), Zhao J(1), Schug J(2), Deliard S(1), Xia Q(1), Guy VC(1), Sainz
J(3), Kaestner KH(2), Wells AD(4), Grant SF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics , The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Institute of
Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism , Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA. (3)Institute of Biomedicine and 
Biotechnology of Cantabria (IBBTEC), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) ,
Santander , Spain. (4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA. (5)Division of Human Genetics , 
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA ;
Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism ,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania , USA ; Department of Pediatrics , Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus is strongly
implicated in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We previously mapped the
genomic regions bound by TCF7L2 using ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation)-seq in
the colorectal carcinoma cell line, HCT116, revealing an unexpected highly
significant over-representation of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) loci
associated primarily with endocrine (in particular T2D) and cardiovascular
traits.
METHODS: In order to further explore if this observed phenomenon occurs in other 
cell lines, we carried out ChIP-seq in HepG2 cells and leveraged ENCODE data for 
five additional cell lines. Given that only a minority of the predicted genetic
component to most complex traits has been identified to date, plus our
GWAS-related observations with respect to TCF7L2 occupancy, we investigated if
restricting association analyses to the genes yielded from this approach, in
order to reduce the constraints of multiple testing, could reveal novel T2D loci.
RESULTS: We found strong evidence for the continued enrichment of endocrine and
cardiovascular GWAS categories, with additional support for cancer. When
investigating all the known GWAS loci bound by TCF7L2 in the shortest gene list, 
derived from HCT116, the coronary artery disease-associated variant, rs46522 at
the UBE2Z-GIP-ATP5G1-SNF8 locus, yielded significant association with T2D within 
DIAGRAM. Furthermore, when we analyzed tag-SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms)
in genes not previously implicated by GWAS but bound by TCF7L2 within 5 kb, we
observed a significant association of rs4780476 within CPPED1 in DIAGRAM.
CONCLUSIONS: ChIP-seq data generated with this GWAS-implicated transcription
factor provided a biologically plausible method to limit multiple testing in the 
assessment of genome-wide genotyping data to uncover two novel T2D-associated
loci.

PMCID: PMC4250976
PMID: 25469308  [PubMed]


115. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2014 Apr 6;2(1):e000008. doi:
10.1136/bmjdrc-2013-000008. eCollection 2014.

Association of TCF7L2 variation with single islet autoantibody expression in
children with type 1 diabetes.

Redondo MJ(1), Muniz J(2), Rodriguez LM(1), Iyer D(3), Vaziri-Sani F(4), Haymond 
MW(5), Hampe CS(6), Metzker ML(2), Grant SF(7), Balasubramanyam A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Diabetes and Endocrinology , Texas
Children's Hospital , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston, Texas , USA.
(2)Department of Genetics , Human Genome Center, Baylor College of Medicine ,
Houston, Texas , USA. (3)Division of Diabetes , Translational Metabolism Unit,
Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Baylor College of
Medicine , Houston, Texas , USA. (4)Department of Clinical Sciences , Diabetes
and Celiac Disease, Lund University/CRC , Malmö , Sweden. (5)Childrens's
Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine , Houston, Texas , USA.
(6)Department of Medicine , University of Washington , Seattle, Washington , USA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Applied Genomics , The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , USA.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has the strongest
genetic association with type 2 diabetes. TCF7L2 also associates with latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults, which often presents with a single islet
autoantibody, but not with classical type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We aimed to test if TCF7L2 is associated with single islet autoantibody 
expression in pediatric type 1 diabetes. We studied 71 prospectively recruited
children who had newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes and evidence of islet
autoimmunity, that is, expressed =1 islet autoantibody to insulin, glutamic acid 
decarboxylase 65, islet cell autoantigen 512, or zinc transporter 8. TCF7L2
rs7903146 alleles were identified. Data at diagnosis were cross-sectionally
analyzed.
RESULTS: We found that 21.1% of the children with autoimmune type 1 diabetes
expressed a single islet autoantibody. The distribution of TCF7L2 rs7903146
genotypes in children with a single autoantibody (n=15) was 40% CC, 26.7% CT and 
33.3% TT, compared with children with =2 islet autoantibodies (50% CC, 42.9% CT
and 7.1% TT, p=0.024). Furthermore, compared with children with =2
autoantibodies, single-autoantibody children had characteristics reflecting
milder autoimmune destruction of ß-cells. Restricting to lean children (body mass
index<85th centile; n=36), 45.5% of those expressing a single autoantibody were
rs7903146 TT homozygotes, compared with 0% of those with =2 autoantibodies
(p<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that, in children with only mild islet
autoimmunity, mechanisms associated with TCF7L2 genetic variation contribute to
diabetogenesis, and this contribution is larger in the absence of obesity.

PMCID: PMC4212574
PMID: 25452857  [PubMed]


116. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jan;125(1):208-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI76902. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Intronic locus determines SHROOM3 expression and potentiates renal allograft
fibrosis.

Menon MC, Chuang PY, Li Z, Wei C, Zhang W, Luan Y, Yi Z, Xiong H, Woytovich C,
Greene I, Overbey J, Rosales I, Bagiella E, Chen R, Ma M, Li L, Ding W, Djamali
A, Saminego M, O'Connell PJ, Gallon L, Colvin R, Schroppel B, He JC, Murphy B.

Fibrosis underlies the loss of renal function in patients with chronic kidney
disease (CKD) and in kidney transplant recipients with chronic allograft
nephropathy (CAN). Here, we studied the effect of an intronic SNP in SHROOM3,
which has previously been linked to CKD, on the development of CAN in a
prospective cohort of renal allograft recipients. The presence of the rs17319721 
allele at the SHROOM3 locus in the donor correlated with increased SHROOM3
expression in the allograft. In vitro, we determined that the sequence containing
the risk allele at rs17319721 is a transcription factor 7-like 2-dependent
(TCF7L2-dependent) enhancer element that functions to increase SHROOM3
transcription. In renal tubular cells, TGF-ß1 administration upregulated SHROOM3 
expression in a ß-catenin/TCF7L2-mediated manner, while SHROOM3 in turn
facilitated canonical TGF-ß1 signaling and increased a1 collagen (COL1A1)
expression. Inducible and tubular cell-specific knockdown of Shroom3 markedly
abrogated interstitial fibrosis in mice with unilateral ureteric obstruction.
Moreover, SHROOM3 expression in allografts at 3 months after transplant and the
presence of the SHROOM3 risk allele in the donor correlated with increased
allograft fibrosis and with reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate at 12
months after transplant. Our findings suggest that rs17319721 functions as a
cis-acting expression quantitative trait locus of SHROOM3 that facilitates TGF-ß1
signaling and contributes to allograft injury.

PMCID: PMC4382250
PMID: 25437874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13615-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1186. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The TCF C-clamp DNA binding domain expands the Wnt transcriptome via alternative 
target recognition.

Hoverter NP(1), Zeller MD(2), McQuade MM(1), Garibaldi A(1), Busch A(1), Selwan
EM(1), Hertel KJ(1), Baldi P(2), Waterman ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (2)Department of Information and Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA
92697, USA marian.waterman@uci.edu.

LEF/TCFs direct the final step in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling by recruiting
ß-catenin to genes for activation of transcription. Ancient, non-vertebrate TCFs 
contain two DNA binding domains, a High Mobility Group box for recognition of the
Wnt Response Element (WRE; 5'-CTTTGWWS-3') and the C-clamp domain for recognition
of the GC-rich Helper motif (5'-RCCGCC-3'). Two vertebrate TCFs (TCF-1/TCF7 and
TCF-4/TCF7L2) use the C-clamp as an alternatively spliced domain to regulate
cell-cycle progression, but how the C-clamp influences TCF binding and activity
genome-wide is not known. Here, we used a doxycycline inducible system with
ChIP-seq to assess how the C-clamp influences human TCF1 binding genome-wide.
Metabolic pulse-labeling of nascent RNA with 4'Thiouridine was used with RNA-seq 
to connect binding to the Wnt transcriptome. We find that the C-clamp enables
targeting to a greater number of gene loci for stronger occupancy and
transcription regulation. The C-clamp uses Helper sites concurrently with WREs
for gene targeting, but it also targets TCF1 to sites that do not have readily
identifiable canonical WREs. The coupled ChIP-seq/4'Thiouridine-seq analysis
identified new Wnt target genes, including additional regulators of cell
proliferation. Thus, C-clamp containing isoforms of TCFs are potent
transcriptional regulators with an expanded transcriptome directed by
C-clamp-Helper site interactions.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267635
PMID: 25414359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13646-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1225. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The mechanisms of genome-wide target gene regulation by TCF7L2 in liver cells.

Norton L(1), Chen X(2), Fourcaudot M(2), Acharya NK(2), DeFronzo RA(2), Heikkinen
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 
78229, USA nortonl@uthscsa.edu. (2)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (3)Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio 70211, Finland nortonl@uthscsa.edu.

In the liver Wnt-signaling contributes to the metabolic fate of hepatocytes, but 
the precise role of the TCF7L2 in this process is unknown. We employed a temporal
RNA-Seq approach to examine gene expression 3-96 h following Tcf7l2 silencing in 
rat hepatoma cells, and combined this with ChIP-Seq to investigate mechanisms of 
target gene regulation by TCF7L2. Silencing Tcf7l2 led to a time-dependent
appearance of 406 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including key regulators
of cellular growth and differentiation, and amino acid, lipid and glucose
metabolism. Direct regulation of 149 DEGs was suggested by strong proximal TCF7L2
binding (peak proximity score > 10) and early mRNA expression changes (= 18 h).
Indirect gene regulation by TCF7L2 likely occurred via alternate transcription
factors, including Hnf4a, Foxo1, Cited2, Myc and Lef1, which were differentially 
expressed following Tcf7l2 knock-down. Tcf7l2-silencing enhanced the expression
and chromatin occupancy of HNF4a, and co-siRNA experiments revealed that HNF4a
was required for the regulation of a subset of metabolic genes by TCF7L2,
particularly those involved in lipid and amino-acid metabolism. Our findings
suggest TCF7L2 is an important regulator of the hepatic phenotype, and highlight 
novel mechanisms of gene regulation by TCF7L2 that involve interplay between
multiple hepatic transcriptional pathways.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267646
PMID: 25414334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 15;24(6):1646-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu577. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

Evidence of non-pancreatic beta cell-dependent roles of Tcf7l2 in the regulation 
of glucose metabolism in mice.

Bailey KA(1), Savic D(1), Zielinski M(2), Park SY(2), Wang LJ(3), Witkowski P(3),
Brady M(4), Hara M(2), Bell GI(5), Nobrega MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics. (2)Department of Medicine. (3)Department of
Surgery. (4)Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and
Metabolism, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)Department of Human
Genetics, Department of Medicine. (6)Department of Human Genetics,
nobrega@uchicago.edu.

Non-coding variation within TCF7L2 remains the strongest genetic determinant of
type 2 diabetes risk in humans. A considerable effort has been placed in
understanding the functional roles of TCF7L2 in pancreatic beta cells, despite
evidence of TCF7L2 expression in various peripheral tissues important in glucose 
homeostasis. Here, we use a humanized mouse model overexpressing Tcf7l2,
resulting in glucose intolerance, to infer the contribution of Tcf7l2
overexpression in beta cells and in other tissues to the metabolic phenotypes
displayed by these mice. Restoring Tcf7l2 expression specifically in beta cells
to endogenous levels, in face of its overexpression elsewhere, results in
impaired insulin secretion, reduced beta cell number and islet area,
corroborating data obtained in humans showing similar phenotypes as a result of
manipulations leading to Tcf7l2 loss of function. Interestingly, the persistent
overexpression of Tcf7l2 in non-pancreatic tissues results in a significant
worsening in glucose tolerance in vivo, indicating that Tcf7l2 overexpression in 
beta cells does not account for the glucose intolerance in the Tcf7l2
overexpression mouse model. Collectively, these data posit that Tcf7l2 plays key 
roles in glucose metabolism through actions beyond pancreatic beta cells, and
further points to functionally opposing cell-type specific effects for Tcf7l2 on 
the maintenance of balanced glucose metabolism, thereby urging a careful
examination of its role in non-pancreatic tissues as well as its composite
metabolic effects across distinct tissues. Uncovering these roles may lead to new
therapeutic targets for type 2 diabetes.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4381752
PMID: 25398947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 13;9(11):e113072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113072.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of allelic heterogeneity at type-2 diabetes loci and impact on
prediction.

Klimentidis YC(1), Zhou J(1), Wineinger NE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, Division of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America. 
(2)Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, California, United States
of America.

Although over 60 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified by
meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for type-2 diabetes (T2D) among 
individuals of European descent, much of the genetic variation remains
unexplained. There are likely many more SNPs that contribute to variation in T2D 
risk, some of which may lie in the regions surrounding established SNPs--a
phenomenon often referred to as allelic heterogeneity. Here, we use the summary
statistics from the DIAGRAM consortium meta-analysis of T2D genome-wide
association studies along with linkage disequilibrium patterns inferred from a
large reference sample to identify novel SNPs associated with T2D surrounding
each of the previously established risk loci. We then examine the extent to which
the use of these additional SNPs improves prediction of T2D risk in an
independent validation dataset. Our results suggest that multiple SNPs at each of
3 loci contribute to T2D susceptibility (TCF7L2, CDKN2A/B, and KCNQ1;
p<5×10(-8)). Using a less stringent threshold (p<5×10(-4)), we identify 34
additional loci with multiple associated SNPs. The addition of these SNPs
slightly improves T2D prediction compared to the use of only the respective lead 
SNPs, when assessed using an independent validation cohort. Our findings suggest 
that some currently established T2D risk loci likely harbor multiple
polymorphisms which contribute independently and collectively to T2D risk. This
opens a promising avenue for improving prediction of T2D, and for a better
understanding of the genetic architecture of T2D.

PMCID: PMC4231111
PMID: 25393876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):1390-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu553. Epub 2014 Oct
29.

Selective disruption of Tcf7l2 in the pancreatic ß cell impairs secretory
function and lowers ß cell mass.

Mitchell RK(1), Mondragon A(1), Chen L(2), Mcginty JA(2), French PM(2), Ferrer
J(3), Thorens B(4), Hodson DJ(1), Rutter GA(5), Da Silva Xavier G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine. (2)Photonics Group, Department of Physics and. (3)Section
of Genetics and Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK. (4)Center for
Integrative Genomics, Physiology Department, University of Lausanne, Genopode
Building, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)Section of Cell Biology, Division of 
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
g.dasilva-xavier@imperial.ac.uk g.rutter@imperial.ac.uk.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by ß cell dysfunction and loss. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms in the T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, associated 
with T2D by genome-wide association studies, lead to impaired ß cell function.
While deletion of the homologous murine Tcf7l2 gene throughout the developing
pancreas leads to impaired glucose tolerance, deletion in the ß cell in adult
mice reportedly has more modest effects. To inactivate Tcf7l2 highly selectively 
in ß cells from the earliest expression of the Ins1 gene (~E11.5) we have
therefore used a Cre recombinase introduced at the Ins1 locus.
Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre mice display impaired oral and intraperitoneal glucose
tolerance by 8 and 16 weeks, respectively, and defective responses to the GLP-1
analogue liraglutide at 8 weeks. Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre islets displayed defective
glucose- and GLP-1-stimulated insulin secretion and the expression of both the
Ins2 (~20%) and Glp1r (~40%) genes were significantly reduced. Glucose- and
GLP-1-induced intracellular free Ca(2+) increases, and connectivity between
individual ß cells, were both lowered by Tcf7l2 deletion in islets from mice
maintained on a high (60%) fat diet. Finally, analysis by optical projection
tomography revealed ~30% decrease in ß cell mass in pancreata from
Tcfl2(fl/fl)::Ins1Cre mice. These data demonstrate that Tcf7l2 plays a cell
autonomous role in the control of ß cell function and mass, serving as an
important regulator of gene expression and islet cell coordination. The possible 
relevance of these findings for the action of TCF7L2 polymorphisms associated
with Type 2 diabetes in man is discussed.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4321446
PMID: 25355422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;49(8):588-93.

[Correlation between TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and genetic susceptibility in women
with gestational diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi X(1), Cai Q(2), Zou M, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Maternal and Children Health Hospital of Jiangxi
Province, Nanchang 330000, China. (2)Email: ai929@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) at locus rs7903146, rs290487,
rsl1196205, rs12255372 and genetic susceptibility in women with gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: As a case- control study, 100 pregnant women with GDM and 100 healthy
pregnant women in the Maternal and Children Health Hospital of Jiangxi Province
were recruited from January 2010 to July 2013. Clinical parameters, including
body mass index (BMI), fasting insulin (FINS), fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and
homeostatic model assessment-insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) were measured
after admission to hospital. Allelespecific PCR was used to analyze the SNP of
TCF7L2 at locus rs7903146, rs290487, rs11196205, rs12255372.
RESULTS: (1)The BMI, FPG, FINS and HOMA-IR in GDM group were (27.4 ± 3.0)kg/m²,
(5.6 ± 1.0) mmol/L, (6.2 ± 3.4) mU/L and 1.8 ± 1.0, and were (24.2 ± 2.9) kg/m², 
(5.3 ± 0.8) mmol/L, (4.5 ± 2.8) mU/L, 1.2 ± 0.8 in the control group,
respectively. The differences had statistically significance (P < 0.05). (2)The
SNP of TCF7L2 gene, locus rs7903146 were CC, CT and TT genotype; the SNP of locus
rs290487 were CC, CT and TT genotype; and the SNP of locus rs11196205 were GG and
CC genotype; while the SNP of locus rs12255372 was GG genotype. (3) The
distribution frequencies of genotype CC, CT and TT at locus rs7903146 in the GDM 
group were 40% (40/100), 36% (36/100) and 24% (24/100), respectively. While in
the control group, they were 55% (55/100), 38% (38/100) and 7% (7/100),
respectively. The frequencies of C and T allele of rs7903146 were 58%and 42% in
the GDM group, and in the control group they were 74% (148/200) and 26% (52/200).
The differences of genotype distribution and C/T allele frequency of rs7903146
between the two groups were statistically significant (P < 0.05). (4) The
distribution frequencies of genotype CC, CT and TT at locus rs290487 in the GDM
group were 12% (12/100), 36% (36/ 100) and 52% (52/100), and were 16% (16/100),
34% (34/100)and 50% (50/100) in the control group. The frequencies of C and T
allele of rs290487 were 30% (60/200) and 70% (140/200) in the GDM group, and were
33% (66/200) and 67% (134/200) in the control group. There was no difference of
genotype distribution and C/T allele frequency of rs290487 between the two groups
(P > 0.05). (5)The distribution frequencies of genotype GG and CC at locus
rs11196205 in the GDM group were 99% (99/100) and 1% (1/100), while those in the 
control group were 100% (100/100)and 0%. The frequency of G and C allele of
rs11196205 were 99% (198/200) and 1% (2/200) in the GDM group, while in the
control group were 100% (200/200) and 0. There was no difference of genotype
distribution and G/C allele frequency of rs11196205 between the two groups (P >
0.05). (6)The distribution frequencies of genotype GG at locus rs12255372 were
100% (100/100) in both the GDM group and the control group. The frequencies of G 
allele of rs12255372 were 100% (200/200) in both the GDM group and the control
group. There was no difference of genotype distribution and G allele frequency of
rs12255372 between the two groups (P > 0.05). (7) After adjusting for age,
gestational age, BMI, FPG and FINS, pregnant women with TT genotype at locus
rs7903146 were more likely to have hyperglycemia compared with the C allele
carriers (OR = 2.77, 95% CI: 1.03-7.57, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The polymorphism of locus rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene may be associated
with genetic susceptibility in women with GDM. TT genotype is likely to be risk
factor in the pathogenesis of GDM.

PMID: 25354859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 Mar;31(3):326-34. doi: 10.1089/aid.2014.0195.
Epub 2014 Oct 29.

rs7903146 polymorphism at transcription factor 7 like 2 gene is associated with
total cholesterol and lipoprotein profile in HIV/hepatitis C virus-coinfected
patients.

Pineda-Tenor D(1), Berenguer J, Jiménez-Sousa MA, Carrero A, García-Álvarez M,
Aldámiz-Echevarria T, García-Broncano P, Diez C, Guzmán-Fulgencio M,
Fernández-Rodríguez A, Resino S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Unidad de Infección Viral e Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III , Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain .

Transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 polymorphism has been associated
with metabolic disturbance and cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was 
to analyze the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and potential
disturbances on the lipid profile in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/hepatitis
C virus (HCV)-coinfected patients. We performed a cross-sectional study on 263
HIV/HVC-coinfected patients. TCF7L2 polymorphism was genotyped by GoldenGate
assay. The analysis was performed by linear and logistic regression under a
dominant model of inheritance. The variables analyzed were total cholesterol
(TC), high-density lipoprotein (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein (LDL-C),
non-HDL-C, and triglycerides. Patients harboring the rs7903146 TT/TC genotype
showed a diminished concentration of TC (p=0.003), LDL-C (p=0.004), HDL-C
(p=0.012), and non-HDL-C (p=0.013), a lower percentage of TC=200<U+2009>mg/dl (p=0.038),
and a higher percentage of HDL=40<U+2009>mg/dl (p=0.023). In addition, we observed that 
rs7903146 was differently related to fasting serum lipid levels according to the 
HCV-genotype (HCV-GT). With regard to HCV-GT1 patients, the rs7903146 TT/TC
genotype was associated with lower levels of HDL-C [adjusted arithmetic mean
ratio (aAMR)=0.91; p=0.049] and an elevated percentage of patients with
HDL-C=40<U+2009>mg/dl [adjusted odds ratio (aOR)=3.26; p=0.003]. For HCV-GT3 patients,
the rs7903146 TT/TC genotype was associated with lower serum values of TC
(aAMR=0.81; p=0.037), LDL-C (aAMR=0.67; p=0.001), and non-HDL-C (aAMR=0.75;
p=0.002) and a reduced percentage of TC=200<U+2009>mg/dl (aOR=0.089; p=0.037). In
conclusion, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 TT/TC genotype was associated with lower levels 
of TC, LDL, and HDL in HCV-GT3 patients, and lower levels of HDL-C in HCV-GT1
patients, suggesting a role in cardiovascular disease and a potential use as a
biomarker in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients.

PMCID: PMC4348080
PMID: 25353718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):550-64. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0310. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Epigenetic disruptions of histone signatures for the trophectoderm and inner cell
mass in mouse parthenogenetic embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center , Taipei, Taiwan .

Epigenetic asymmetry has been shown to be associated with the first lineage
allocation event in preimplantation development, that is, the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages in the blastocyst. Since
parthenogenesis causes aberrant segregation between the TE and ICM lineages, we
examined several development-associated histone modifications in parthenotes,
including those involved in (i) transcriptional activation [acetylated histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9Ac) and lysine 14 (H3K14Ac), trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4Me3), and dimethylated histone H3 arginine 26 (H3R26Me2)] and (ii)
transcriptional repression [trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9Me3) and
lysine 27 (H3K27Me3), and mono-ubiquitinated histone H2A lysine 119 (H2AK119u1)].
Here, we report that in parthenotes, H3R26Me2 expression decreased from the
morula stage, while expression patterns and levels of H3K9Ac, H3K27Me3, and
H2AK119u1 were unchanged until the blastocyst stage; whereas H3K14Ac, H3K4Me3,
and H3K9Me3 showed normal patterns and levels of expressions. Relative to the
decrease of H3K9Ac in the ICM and increase in the TE of parthenotes, we detected 
reduced expression of TAT-interactive protein 60 acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase 1 deacetylase in the ICM and TE of parthenotes, respectively.
Relative to the decrease of H3R26Me2, we also observed decreased expression of
coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 methyltransferase and
increased expression of the Wnt effector transcription factor 7L2 and miR-181c
microRNA in parthenotes. Furthermore, relative to the decrease in H3K27Me3 and
H2AK119u1, we found increased phosphorylation of Akt1 and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 in parthenogenetic TE. Therefore, our findings that histone signatures 
are impaired in parthenotes provide a mechanistic explanation for aberrant
lineage segregation and TE defects.

PMCID: PMC4333321
PMID: 25315067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Sep 29;13(3):7889-98. doi: 10.4238/2014.September.29.1.

Association of the rs7903146 and rs12255372 polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene with
type 2 diabetes in a population from northeastern Brazil.

Barros CM(1), Araujo-Neto AP(1), Lopes TR(1), Barros MA(1), Motta FJ(1), Canalle 
R(1), Nunes LC(2), Rey JA(3), Burbano RR(4), Lima-Barros MA(5), Yoshioka FK(1),
Pinto GR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Piauí,
Parnaíba, PI, Brasil. (2)Núcleo de Tecnologia Farmacêutica, Universidade Federal 
do Piauí, Teresina, PI, Brasil. (3)Laboratorio de Oncogenética Molecular,
Departamento de Cirugía Experimental, Hospital Universitario "La Paz", Madrid,
España. (4)Laboratório de Citogenética Humana, Universidade Federal do Pará,
Belém, PA, Brasil. (5)Tec Lab Medicina Laboratorial, Parnaíba, PI, Brasil.
(6)Laboratório de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Piauí,
Parnaíba, PI, Brasil pintogr@ufpi.edu.br.

Approximately 200 million people suffer from type 2 diabetes (T2D) worldwide, and
the rapid increase in the prevalence of this disease is likely a result of
multiple environmental factors, such as increased food intake and decreased
physical activity in genetically predisposed individuals. Different population
studies have demonstrated a strong association of two polymorphic variations in
the TCF7L2 gene, the noncoding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146
(C/T) and rs12255372 (G/T), with T2D. Herein, we analyzed the association of
these SNPs with T2D in a population from northeastern Brazil. Our results showed 
that the genotype and allele frequencies in TCF7L2 rs7903146 and rs12255372 were 
similar in the patient and control groups (P > 0.05). In addition, the allele
frequencies were not significantly associated with T2D risk [rs7903146: odds
ratio (OR) = 0.95, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.52-1.76, P = 1.00, and
rs12255372: OR = 1.38, 95%CI = 0.72-2.62, P = 0.41]. These data suggest that the 
TCF7L2 SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 may not significantly contribute to T2D
susceptibility in this population. However, our results may reflect the small
number of subjects. Alternatively, these results may be attributable to specific 
ethnic effects, as most of the previously reported associations were demonstrated
with predominantly European populations. To reach a definitive conclusion on the 
role of such gene variants for T2D in mixed populations, additional efforts are
necessary to replicate this study with larger populations from areas with more
ethnic heterogeneity.

PMID: 25299103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Oncol. 2015 Feb;9(2):335-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.08.016. Epub 2014 Sep
16.

SNAIL1 combines competitive displacement of ASCL2 and epigenetic mechanisms to
rapidly silence the EPHB3 tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer.

Rönsch K(1), Jägle S(1), Rose K(2), Seidl M(3), Baumgartner F(4), Freihen V(2),
Yousaf A(5), Metzger E(6), Lassmann S(7), Schüle R(6), Zeiser R(8), Michoel T(9),
Hecht A(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center, Breisacher Str. 115a, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center,
Breisacher Str. 117, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, University Medical Center, Hugstetter Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Albertstraße 19, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (6)Department of
Urology/Women's Hospital and Center for Clinical Research, University Medical
Center, Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological 
Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104
Freiburg, Germany; German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany. (7)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Breisacher Str.
115a, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center, Hugstetter
Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Albertstraße 19, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; The Roslin Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian EH25 9RG, Scotland, UK.
(10)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University 
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
andreas.hecht@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de.

EPHB3 is a critical cellular guidance factor in the intestinal epithelium and an 
important tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer (CRC) whose expression is
frequently lost at the adenoma-carcinoma transition when tumor cells become
invasive. The molecular mechanisms underlying EPHB3 silencing are incompletely
understood. Here we show that EPHB3 expression is anti-correlated with inducers
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in primary tumors and CRC cells. In
vitro, SNAIL1 and SNAIL2, but not ZEB1, repress EPHB3 reporter constructs and
compete with the stem cell factor ASCL2 for binding to an E-box motif. At the
endogenous EPHB3 locus, SNAIL1 triggers the displacement of ASCL2, p300 and the
Wnt pathway effector TCF7L2 and engages corepressor complexes containing HDACs
and the histone demethylase LSD1 to collapse active chromatin structure,
resulting in rapid downregulation of EPHB3. Beyond its impact on EPHB3, SNAIL1
deregulates markers of intestinal identity and stemness and in vitro forces CRC
cells to undergo EMT with altered morphology, increased motility and
invasiveness. In xenotransplants, SNAIL1 expression abrogated tumor cell
palisading and led to focal loss of tumor encapsulation and the appearance of
areas with tumor cells displaying a migratory phenotype. These changes were
accompanied by loss of EPHB3 and CDH1 expression. Intriguingly, SNAIL1-induced
phenotypic changes of CRC cells are significantly impaired by sustained EPHB3
expression both in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, our results identify EPHB3 as a
novel target of SNAIL1 and suggest that disabling EPHB3 signaling is an important
aspect to eliminate a roadblock at the onset of EMT processes.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Acta Ophthalmol. 2015 May;93(3):e223-9. doi: 10.1111/aos.12542. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

The gene polymorphisms of UCP1 but not PPAR <U+03B3> and TCF7L2 are associated with
diabetic retinopathy in Chinese type 2 diabetes mellitus cases.

Zhang Y(1), Meng N, Lv Z, Li H, Qu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to investigate the association between the
polymorphisms in three insulin resistance-related genes, uncoupling protein-1
(UCP1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and the susceptibility to diabetic retinopathy (DR) in a
Chinese type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) cohort.
METHODS: A total of 792 patients with T2DM were enrolled and categorized into two
groups: (1) the DR group consisted of 448 patients, which was further
subclassified into a proliferative DR (PDR) group with 220 patients and a
non-proliferative DR (NPDR) group with 228 patients; (2) the diabetes without
retinopathy (DNR) group, comprised 344 patients who had no signs of DR.
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs1800592 in the UCP1 gene, rs1801282,
rs3856806 and rs1249719 in the PPAR<U+03B3> gene and rs11196205 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
genotyped in this study.
RESULTS: For SNP rs1800592 of the UCP1 gene, the frequency of allele G and
genotype GG was significantly higher in the PDR group than in the DNR group
(allele OR: 1.32, 95% CI: 1.03-1.68, p = 0.03; genotype OR: 1.72, 95%CI:
1.06-2.79, p = 0.03). No evident association was found between the allele
frequencies and genotype distributions of any individual SNP in the PPAR<U+03B3> or
TCF7L2 genes and DR, PDR or NPDR. Haplotype analyses of the PPAR<U+03B3> gene did not
provide any evidence for an association with DR, PDR or NPDR in this Chinese T2DM
cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the SNP rs1800592 in the UCP1 gene is
associated with increased risk of PDR in the Chinese T2DM population.

© 2014 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25274455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Hum Genet. 2014 Dec;133(12):1487-95. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1486-5. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

A comparison of type 2 diabetes risk allele load between African Americans and
European Americans.

Keaton JM(1), Cooke Bailey JN, Palmer ND, Freedman BI, Langefeld CD, Ng MC,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Genomics Program, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is greater in populations of African
descent compared to European-descent populations. Genetic risk factors may
underlie the disparity in disease prevalence. Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified >60 common genetic variants that contribute to T2D risk in
populations of European, Asian, African and Hispanic descent. These studies have 
not comprehensively examined population differences in cumulative risk allele
load. To investigate the relationship between risk allele load and T2D risk, 46
T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 43 loci from GWAS in European,
Asian, and African-derived populations were genotyped in 1,990 African Americans 
(n = 963 T2D cases, n = 1,027 controls) and 1,644 European Americans (n = 719 T2D
cases, n = 925 controls) ascertained and recruited using a common protocol in the
southeast United States. A genetic risk score (GRS) was constructed from the
cumulative risk alleles for each individual. In African American subjects, risk
allele frequencies ranged from 0.024 to 0.964. Risk alleles from 26 SNPs
demonstrated directional consistency with previous studies, and 3 SNPs from
ADAMTS9, TCF7L2, and ZFAND6 showed nominal evidence of association (p < 0.05).
African American individuals carried 38-67 (53.7 ± 4.0, mean ± SD) risk alleles. 
In European American subjects, risk allele frequencies ranged from 0.084 to
0.996. Risk alleles from 36 SNPs demonstrated directional consistency, and 10
SNPs from BCL11A, PSMD6, ADAMTS9, ZFAND3, ANK1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, PRC1, FTO, and 
BCAR1 showed evidence of association (p < 0.05). European American individuals
carried 38-65 (50.9 ± 4.4) risk alleles. African Americans have a significantly
greater burden of 2.8 risk alleles (p = 3.97 × 10(-89)) compared to European
Americans. However, GRS modeling showed that cumulative risk allele load was
associated with risk of T2D in European Americans, but only marginally in African
Americans. This result suggests that there are ethnic-specific differences in
genetic architecture underlying T2D, and that these differences complicate our
understanding of how risk allele load impacts disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4225163
PMID: 25273842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genes Nutr. 2014 Nov;9(6):431. doi: 10.1007/s12263-014-0431-5. Epub 2014 Sep 27.

Omental adipose tissue gene expression, gene variants, branched-chain amino
acids, and their relationship with metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance in
humans.

Serralde-Zúñiga AE(1), Guevara-Cruz M, Tovar AR, Herrera-Hernández MF, Noriega
LG, Granados O, Torres N.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología de la Nutrición, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Vasco de Quiroga No. 15 Tlalpan, 14000,
México, DF, Mexico.

Obesity is a complex disorder caused by several factors. Thus, the aim of the
present study was to assess whether the expression of genes in the omental white 
adipose tissue (AT) of subjects with insulin resistance (IR) or metabolic
syndrome (MetS) is associated with an elevation in serum branched-chain amino
acids (BCAAs) and whether this response depends on specific genetic variants.
Serum BCAA concentration, the adipocyte area, and gene variants of PPAR<U+03B3>, ABCA1, 
FTO, TCF7L2, GFOD2, BCAT2, and BCKDH were determined in 115 Mexican subjects. The
gene expression in the AT and adipocytes of BCAT, BCKDH E1a, C/EBPa, PPAR<U+03B3>2,
SREBP-1, PPARa, UCP1, leptin receptor, leptin, adiponectin, and TNFa was measured
in 51 subjects. Subjects with IR showed higher values for the BMI, HOMA-IR, and
adipocyte area and higher levels of serum glucose, insulin, leptin, and
C-reactive protein, as well as an elevation of the AT gene expression of SREBP-1,
leptin, and TNFa and a significant reduction in the expression of adiponectin,
BCAT2, and BCKDH E1a, compared with non-IR subjects. The presence of MetS was
associated with higher HOMA-IR as well as higher serum BCAA concentrations.
Subjects with the genetic variants for BCAT2 and BCKDH E1 a showed a lower serum 
BCAA concentration, and those with the ABCA1 and FTO gene variant showed higher
levels of insulin and HOMA-IR than non-IR subjects. AT dysfunction is the result 
of a combination of the presence of some genetic variants, altered AT gene
expression, the presence of MetS risk factors, IR, and serum BCAA concentrations.

PMCID: PMC4176839
PMID: 25260659  [PubMed]


130. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2014 Dec;17(4):353-8. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2014.36.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Association of variants in genes related to the immune response and obesity with 
BPH in CLUE II.

Lopez DS(1), Peskoe SB(2), Tsilidis KK(3), Hoffman-Bolton J(4), Helzlsouer KJ(5),
Isaacs WB(6), Smith MW(7), Platz EA(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Division of Epidemiology, University of Texas
School of Public Health, Houston, TX, USA [3] Division of Urology, University of 
Texas Medical School, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of
Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina School of Medicine, Ioannina,
Greece. (4)George W. Comstock Center for Public Health Research and Prevention,
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Hagerstown, MD, USA. (5)1]
Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA [2] George W. Comstock Center for Public Health Research and
Prevention, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Hagerstown, MD, USA 
[3] Prevention and Research Center, Mercy Medical Center, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)1] Department of Urology, The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, USA. (7)Extramural Research
Program, National Human Genome Research Institute, Rockville, MD, USA. (8)1]
Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Department of Urology, The James Buchanan Brady Urological
Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [3] Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation and obesity may contribute to the genesis or
progression of BPH and BPH-associated lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). The
influence of variants in genes related to these states on BPH has not been
studied extensively. Thus, we evaluated the association of 17 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in immune response genes (IL1B, IL6, IL8, IL10, TNF, CRP,
TLR4 and RNASEL) and genes involved in obesity, including insulin regulation
(LEP, ADIPOQ, PPARG and TCF7L2), with BPH.
METHODS: BPH cases (N = 568) and age-frequency matched controls (N=568) were
selected from among adult male CLUE II cohort participants who responded in 2000 
to a mailed questionnaire. BPH was defined as BPH surgery, use of BPH medications
or symptomatic BPH (American Urological Association Symptom Index Score <U+2A7E> 15).
Controls were men who had not had BPH surgery, did not use BPH medications and
whose symptom score was <U+2A7D> 7. Age-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were estimated using logistic regression.
RESULTS: None of the candidate SNPs was statistically significantly associated
with BPH. However, we could not rule out possible weak associations for CRP
rs1205 (1082C>T), ADIPOQ rs1501299 (276C>A), PPARG rs1801282 (-49C>G) and TCF7L2 
rs7903146 (47833T>C). After summing risk alleles, men with <U+2A7E> 4 had an increased
BPH risk compared with those with <U+2A7D> 1 (OR, 1.78; 95% CI, 1.10-2.89; P(trend) =
0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in genes related to immune response and obesity, especially in 
combination, may be associated with BPH.

PMCID: PMC4227920
PMID: 25224558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014 Jul-Aug;10(4):679-83. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2013.12.016.
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Weight loss independent association of TCF7 L2 gene polymorphism with fasting
blood glucose after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in type 2 diabetic patients.

Rouskas K(1), Cauchi S(2), Raverdy V(1), Yengo L(2), Froguel P(3), Pattou F(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. (2)European Genetic
Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord de France, Lille,
France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France. (3)CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France; CNRS UMR 8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.
(4)INSERM, UMR 859 Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France; CHRU, Lille, France;
European Genetic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France; University of Lille-Nord 
de France, Lille, France. Electronic address: fpattou@univ-lille2.fr.

BACKGROUND: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery improves glucose control in
most but not all patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2 DM). Transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7 L2) gene variation (rs7903146, C: wild-type allele, T:
risk-allele) is the strongest contributor to T2 DM risk. Until now, there are no 
studies investigating gene interactions with changes of glycemia in obese
patients with T2 DM after RYGB. The objective of this study was to assess the
effect of TCF7 L2 genotype on RYGB-induced changes in glucose homeostasis in 99
obese patients with T2 DM at 1-year follow-up.
METHODS: Body mass index (BMI) and fasting blood glucose (FBG) were measured
before and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after RYGB. Genotyping was performed with
TaqMan technology. The effect of the interaction between TCF7 L2 genotype and
postoperative time on BMI and FBG changes was analyzed with a linear mixed model.
RESULTS: Preoperatively, there was no difference in BMI, FBG, and other diabetes 
associated traits between homozygous (CC) (n = 49) and heterozygous (CT) or
homozygous (TT) T risk-allele carriers (n = 50). One year after RYGB, 48 out of
99 patients had glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1 c) lower than 6.5% in absence of
any antidiabetic medication. BMI decreased similarly in both groups (P = .769,
genotype-time interaction), however, the decrease in FBG over time was lower in T
risk-allele carriers (P = .016, genotype-time interaction). At 1 year, FBG was
6.42 ± 2.98 mmol/L in CT/TT versus 5.36 ± 0.98 mmol/L in CC (P = .022, t test).
CONCLUSION: TCF7 L2 gene variation affected the decrease of FBG after RYGB in
obese patients with T2 DM, independently of weight loss.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25224167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):4203-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400614. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

TLR2-dependent activation of ß-catenin pathway in dendritic cells induces
regulatory responses and attenuates autoimmune inflammation.

Manoharan I(1), Hong Y(1), Suryawanshi A(1), Angus-Hill ML(2), Sun Z(3), Mellor
AL(4), Munn DH(5), Manicassamy S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, Georgia Regents
University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912; (2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT 84112; (3)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City
of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010; (4)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance
Program, Georgia Regents University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; and. (5)Cancer
Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, Georgia Regents University
Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
GA 30912; Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA 30912. (6)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance 
Program, Georgia Regents University Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912; and
smanicassamy@gru.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) sense microbes via multiple innate receptors. Signals from 
different innate receptors are coordinated and integrated by DCs to generate
specific innate and adaptive immune responses against pathogens. Previously, we
have shown that two pathogen recognition receptors, TLR2 and dectin-1, which
recognize the same microbial stimulus (zymosan) on DCs, induce mutually
antagonistic regulatory or inflammatory responses, respectively. How diametric
signals from these two receptors are coordinated in DCs to regulate or incite
immunity is not known. In this study, we show that TLR2 signaling via AKT
activates the ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 pathway in DCs and programs them to drive
T regulatory cell differentiation. Activation of ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 was
critical to induce regulatory molecules IL-10 (Il-10) and vitamin A metabolizing 
enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Aldh1a2) and to suppress proinflammatory
cytokines. Deletion of ß-catenin in DCs programmed them to drive Th17/Th1 cell
differentiation in response to zymosan. Consistent with these findings,
activation of the ß-catenin pathway in DCs suppressed chronic inflammation and
protected mice from Th17/Th1-mediated autoimmune neuroinflammation. Thus,
activation of ß-catenin in DCs via the TLR2 receptor is a novel mechanism in DCs 
that regulates autoimmune inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4185231
PMID: 25210120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Nov 5;742:55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.08.028. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Emodin suppresses Wnt signaling in human colorectal cancer cells SW480 and SW620.

Pooja T(1), Karunagaran D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address:
pooja256@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School
of Biosciences, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India.
Electronic address: karuna@iitm.ac.in.

Wnt signaling is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Its aberrant activation is a key event in the
pathogenesis and progression of human colorectal cancers. Dietary phytochemicals 
are gaining importance as chemotherapeutic agents owing to their potential to
prevent, delay or reverse oncogenesis. Here we demonstrate that emodin
(1,3,8-trihydroxy-6-methylanthraquinone), an anthraquinone present in the roots
and bark of several medicinal plants, down regulates Wnt signaling pathway in
human colorectal cancer cells (SW480 and SW620) by down regulating TCF/LEF
transcriptional activity. Emodin significantly down regulated the expression of
key players of Wnt signaling (ß-catenin and TCF7L2) and also that of its various 
downstream targets (cyclin D1, c-Myc, snail, vimentin, MMP-2 and MMP-9). Two
novel targets of emodin<U+05F3>s action were discovered namely Wnt co-activator p300
(down regulated) and repressor HBP1 (up regulated). Morphological changes induced
by emodin suggest mesenchymal to epithelial transition accompanied by the
increase in E-cadherin expression in human colorectal cancer cells but a
differentiation marker (alkaline phosphatase) was activated only in SW620 cells
(metastatic origin) and not in SW480 cells (primary tumor-derived). Moreover, our
data indicate that reactive oxygen species plays a key role in emodin-mediated
down regulation of Wnt signaling as emodin-mediated inhibition of migration and
induction of growth arrest were partially rescued by the reactive oxygen species 
scavenger ascorbic acid. Effects of emodin shown in this study may provide
important insights for the use of this anthraquinone as a potential complementary
and integrated medicine for the treatment of human colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25205133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Curr Biol. 2014 Oct 6;24(19):2217-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.08.006. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Tcf7l2 is required for left-right asymmetric differentiation of habenular
neurons.

Hüsken U(1), Stickney HL(2), Gestri G(2), Bianco IH(2), Faro A(2), Young RM(2),
Roussigne M(3), Hawkins TA(2), Beretta CA(1), Brinkmann I(1), Paolini A(1),
Jacinto R(1), Albadri S(4), Dreosti E(5), Tsalavouta M(2), Schwarz Q(6),
Cavodeassi F(2), Barth AK(2), Wen L(7), Zhang B(7), Blader P(8), Yaksi E(9),
Poggi L(4), Zigman M(10), Lin S(11), Wilson SW(12), Carl M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. (2)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK; Centre de Biologie du Développement
(CDB), UPS, Université de Toulouse, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062, France; CNRS,
CDB UMR 5547, 31062 Toulouse, France. (4)Centre for Organismal Studies,
Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
UK; Neuroelectronics Research Flanders, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. (6)Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK. (7)Key Laboratory 
of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, College
of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. (8)Centre de Biologie
du Développement (CDB), UPS, Université de Toulouse, 118 Route de Narbonne,
31062, France; CNRS, CDB UMR 5547, 31062 Toulouse, France. (9)Neuroelectronics
Research Flanders, 3001 Leuven, Belgium; Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie,
3001 Leuven, Belgium; KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. (10)Department of
Molecular Evolution and Genomics, Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), Heidelberg
University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 329, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Key
Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China;
Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, 621 Charles E. Young Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 
(12)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. Electronic address: s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk.
(13)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
Electronic address: matthias.carl@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Although left-right asymmetries are common features of nervous
systems, their developmental bases are largely unknown. In the zebrafish
epithalamus, dorsal habenular neurons adopt medial (dHbm) and lateral (dHbl)
subnuclear character at very different frequencies on the left and right sides.
The left-sided parapineal promotes the elaboration of dHbl character in the left 
habenula, albeit by an unknown mechanism. Likewise, the genetic pathways acting
within habenular neurons to control their asymmetric differentiated character are
unknown.
RESULTS: In a forward genetic screen for mutations that result in loss of
habenular asymmetry, we identified two mutant alleles of tcf7l2, a gene that
encodes a transcriptional regulator of Wnt signaling. In tcf7l2 mutants, most
neurons on both sides differentiate with dHbl identity. Consequently, the
habenulae develop symmetrically, with both sides adopting a pronounced leftward
character. Tcf7l2 acts cell automously in nascent equipotential neurons, and on
the right side, it promotes dHbm and suppresses dHbl differentiation. On the
left, the parapineal prevents this Tcf7l2-dependent process, thereby promoting
dHbl differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Tcf7l2 is essential for lateralized fate selection by habenular
neurons that can differentiate along two alternative pathways, thereby leading to
major neural circuit asymmetries.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4194317
PMID: 25201686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Curr Diab Rep. 2014;14(11):550. doi: 10.1007/s11892-014-0550-9.

Overlap of genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults.

Basile KJ(1), Guy VC, Schwartz S, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, 19104, USA.

Despite the notion that there is a degree of commonality to the biological
etiology of type 1 diabetes (T1D) and type 2 diabetes (T2D), the lack of overlap 
in the genetic factors underpinning each of them suggests very distinct
mechanisms. A disorder considered to be at the "intersection" of these two
diseases is "latent autoimmune diabetes in adults" (LADA). Interestingly, genetic
signals from both T1D and T2D are also seen in LADA, including the key HLA and
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) loci, but the magnitudes of these effects 
are more complex than just pointing to LADA as being a simple admixture of T1D
and T2D. We review the current status of the understanding of the genetics of
LADA and place it in the context of what is known about the genetics of its
better-studied "cousins," T1D and T2D, especially with respect to the myriad of
discoveries made over the last decade through genome-wide association studies.

PMID: 25189437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Diabet Med. 2014 Dec;31(12):1480-7. doi: 10.1111/dme.12579.

Dorothy Hodgkin Lecture 2014. Understanding genes identified by genome-wide
association studies for type 2 diabetes.

Rutter GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cell Biology, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Whilst the heritable nature of Type 2 diabetes has been recognized for many
years, only in the past two decades have linkage analyses in families and
genome-wide association studies in large populations begun to reveal the genetic 
landscape of the disease in detail. Whilst the former have provided a powerful
means of identifying the genes responsible for monogenic forms of the disease,
the latter highlight relatively large genomic regions. These often harbour
multiple genes, whose relative contribution to exaggerated disease risk is
uncertain. In the present study, the approaches that have been used to dissect
the role of just a few (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, ADCY5, MTNR1B and CDKAL1) of the ~ 500
genes identified at dozens of implicated loci are described. These are usually
selected based on the strength of their effect on disease risk, and predictions
as to their likely biological role. Direct determination of the effects of
identified polymorphisms on gene expression in disease-relevant tissues, notably 
the pancreatic islet, are then performed to identify genes whose expression is
affected by a particular polymorphism. Subsequent functional analyses then
involve perturbing gene expression in vitro in ß-cell lines or isolated islets
and in vivo in animal models. Although the majority of polymorphisms affect
insulin production rather than action, and mainly affect the ß cell, effects via 
other tissues may also contribute, requiring careful consideration in the design 
and interpretation of experiments in model systems. These considerations
illustrate the scale of the task needed to exploit genome-wide association study 
data for the development of new therapeutic strategies.

© 2014 The Author. Diabetic Medicine © 2014 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 25186316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Endokrynol Pol. 2014;65(4):298-305. doi: 10.5603/EP.2014.0041.

TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and diabetic nephropathy association is not
independent of type 2 diabetes--a study in a south Indian population and
meta-analysis.

Hussain H, Ramachandran V, Ravi S, Sajan T, Ehambaram K, Gurramkonda VB,
Ramanathan G, Bhaskar LV(1).

Author information: 
(1)lvksbhaskar@gmail.com.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a chronic microangiopathic complication of both type
1 (T1DM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The TCF7L2 gene has been reported
to be associated with type 2 diabetes risk. We aimed to investigate the impact of
TCF7L2 gene on the susceptibility of T2DM and DN in a south Indian population.
Plus to evaluate the association of rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene with T2DM in the
Indian population. The subjects recruited for this included 55 diabetic cases
with diabetic nephropathy, 68 diabetic cases without nephropathy, and 82
non-diabetic healthy controls. Genomic DNA was isolated from blood and genotyping
of TCF7L2 rs7903146 was performed by PCR-RFLP analysis. A literature survey was
carried out into the effect of rs7903146 on genetic susceptibility to T2DM in
Indian populations and we then performed a meta-analysis in order to evaluate its
association with T2DM. Analysis of TCF7L2 rs7903146 in normal controls and
diabetics with or without nephropathy demonstrated that the 'T' allele is
associated with both diabetes (p = 0.049) and DN (p = 0.024), but this
association is not independent of T2DM. Meta-analysis showed that the mutant
allele and genotypes are associated with T2DM in Indian populations. In summary, 
a significant association exists between the 'T' allele and DN, but this
association is not independent of T2DM. Pooled meta-analysis of studies on
rs7903146 and T2DM confirmed that rs7903146 is significantly associated with
susceptibility to T2DM in Indian populations.

PMID: 25185853  [PubMed - in process]


138. Clin Lab. 2014;60(8):1269-76.

Association of rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487 polymorphisms in TCF7L2 gene
with type 2 diabetes in an Iranian Kurdish ethnic group.

Shokouhi S, Delpisheh A, Haghani K, Mahdizadeh M, Bakhtiyari S.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are well known risk variants for type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM). The association between TCF7L2 SNPs and T2DM has been
investigated in several studies, but the results are controversial. In this
study, we investigated whether the rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487
polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are associated with T2DM per se or metabolic traits
related to this disease in a Kurdish ethnic group of Iran.
METHODS: In all, 173 patients with T2DM and 173 normoglycemic subjects were
included in this study. All subjects were genotyped using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Genotypic and
allelic frequencies were then analyzed in each group. Serum lipids, fasting
glucose, fasting serum insulin, HOMA-IR, and HbA1c levels were determined by
conventional methods.
RESULTS: T-allele and genotype frequencies of rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs290487
were significantly different between T2DM and control subjects. The CT genotype
(OR = 1.98, p = 0.008), TT genotype (OR = 3.54, p = 0.024), and the dominant
model (OR = 2.16, p = 0.002) of rs7903146 were associated with T2DM. The GT
genotype (OR = 2.23, p = 0.005), TT genotype (OR = 4.25, p = 0.046), and the
dominant model (OR = 2.2, p = 0.001) of rs12255372 gave a higher risk for T2DM.
The carriers of CT genotype of rs290487 showed a significantly increased risk for
T2DM (OR = 2.24, p = 0.003). Similarly, the dominant model of this SNP was found 
to be significantly associated with T2DM (OR = 2.25, p = 0.002). The control
subjects carrying the T-allele of rs7903146 had higher levels of total
cholesterol (CC; 4.52 +/- 1.03 vs. CT + TT; 5.00 +/- 1.2 mmol/L, p = 0.009) than 
those with CC genotype. Normoglycemic subjects carrying GT + TT genotypes of
rs12255372 had a significantly higher WHR (GG; 0.90 +/- 0.059 vs. GT + TT; 0.93
+/- 0.07, p = 0.038) as compared with those with the GG genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The T-allele of rs12255372, rs7903146, and rs290487 polymorphisms of
TCF7L2 confer susceptibility to T2DM in the Kurdish population of Iran.

PMID: 25185411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Toxicology. 2014 Nov 5;325:144-50. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.08.011. Epub 2014 Aug 
29.

5-Fluorouracil causes severe CNS demyelination by disruption of
TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in adolescent mice.

Weng Q(1), Tan B(2), Wang J(2), Wang J(2), Zhou H(3), Shi J(3), He Q(4), Yang
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and
Research, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
wengqinjie@zju.edu.cn. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (3)Departments of
Pediatrics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, Institute of Stem Cell and Developmental
Biology, West China Second Hospital, Chengdu 61004, China. (4)Institute of
Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Several studies have showed the anti-cancer efficacy of 5-FU (5-fluorouracil) on 
pediatric tumors. Although the delayed demyelination induced by 5-FU in adult
patients has been reported, the effect of 5-FU on oligodendrocyte myelination in 
adolescence is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that systemic administration
with 5-FU leads to immediate demyelination in the central nervous system (CNS) of
adolescent mice, which is mainly attributed to the death of OLs. Gene-chip
microarray transcriptome analysis identifies that oligodendrocyte-specific factor
TCF7L2 may be a toxic target of 5-FU-impaired myelination. 5-FU-decreased TCF7L2 
results in disruption of the interaction between TCF7L2 and HDAC1/2. Inhibition
of crucial myelination-promoting factors by 5-FU is more significantly
antagonized by co-transfection of TCF7L2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 than TCF7L2 alone. Our 
findings reveal that 5-FU could acutely induce the severe myelin degeneration in 
adolescence and disruption of TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex is at least partially
involved in 5-FU-induced demyelination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25178657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Ageing Res Rev. 2014 Nov;18:53-73. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2014.08.002. Epub 2014 Aug 
24.

Aging and cardiovascular diseases: the role of gene-diet interactions.

Corella D(1), Ordovás JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y
Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of
Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Population Genetics, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain; IMDEA Alimentación,
Madrid, Spain; Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, JM-USDA Human Nutrition
Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic
address: jose.ordovas@tufts.edu.

In the study of longevity, increasing importance is being placed on the concept
of healthy aging rather than considering the total number of years lived.
Although the concept of healthy lifespan needs to be defined better, we know that
cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the main age-related diseases. Thus,
controlling risk factors will contribute to reducing their incidence, leading to 
healthy lifespan. CVDs are complex diseases influenced by numerous genetic and
environmental factors. Numerous gene variants that are associated with a greater 
or lesser risk of the different types of CVD and of intermediate phenotypes
(i.e., hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, diabetes) have been successfully
identified. However, despite the close link between aging and CVD, studies
analyzing the genes related to human longevity have not obtained consistent
results and there has been little coincidence in the genes identified in both
fields. The APOE gene stands out as an exception, given that it has been
identified as being relevant in CVD and longevity. This review analyzes the
genomic and epigenomic factors that may contribute to this, ranging from
identifying longevity genes in model organisms to the importance of gene-diet
interactions (outstanding among which is the case of the TCF7L2 gene).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25159268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1839(11):1151-60. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.009. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

CNBP modulates the transcription of Wnt signaling pathway components.

Margarit E(1), Armas P(1), García Siburu N(1), Calcaterra NB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET) - Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Ocampo y
Esmeralda,(S2000FHQ) Rosario, Argentina. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas (CONICET) - Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas,
Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Ocampo y Esmeralda,(S2000FHQ) Rosario,
Argentina. Electronic address: calcaterra@ibr-conicet.gov.ar.

BACKGROUND: Cellular nucleic acid binding protein (CNBP) is a small and highly
conserved protein with nucleic acid chaperone activity that binds single-stranded
nucleic acids. Data collected so far suggests that CNBP is required for proper
craniofacial development. Despite the advances achieved in the last decade, the
identity of the molecular targets of CNBP responsible for its role in rostral
head development remains elusive.
METHODS: In this work we used the CNBP single-stranded DNA-consensus binding
sequence to find out putative CNBP target genes present in the human, mouse,
chicken, Xenopus and zebrafish genomes.
RESULTS: Most of the identified genes are associated with embryonic developmental
processes, being three of them (cdk14, ptk7 and tcf7l2) members of the Wnt
signaling pathway. This finding, along with previous one showing that CNBP
down-regulates the transcription of Wnt5, aimed our work to address the role of
CNBP on the WNT signaling players and pathway regulation. Experiments carried out
in zebrafish developing embryos revealed that craniofacial morphology was more
adversely affected as CNBP abundance decreased. Furthermore, we observed that
CNBP up-regulated in a dose-dependent fashion the transcription of cdk14, ptk7
and tcf7l2, which in turn was reflected in c-myc, ccnd1 and axin2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: RESULTS reveal a role of CNBP in transcriptional control of
components of the Wnt signaling pathway, which might explain its requirement for 
proper craniofacial development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25151948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):983-90. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.020. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

A polymorphic enhancer near GREM1 influences bowel cancer risk through
differential CDX2 and TCF7L2 binding.

Lewis A(1), Freeman-Mills L(1), de la Calle-Mustienes E(2), Giráldez-Pérez RM(2),
Davis H(1), Jaeger E(1), Becker M(3), Hubner NC(4), Nguyen LN(4), Zeron-Medina
J(5), Bond G(5), Stunnenberg HG(4), Carvajal JJ(2), Gomez-Skarmeta JL(2), Leedham
S(1), Tomlinson I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (2)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC-Universidad Pablo de Olavide-Junta de
Andalucía, Carretera de Utrera Km1, 41013 Sevilla, Spain. (3)Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Science,
Geert Grooteplein 26/28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (5)Ludwig Institute
for Cancer Research, Ltd., Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ,
UK. (6)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
Electronic address: iant@well.ox.ac.uk.

A rare germline duplication upstream of the bone morphogenetic protein antagonist
GREM1 causes a Mendelian-dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer (CRC). The 
underlying disease mechanism is strong, ectopic GREM1 overexpression in the
intestinal epithelium. Here, we confirm that a common GREM1 polymorphism,
rs16969681, is also associated with CRC susceptibility, conferring ~20%
differential risk in the general population. We hypothesized the underlying cause
to be moderate differences in GREM1 expression. We showed that rs16969681 lies in
a region of active chromatin with allele- and tissue-specific enhancer activity. 
The CRC high-risk allele was associated with stronger gene expression, and higher
Grem1 mRNA levels increased the intestinal tumor burden in Apc(Min) mice. The
intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 and Wnt effector TCF7L2 bound near
rs16969681, with significantly higher affinity for the risk allele, and CDX2
overexpression in CDX2/GREM1-negative cells caused re-expression of GREM1.
rs16969681 influences CRC risk through effects on Wnt-driven GREM1 expression in 
colorectal tumors.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4471812
PMID: 25131200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2014 Jul-Sep;8(3):133-7. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2014.07.002.
Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Studying progression from glucose intolerance to type 2 diabetes in obese
children.

Dubinina IA(1), Chistiakov DA(2), Eremina IA(1), Brovkin AN(3), Zilberman LI(1), 
Nikitin AG(3), Kuraeva TL(1), Nosikov VV(3), Peterkova VA(1), Dedov II(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Medical Bionanotechnology, Pirogov Russian State Medical
University, Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: dimitry.chistiakov@lycos.com.
(3)Federal Research Clinical Center of Federal Medical and Biological Agency of
Russia, Moscow, Russia.

AIM: Identification of metabolic and genetic factors capable to mediate
progression from normal glucose tolerance (NGT) through impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT) to type 2 diabetes (T2D) in childhood obesity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three groups of obese children with NGT (n=54), IGT (n=35),
and T2D (n=62) were evaluated. A control group of non-obese normal children
(n=210) was also studied. In obese patients, an oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT) was performed. Insulin resistance (IR) was assessed using HOMA-IR index.
Insulin sensitivity (IS) was assessed according to the Matsuda formula. Genomic
DNA from obese and control children was genotyped for genetic variants of PPARG, 
ADIPOQ, ADIPOR1, FTO, TCF7L2, and KCNJ11 using a real-time PCR strategy. The
unpaired Student's t-test and Kruskal-Wallis one-way test were used to compare
quantitative data in two and more groups. To assess the extent to which the
various genetic variants were associated with pathology, ORs (odds ratios) and
95% CI (confidence interval) were estimated.
RESULTS: In T2D children, HOMA-IR value (7.5±3.1) was significantly (P<0.001)
higher than that in IGT (4.21±2.25) and NGT (4.1±2.4) subjects. The Matsuda IS
index was significantly increased in normoglycemic patients compared to IGT
individuals (2.8±1.75 vs. 2.33±1.2, P<0.05). The Pro12Ala polymorphism of PPARG
was significantly associated with obesity (OR=1.74, 95% CI=1.19-2.55, P=0.004)
and T2D in obesity (OR=2.01, 95% CI=1.24-3.26, P=0.004).
CONCLUSION: IR is a major risk factor that mediates progression from NGT to
clinical T2D in Russian obese children. This progression may be genetically
influenced by the Pro12Ala variant of PPARG.

Copyright © 2014 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25127329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:650393. doi: 10.1155/2014/650393. Epub 2014 Jul
10.

Sequence variants of ADIPOQ and association with type 2 diabetes mellitus in
Taiwan Chinese Han population.

Tsai MK(1), Wang HM(2), Shiang JC(1), Chen IH(1), Wang CC(1), Shiao YF(3), Liu
WS(3), Lin TJ(4), Chen TM(5), Chen YH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General
Hospital, Kaohsiung 80284, Taiwan. (2)Department of Fragrance and Cosmetic
Science, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan ; Graduate
Institute of Natural Products, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708,
Taiwan. (3)Asia-Pacific Biotech Developing, Inc., Kaohsiung 80681, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pharmacy and Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology,
Tajen University, Pingtung 90741, Taiwan. (5)Department of Physiology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan
; Department and Graduate Institute of Aquaculture, National Kaohsiung Marine
University, Kaohsiung 81157, Taiwan. (6)Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40477, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of
Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Cancer Center Building 8F, No. 6
Hsueh-Shih Road, Taichung 40477, Taiwan.

Diabetes is a serious global health problem. Large-scale genome-wide association 
studies identified loci for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), including
adiponectin (ADIPOQ) gene and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), but few
studies clarified the effect of genetic polymorphisms of ADIPOQ and TCF7L2 on
risk of T2DM. We attempted to elucidate association between T2DM and polymorphic 
variations of both in Taiwan's Chinese Han population, with our retrospective
case-control study genotyping single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ADIPOQ
and TCF7L2 genes both in 149 T2DM patients and in 139 healthy controls from
Taiwan. Statistical analysis gauged association of these polymorphisms with risk 
of T2DM to show ADIPOQ rs1501299 polymorphism variations strongly correlated with
T2DM risk (P = 0.042), with rs2241766 polymorphism being not associated with T2DM
(P = 0.967). However, both polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 of TCF7L2 were 
rarely detected in Taiwanese people. This study avers that ADIPOQ rs1501299
polymorphism contributes to risk of T2DM in the Taiwanese population.

PMCID: PMC4121223
PMID: 25121131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Aug 7;13(3):5865-72. doi: 10.4238/2014.August.7.1.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphisms and diabetic retinopathy: a
systematic review.

Sudchada P(1), Scarpace K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan 
University, Phitsanulok, Thailand psudchada@gmail.com. (2)School of Pharmacy,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

The global prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has increased, as well
as complications including diabetic retinopathy. Polymorphisms in transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have been associated with T2DM, with the strongest
association attributed to the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146. In this
review, we searched the current literature to determine whether an association
exists between TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146 with diabetic retinopathy. A
systematic search was performed of EMBASE, PubMed, and Scopus using the following
search terms: diabetic, retinopathy, polymorphism, genetic, transcription factor 
7-like 2, TCF7L2. A manual search was also performed. There was no language or
study design restriction. Three full articles and one abstract were reviewed. All
studies were retrospective case-control studies that compared the frequency of
the wild-type CC genotype and genotypes with the risk T allele. None of the
studies found a statistically significant odds ratio. While the number of studies
examined was small, this review suggests that there is no risk of diabetic
retinopathy among individuals with the TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146; however,
the polymorphism may play a small role in diabetic retinopathy. Future
prospective studies and trials involving diverse ethnicities that adjust for
confounding variables are required to understand the association between TCF7L2
polymorphisms and diabetic retinopathy.

PMID: 25117344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 7;10(8):e1004517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004517.
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in African Americans provides
insights into the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes.

Ng MC(1), Shriner D(2), Chen BH(3), Li J(4), Chen WM(5), Guo X(6), Liu J(7),
Bielinski SJ(8), Yanek LR(9), Nalls MA(10), Comeau ME(11), Rasmussen-Torvik
LJ(12), Jensen RA(13), Evans DS(14), Sun YV(15), An P(16), Patel SR(17), Lu
Y(18), Long J(19), Armstrong LL(20), Wagenknecht L(21), Yang L(22), Snively
BM(22), Palmer ND(23), Mudgal P(4), Langefeld CD(11), Keene KL(24), Freedman
BI(25), Mychaleckyj JC(5), Nayak U(5), Raffel LJ(26), Goodarzi MO(26), Chen
YD(6), Taylor HA Jr(27), Correa A(7), Sims M(7), Couper D(28), Pankow JS(29),
Boerwinkle E(30), Adeyemo A(2), Doumatey A(2), Chen G(2), Mathias RA(31), Vaidya 
D(32), Singleton AB(10), Zonderman AB(33), Igo RP Jr(34), Sedor JR(35); FIND
Consortium, Kabagambe EK(36), Siscovick DS(37), McKnight B(38), Rice K(38), Liu
Y(39), Hsueh WC(40), Zhao W(41), Bielak LF(41), Kraja A(16), Province MA(16),
Bottinger EP(42), Gottesman O(42), Cai Q(19), Zheng W(19), Blot WJ(43), Lowe
WL(20), Pacheco JA(44), Crawford DC(45); eMERGE Consortium; DIAGRAM Consortium,
Grundberg E(46); MuTHER Consortium, Rich SS(47), Hayes MG(20), Shu XO(19), Loos
RJ(48), Borecki IB(16), Peyser PA(41), Cummings SR(14), Psaty BM(49), Fornage
M(30), Iyengar SK(34), Evans MK(50), Becker DM(51), Kao WH(52), Wilson JG(53),
Rotter JI(6), Sale MM(54), Liu S(55), Rotimi CN(2), Bowden DW(23); MEta-analysis 
of type 2 DIabetes in African Americans Consortium.

Collaborators: Elston RC, Iyengar S, Goddard K, Olson J, Ialacci S, Edwards S,
Fondran C, Horvath A, Jun G, Kramp K, Slaughter M, Zaletel E, Sedor JR, Schelling
J, Sehgal A, Pickens A, Humbert L, Getz-Fradley L, Adler S, Collins-Schramm HE,
Ipp E, Li H, Pahl M, Seldin MF, LaPage J, Walker B, Garcia C, Gonzalez J,
Ingram-Drake L, Klag M, Coresh J, Kao L, Mead L, Parekh R, Fink N, Bayton P, Long
Y, Wei L, Whitehead T, Knowler WC, Hanson RL, Nelson RG, Jones L, Juan R,
Lovelace R, Luethe C, Phillips LM, Sewemaenewa J, Sili I, Waseta B, Saad MF, Guo 
X, Rotter J, Taylor K, Budgett M, Zager P, Shah V, Scavini M, Bobelu A, Abboud H,
Arar N, Duggirala R, Kasinath BS, Plaetke R, Stem M, Goyes C, Sartorio V,
Freedman BI, Bowden DW, Satko SC, Rich SS, Warren S, Viverette S, Brooks G, Young
R, Winkler C, Smith MW, Thompson M, Hanson R, Briggs JP, Kimmel PL, Rasooly R,
Warnock D, Chakraborty R, Dunston GM, Lifton RP, O'Brien SJ, Spielman R, McCarty 
CA, Starren J, Peissig P, Berg R, Rasmussen L, Linneman J, Miller A, Choudary V, 
Chen L, Waudby C, Kitchner T, Reeser J, Fost N, Ritchie M, Wilke RA, Chisholm RL,
Avila PC, Greenland P, Hayes M, Kho AN, Kibbe WA, Lemke AA, Lowe WL, Smith ME,
Wolf WA, Pacheco JA, Thompson WK, Humowiecki J, Law M, Rasmussen-Torvik L, Chute 
C, Kullo I, Koenig B, de Andrade M, Bielinski S, Pathak J, Savova G, Wu J,
Henriksen J, Ding K, Hart L, Palbicki J, Larson EB, Newton K, Ludman E, Spangler 
L, Hart G, Carrell D, Jarvik G, Crane P, Burke W, Fullerton SM, Brown Trinidad S,
Carlson C, McDavid A, Roden DM, Clayton E, Haines JL, Masys DR, Churchill LR,
Cornfield D, Crawford D, Darbar D, Denny JC, Malin BA, Ritchie MD, Schildcrout
JS, Xu H, Ramirez AH, Basford M, Pulley J, Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir 
V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, 
Mcculloch LJ, Ferreira T, Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S,
Mccarroll SA, Langenberg C, Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M,
Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle
E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB, Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier
G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott
AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin
S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU,
Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen 
T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM, Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, 
Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P, Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou
C, Proença C, Prokopenko I, Rathmann W, Rayner N, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G,
Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T,
Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van 
Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters G, Weedon 
MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL,
Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, laakso 
M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein
LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR,
Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ, Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS,
Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K,
Altshuler D, Boehnke M, Mccarthy MI.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is more prevalent in African Americans than in Europeans.
However, little is known about the genetic risk in African Americans despite the 
recent identification of more than 70 T2D loci primarily by genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) in individuals of European ancestry. In order to
investigate the genetic architecture of T2D in African Americans, the
MEta-analysis of type 2 DIabetes in African Americans (MEDIA) Consortium examined
17 GWAS on T2D comprising 8,284 cases and 15,543 controls in African Americans in
stage 1 analysis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) association analysis was
conducted in each study under the additive model after adjustment for age, sex,
study site, and principal components. Meta-analysis of approximately 2.6 million 
genotyped and imputed SNPs in all studies was conducted using an inverse
variance-weighted fixed effect model. Replications were performed to follow up 21
loci in up to 6,061 cases and 5,483 controls in African Americans, and 8,130
cases and 38,987 controls of European ancestry. We identified three known loci
(TCF7L2, HMGA2 and KCNQ1) and two novel loci (HLA-B and INS-IGF2) at genome-wide 
significance (4.15 × 10(-94)<P<5 × 10(-8), odds ratio (OR)<U+200A> = 1.09 to 1.36).
Fine-mapping revealed that 88 of 158 previously identified T2D or glucose
homeostasis loci demonstrated nominal to highly significant association (2.2 ×
10(-23) < locus-wide P<0.05). These novel and previously identified loci yielded 
a sibling relative risk of 1.19, explaining 17.5% of the phenotypic variance of
T2D on the liability scale in African Americans. Overall, this study identified
two novel susceptibility loci for T2D in African Americans. A substantial number 
of previously reported loci are transferable to African Americans after
accounting for linkage disequilibrium, enabling fine mapping of causal variants
in trans-ethnic meta-analysis studies.

PMCID: PMC4125087
PMID: 25102180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014 Oct;100(4):1188-97. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.114.089706. Epub 2014 
Aug 6.

Association between Mediterranean and Nordic diet scores and changes in weight
and waist circumference: influence of FTO and TCF7L2 loci.

Roswall N(1), Ängquist L(1), Ahluwalia TS(1), Romaguera D(1), Larsen SC(1),
Østergaard JN(1), Halkjaer J(1), Vimaleswaran KS(1), Wareham NJ(1), Bendinelli
B(1), Palli D(1), Boer JM(1), van der A DL(1), Boeing H(1), Loos RJ(1), Sørensen 
TI(1), Tjønneland A(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark (NR, JH,
and AT); the Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg
Hospitals-The Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark (LÄ, SCL, and TIAS); the Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic
Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark (TSA and TIAS); the
Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen and Danish Pediatric Asthma Center, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark (TSA); the Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom 
(DR); the Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Palma, Palma de Mallorca, Spain
(DR); the Centro de Investigacíon Biomédica en Red Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad 
y Nutrición, Mallorca, Spain (DR); the Medical Research Council Epidemiology
Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom (KSV, NJW, and RJFL);
the Hugh Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition, Department of Food and Nutritional
Sciences, School of Chemistry, Food and Pharmacy, University of Reading, Reading,
United Kingdom (KSV); the Section for Epidemiology, Department of Public Health, 
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (JNØ); the Cancer Research and Prevention
Institute-Istituto per lo Studio e la Prevenzione Oncologica, Florence, Italy (BB
and DP); the Center for Nutrition, Prevention and Health Services, National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment Bilthoven, Netherlands (JMAB and 
DLvdA); the Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, Nuthetal, Germany (HB); and
the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, The Charles Bronfman Institute for
Personalized Medicine, The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, The
Genetics of Obesity and Related Metabolic Traits Program, New York, NY (RJFL).

BACKGROUND: Several studies have shown that adherence to the Mediterranean Diet
measured by using the Mediterranean diet score (MDS) is associated with lower
obesity risk. The newly proposed Nordic Diet could hold similar beneficial
effects. Because of the increasing focus on the interaction between diet and
genetic predisposition to adiposity, studies should consider both diet and
genetics.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether FTO rs9939609 and TCF7L2 rs7903146 modified
the association between the MDS and Nordic diet score (NDS) and changes in weight
(<U+0394>weight), waist circumference (<U+0394>WC), and waist circumference adjusted for body
mass index (BMI) (<U+0394>WCBMI).
DESIGN: We conducted a case-cohort study with a median follow-up of 6.8 y that
included 11,048 participants from 5 European countries; 5552 of these subjects
were cases defined as individuals with the greatest degree of unexplained weight 
gain during follow-up. A randomly selected subcohort included 6548 participants, 
including 5496 noncases. Cases and noncases were compared in analyses by using
logistic regression. Continuous traits (ie, <U+0394>weight, <U+0394>WC, and <U+0394>WCBMI) were
analyzed by using linear regression models in the random subcohort. Interactions 
were tested by including interaction terms in models.
RESULTS: A higher MDS was significantly inversely associated with case status
(OR: 0.98; 95% CI: 0.96, 1.00), <U+0394>WC (ß = -0.010 cm/y; 95% CI: -0.020, -0.001
cm/y), and <U+0394>WCBMI (ß = -0.008; 95% CI:-0.015, -0.001) per 1-point increment but
not <U+0394>weight (P = 0.53). The NDS was not significantly associated with any
outcome. There was a borderline significant interaction between the MDS and
TCF7L2 rs7903146 on weight gain (P = 0.05), which suggested a beneficial effect
of the MDS only in subjects who carried 1 or 2 risk alleles. FTO did not modify
observed associations.
CONCLUSIONS: A high MDS is associated with a lower <U+0394>WC and <U+0394>WCBMI, regardless of 
FTO and TCF7L2 risk alleles. For <U+0394>weight, findings were less clear, but the
effect may depend on the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant. The NDS was not associated
with anthropometric changes during follow-up.

© 2014 American Society for Nutrition.

PMID: 25099543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;28(9):1558-70. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1065. Epub 2014 Jul 
24.

Differential transcriptional and posttranslational transcription factor 7-like
regulation among nondiabetic individuals and type 2 diabetic patients.

Pradas-Juni M(1), Nicod N, Fernández-Rebollo E, Gomis R.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory (M.P.-J., N.N., E.F-R., R.G.),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, 08036 Barcelona, Spain;
Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases 
(M.P.-J., N.N., E.F.-R., R.G.), 08017 Barcelona, Spain; Department of Medicine
(R.G.), University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain; and Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona (R.G.), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Human genetic studies have revealed that the T minor allele of single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs7903146 in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is
strongly associated with an increased risk of diabetes by 30%-40%. Molecular and 
clinical studies are of great importance for understanding how this unique
variation in TCF7L2 influences type 2 diabetes (T2D) onset and progression. At
the molecular level, some studies have been performed in diabetic mice and
pancreatic islets from healthy human donors. Whereas TCF7L2 mRNA levels are
up-regulated in islets, protein levels are down-regulated. We performed studies
on TCF7L2 splicing, mRNA expression, and protein levels in immortalized human
lymphocytes from nondiabetic individuals and T2D patients carrying the C/C or the
at-risk T/T genotype. Our results show differential expression of TCF7L2 splice
variants between nondiabetic and T2D patients carrying the at-risk genotype, as
well as differences in protein levels. Therefore, we investigated the regulation 
of splice variants, and our results propose that splicing of exon 4 is under
control of the serine-arginine-rich factor transformer 2 ß (TRA2B). Finally, we
studied the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways, looking for a
posttranslational explanation. We saw a shift in the activation of these pathways
between nondiabetic individuals and T2D patients carrying the at-risk genotype.
These results suggest that, in human immortalized lymphocytes carrying the
at-risk T/T genotype, first the differential expression of TCF7L2 splice variants
implies a regulation, at least for exon 4, by TRA2B and second, the differential 
protein levels between both T/T carriers point to a different activation of
endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways.

PMID: 25058603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes. 2014 Dec;63(12):4230-8. doi: 10.2337/db14-0425. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Differential transcriptome analysis of diabetes-resistant and -sensitive mouse
islets reveals significant overlap with human diabetes susceptibility genes.

Kluth O(1), Matzke D(1), Schulze G(1), Schwenk RW(1), Joost HG(2), Schürmann
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human Nutrition,
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg,
Germany. (2)German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany Department
of Pharmacology, German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke,
Germany. (3)Department of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human
Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany schuermann@dife.de.

Type 2 diabetes in humans and in obese mice is polygenic. In recent genome-wide
association studies, genetic markers explaining a small portion of the genetic
contribution to the disease were discovered. However, functional evidence linking
these genes with the pathogenesis of diabetes is scarce. We performed RNA
sequencing-based transcriptomics of islets from two obese mouse strains, a
diabetes-susceptible (NZO) and a diabetes-resistant (B6-ob/ob) mouse, after a
short glucose challenge and compared these results with human data. Alignment of 
2,328 differentially expressed genes to 106 human diabetes candidate genes
revealed an overlap of 20 genes, including TCF7L2, IGFBP2, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, GRB10,
and PRC1. The data provide a functional validation of human diabetes candidate
genes, including those involved in regulating islet cell recovery and
proliferation, and identify additional candidates that could be involved in human
ß-cell failure.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25053586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int J Oncol. 2014 Oct;45(4):1715-23. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2550. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce attenuation of Wnt signaling and TCF7L2
depletion in colorectal carcinoma cells.

Götze S(1), Coersmeyer M(2), Müller O(3), Sievers S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany. (2)Swiss
Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)University 
of Applied Sciences, Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) specifically affect cancer cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest, activate apoptotic pathways and re-activate
epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes, but their pleiotropic mode of
action is not fully understood. Despite the clinical effects of HDIs in the
treatment of hematological malignancies, their potency against solid tumors is
still unclear. We investigated the effects and mechanisms of HDI action in
colorectal carcinoma cell lines with an activated Wnt signaling pathway, which is
implicated in different aspects of tumorigenesis, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. We assessed the effects of HDI treatment 
in colorectal carcinoma cell lines by measuring histone hyperacetylation, cell
viability and expression of Wnt target genes. Upon treatment with HDIs of the
hydroxamate class, we found attenuation of Wnt signaling with concomitant
induction of apoptosis and colorectal cancer cell death. Strikingly, the effects 
of HDIs on Wnt signaling were independent of histone hyperacetylation, thus we
investigated the role of non-histone target proteins of histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The compounds TSA and SAHA induced a rapid proteasome-dependent
depletion of the Wnt transcription factor TCF7L2, which may be mediated by
inhibition of HDAC 6 and 10. Our findings provide a molecular rationale for the
use of HDIs against colorectal carcinomas with activated Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25050608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2014 Sep;180:77-82. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2014.06.024. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

A gene variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is associated with
an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Pagán A(1), Sabater-Molina M(2), Olza J(3), Prieto-Sánchez MT(4), Blanco-Carnero 
JE(4), Parrilla JJ(4), Gil Á(3), Larqué E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Department, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, Spain.
(2)Clinical Analysis Service, Virgen de la Arrixaca Hospital, Murcia, Spain.
Electronic address: mariasm@um.es. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology II, University of Granada, Spain. (4)Gynecology Service, Virgen de la
Arrixaca Hospital, Murcia, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Adipokines play an important role in the pathogenesis of insulin
resistance during pregnancy. We studied the association of genetic variants
linked with type 2 diabetes in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) subjects and
its influence on maternal adipokines.
STUDY DESIGN: We recruited 25 healthy pregnant women (Controls) and 45 women with
GDM at 24-28 weeks of gestation. Maternal blood samples were collected at
recruitment and delivery. Adipokines were determined at both sampling times.
Genomic DNA was extracted from recruitment samples and FTO rs9939609, TCF7L2
rs4506565, rs7901695, rs12243326, rs12255372 and rs7903146, INSIG2 rs7566605,
SREBF1 rs114001633, rs45535737 and rs12941356 and FATP4 rs2003560 genotyped.
RESULTS: Serum adiponectin was significantly lower in GDM than Controls at
recruitment and showed a similar trend at delivery (p=0.060). In contrast,
resistin tended to higher levels in GDM only at recruitment. TCF7L2 rs4506565
(OR=2.31, 95% CI: 1.97-5.01; p=0.031) and FTO rs9939609 (OR=2.17, 95% CI:
1.07-4.41; p=0.039) were associated with GDM risk. Women carrying the T allele of
TCF7L2 rs4506565 had increases in plasma resistin of 9.38 µg/L (95% CI
1.39-17.37; p=0.022) per allele; this association remained significant after
adjusting for pre-gestational body weight.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 rs4506565 variant (T/T) is associated with increased risk of
GDM and plasma resistin concentrations in women with GDM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25048152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Aug;7(4):505-13. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000386. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Analysis of metabolic syndrome components in >15 000 african americans identifies
pleiotropic variants: results from the population architecture using genomics and
epidemiology study.

Carty CL, Bhattacharjee S, Haessler J, Cheng I, Hindorff LA, Aroda V, Carlson CS,
Hsu CN, Wilkens L, Liu S, Selvin E, Jackson R, North KE, Peters U, Pankow JS,
Chatterjee N, Kooperberg C.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) refers to the clustering of cardiometabolic
risk factors, including dyslipidemia, central adiposity, hypertension, and
hyperglycemia, in individuals. Identification of pleiotropic genetic factors
associated with MetS traits may shed light on key pathways or mediators
underlying MetS.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using the Metabochip array in 15 148 African Americans from 
the Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study, we
identify susceptibility loci and investigate pleiotropy among genetic variants
using a subset-based meta-analysis method, ASsociation-analysis-based-on-subSETs 
(ASSET). Unlike conventional models that lack power when associations for MetS
components are null or have opposite effects,
Association-analysis-based-on-subsets uses 1-sided tests to detect positive and
negative associations for components separately and combines tests accounting for
correlations among components. With Association-analysis-based-on-subsets, we
identify 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 1 glucose and 4 lipids loci
(TCF7L2, LPL, APOA5, CETP, and APOC1/APOE/TOMM40) significantly associated with
MetS components overall, all P<2.5e-7, the Bonferroni adjusted P value. Three
loci replicate in a Hispanic population, n=5172. A novel African
American-specific variant, rs12721054/APOC1, and rs10096633/LPL are associated
with =3 MetS components. We find additional evidence of pleiotropy for APOE,
TOMM40, TCF7L2, and CETP variants, many with opposing effects (eg, the same
rs7901695/TCF7L2 allele is associated with increased odds of high glucose and
decreased odds of central adiposity).
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight a method to increase power in large-scale genomic
association analyses and report a novel variant associated with all MetS
components in African Americans. We also identify pleiotropic associations that
may be clinically useful in patient risk profiling and for informing
translational research of potential gene targets and medications.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4142758
PMID: 25023634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6419-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu359. Epub 2014 Jul
11.

TCF7L2 is a master regulator of insulin production and processing.

Zhou Y(1), Park SY(2), Su J(3), Bailey K(4), Ottosson-Laakso E(1), Shcherbina
L(1), Oskolkov N(1), Zhang E(1), Thevenin T(1), Fadista J(1), Bennet H(1), Vikman
P(1), Wierup N(1), Fex M(1), Rung J(5), Wollheim C(6), Nobrega M(4), Renström
E(1), Groop L(1), Hansson O(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine and. (3)European Bioinformatics Institute, Functional
Genomics, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. (4)Department of Human Genetics,
University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75185, Sweden and.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden,
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Université de Genève, University
Medical Centre, 1 rue Michel-Servet, Geneva 4 1211, Switzerland. (7)Department of
Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden,
Ola.Hansson@med.lu.se.

Genome-wide association studies have revealed >60 loci associated with type 2
diabetes (T2D), but the underlying causal variants and functional mechanisms
remain largely elusive. Although variants in TCF7L2 confer the strongest risk of 
T2D among common variants by presumed effects on islet function, the molecular
mechanisms are not yet well understood. Using RNA-sequencing, we have identified 
a TCF7L2-regulated transcriptional network responsible for its effect on insulin 
secretion in rodent and human pancreatic islets. ISL1 is a primary target of
TCF7L2 and regulates proinsulin production and processing via MAFA, PDX1, NKX6.1,
PCSK1, PCSK2 and SLC30A8, thereby providing evidence for a coordinated regulation
of insulin production and processing. The risk T-allele of rs7903146 was
associated with increased TCF7L2 expression, and decreased insulin content and
secretion. Using gene expression profiles of 66 human pancreatic islets donors', 
we also show that the identified TCF7L2-ISL1 transcriptional network is regulated
in a genotype-dependent manner. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
not only synthesis of proinsulin is regulated by TCF7L2 but also processing and
possibly clearance of proinsulin and insulin. These multiple targets in key
pathways may explain why TCF7L2 has emerged as the gene showing one of the
strongest associations with T2D.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4240194
PMID: 25015099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2014 Apr-Jun;27(2):253-60.

Local rhBMP-2 injection after drill-hole injury in rats: does it have systemic
effects?

Demirkan N(1), Demirkan F(2), Aksoy A(3), Ozdemir M(4), Akman A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School of Pamukkale University, Denizli,
Turkey. (2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Medical School of
Pamukkale University Denizli, Turkey. (3)Department of Pathology, Ankara
University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey. (4)Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Ozel Mardin Park Hastanesi, Mardin, Turkey.

The aim of this study is to investigate the histopathological findings of drill
hole healing and interactions of parathyroid hormone (PTH), &#946;-catenin and
transcription factor-4 (TCF7L2/Tcf-4) after local application of recombinant
human bone morphogenic protein-2 (rhBMP-2). Sprague Dawley rats were used in two 
groups of <U+0091>femoral cortex hole model<U+0092>. In the non-treated group, a hole was
opened with a 3 mm K-wire in the distal and mid third junction of the right
femur. In the treated group, local rhBMP-2 protein was injected into the similar 
femoral hole. Sterile 18M H2O was injected into the femoral hole at contralateral
femur. There was more subperiosteal membranous bone reaction in the group treated
with rhBMP-2 injection compared to the non-treated group. This was also proven
immunohistochemically in both ipsilateral and contralateral femur with increased 
anti bone morphogenic protein-2 (anti BMP-2) expression. Moreover, there was an
increased subperiosteal reaction at the contralateral femur. Also, in the treated
group, PTH expression was increased in cells that form callus, and nuclear
beta-catenin expression was increased in chondrocytes of periosteal ossification.
Future studies should try to find whether the effects of rhBMP-2 on PTH and Wnt
signaling pathway changes with different fracture models, also the systemic
effects of local rhBMP-2 application should be investigated.

PMID: 25004837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Prostate. 2014 Sep;74(12):1161-70. doi: 10.1002/pros.22832. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes risk variant, lifestyle factors, and incidence of prostate
cancer.

Drake I(1), Wallström P, Hindy G, Ericson U, Gullberg B, Bjartell A, Sonestedt E,
Orho-Melander M, Wirfält E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Research Group in Nutritional
Epidemiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), the strongest
genetic risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D), may play a role in prostate cancer
(PCa) depending on lifestyle factors. The aims of this study were to determine if
TCF7L2 rs7903146 is associated with risk of PCa and if the association is
modified by lifestyle factors independently of T2D status.
METHODS: We prospectively followed 8,558 men in the Malmö Diet and Cancer Study
from baseline 1991-1996 until end of 2009. Cox regression models were used to
assess the association between rs7903146 T2D-risk allele (T) and PCa. Effect
modification by incident T2D status, fasting glucose levels, dietary, and
lifestyle risk factors were tested.
RESULTS: During follow-up 855 incident PCa cases were registered. We observed a
non-significant tendency for the TCF7L2 variant to associate with higher risk of 
PCa, which was unaffected by adjustment for incident T2D (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.24; 95% CI:
0.96, 1.60; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.079) but more pronounced among subjects who developed T2D
(HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.91, 95% CI: 0.88, 4.14; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.064). In a sub-sample of hyperglycemic men 
we observed an increased risk of PCa among T-allele carriers (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.72, 95% CI: 
1.22, 6.04; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014; P(interaction) <U+2009>=<U+2009>0.056). T-allele carriers with higher
number of lifestyle risk factors had an increased risk of PCa (P(interaction)
<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no independent association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and PCa
risk. However, among hyperglycemic men we observed that the risk allele may
increase risk of PCa. The association between rs7903146 and PCa risk may also be 
modified by lifestyle factors.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24961829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 24;9(6):e100548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100548.
eCollection 2014.

Genetic association study with metabolic syndrome and metabolic-related traits in
a cross-sectional sample and a 10-year longitudinal sample of chinese elderly
population.

Yang J(1), Liu J(1), Liu J(1), Li W(2), Li X(3), He Y(1), Ye L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Geriatrics, the General Hospital of the People's Liberation Army,
Beijing, China; Beijing Key Lab of Aging and Geriatrics, the General Hospital of 
the People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Institute of Geriatrics, the General Hospital of the People's Liberation Army,
Beijing, China; Department of Geriatric Cardiology, the General Hospital of the
People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The metabolic syndrome (MetS) has been known as partly heritable,
while the number of genetic studies on MetS and metabolic-related traits among
Chinese elderly was limited.
METHODS: A cross-sectional analysis was performed among 2 014 aged participants
from September 2009 to June 2010 in Beijing, China. An additional longitudinal
study was carried out among the same study population from 2001 to 2010.
Biochemical profile and anthropometric parameters of all the participants were
measured. The associations of 23 SNPs located within 17 candidate genes (MTHFR,
PPAR<U+03B3>, LPL, INSIG, TCF7L2, FTO, KCNJ11, JAZF1, CDKN2A/B, ADIPOQ, WFS1, CDKAL1,
IGF2BP2, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, IRS1, ACE) with overweight and obesity, diabetes,
metabolic phenotypes, and MetS were examined in both studies.
RESULTS: In this Chinese elderly population, prevalence of overweight, central
obesity, diabetes, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and MetS were 48.3%, 71.0%, 32.4%,
75.7%, 68.3% and 54.5%, respectively. In the cross-sectional analyses, no SNP was
found to be associated with MetS. Genotype TT of SNP rs4402960 within the gene
IGF2BP2 was associated with overweight (odds ratio (OR) <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.479, 95% confidence 
interval (CI): 0.316-0.724, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) and genotype CA of SNP rs1801131 within
the gene MTHFR was associated with hypertension (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.560, 95% CI: 1.194-2.240,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001). However, these associations were not observed in the longitudinal
analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: The associations of SNP rs4402960 with overweight as well as the
association of SNP rs1801131 with hypertension were found to be statistically
significant. No SNP was identified to be associated with MetS in our study with
statistical significance.

PMCID: PMC4069025
PMID: 24959828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. BMC Med. 2014 Jun 23;12:103. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-12-103.

Effects of palmitate on genome-wide mRNA expression and DNA methylation patterns 
in human pancreatic islets.

Hall E, Volkov P, Dayeh T, Bacos K, Rönn T, Nitert MD, Ling C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Diabetes Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University Diabetes Centre, CRC, Lund University, Scania University Hospital,
Malmö, Sweden. charlotte.ling@med.lu.se.

Comment in
    BMC Med. 2014;12:104.

BACKGROUND: Circulating free fatty acids are often elevated in patients with type
2 diabetes (T2D) and obese individuals. Chronic exposure to high levels of
saturated fatty acids has detrimental effects on islet function and insulin
secretion. Altered gene expression and epigenetics may contribute to T2D and
obesity. However, there is limited information on whether fatty acids alter the
genome-wide transcriptome profile in conjunction with DNA methylation patterns in
human pancreatic islets. To dissect the molecular mechanisms linking lipotoxicity
to impaired insulin secretion, we investigated the effects of a 48 h palmitate
treatment in vitro on genome-wide mRNA expression and DNA methylation patterns in
human pancreatic islets.
METHODS: Genome-wide mRNA expression was analyzed using Affymetrix GeneChip(®)
Human Gene 1.0 ST whole transcript-based array (n = 13) and genome-wide DNA
methylation was analyzed using Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChip (n = 13) in
human pancreatic islets exposed to palmitate or control media for 48 h. A
non-parametric paired Wilcoxon statistical test was used to analyze mRNA
expression. Apoptosis was measured using Apo-ONE(®) Homogeneous Caspase-3/7 Assay
(n = 4).
RESULTS: While glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was decreased, there was no
significant effect on apoptosis in human islets exposed to palmitate. We
identified 1,860 differentially expressed genes in palmitate-treated human
islets. These include candidate genes for T2D, such as TCF7L2, GLIS3, HNF1B and
SLC30A8. Additionally, genes in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism, 
fatty acid metabolism, glutathione metabolism and one carbon pool by folate were 
differentially expressed in palmitate-treated human islets. Palmitate treatment
altered the global DNA methylation level and DNA methylation levels of CpG island
shelves and shores, 5'UTR, 3'UTR and gene body regions in human islets. Moreover,
290 genes with differential expression had a corresponding change in DNA
methylation, for example, TCF7L2 and GLIS3. Importantly, out of the genes
differentially expressed due to palmitate treatment in human islets, 67 were also
associated with BMI and 37 were differentially expressed in islets from T2D
patients.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that palmitate treatment of human pancreatic
islets gives rise to epigenetic modifications that together with altered gene
expression may contribute to impaired insulin secretion and T2D.

PMCID: PMC4065864
PMID: 24953961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 Jun 18;7:36. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-36.

Whole genome sequencing reveals potential targets for therapy in patients with
refractory KRAS mutated metastatic colorectal cancer.

Shanmugam V, Ramanathan RK, Lavender NA, Sinari S, Chadha M, Liang WS, Kurdoglu
A, Izatt T, Christoforides A, Benson H, Phillips L, Baker A, Murray C, Hostetter 
G, Von Hoff DD, Craig DW, Carpten JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), 445 N Fifth Street, Phoenix,
AZ 85004, USA. jcarpten@tgen.org.

BACKGROUND: The outcome of patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma (mCRC)
following first line therapy is poor, with median survival of less than one year.
The purpose of this study was to identify candidate therapeutically targetable
somatic events in mCRC patient samples by whole genome sequencing (WGS), so as to
obtain targeted treatment strategies for individual patients.
METHODS: Four patients were recruited, all of whom had received<U+2009>><U+2009>2 prior therapy
regimens. Percutaneous needle biopsies of metastases were performed with whole
blood collection for the extraction of constitutional DNA. One tumor was not
included in this study as the quality of tumor tissue was not sufficient for
further analysis. WGS was performed using Illumina paired end chemistry on
HiSeq2000 sequencing systems, which yielded coverage of greater than 30X for all 
samples. NGS data were processed and analyzed to detect somatic genomic
alterations including point mutations, indels, copy number alterations,
translocations and rearrangements.
RESULTS: All 3 tumor samples had KRAS mutations, while 2 tumors contained
mutations in the APC gene and the PIK3CA gene. Although we did not identify a
TCF7L2-VTI1A translocation, we did detect a TCF7L2 mutation in one tumor. Among
the other interesting mutated genes was INPPL1, an important gene involved in PI3
kinase signaling. Functional studies demonstrated that inhibition of INPPL1
reduced growth of CRC cells, suggesting that INPPL1 may promote growth in CRC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study further supports potential molecularly defined therapeutic
contexts that might provide insights into treatment strategies for refractory
mCRC. New insights into the role of INPPL1 in colon tumor cell growth have also
been identified. Continued development of appropriate targeted agents towards
specific events may be warranted to help improve outcomes in CRC.

PMCID: PMC4074842
PMID: 24943349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Sci Rep. 2014 Jun 13;4:5296. doi: 10.1038/srep05296.

Clinical and non-targeted metabolomic profiling of homozygous carriers of
Transcription Factor 7-like 2 variant rs7903146.

Wagner R(1), Li J(2), Kenar E(3), Kohlbacher O(4), Machicao F(5), Häring HU(5),
Fritsche A(5), Xu G(6), Lehmann R(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology and Nephrology,
Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital Tuebingen, Germany [2]
Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholtz Zentrum
München at the University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [3] German Center for 
Diabetes Research (DZD), Tübingen [4]. (2)1] CAS Key Laboratory of Separation
Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China [2]. (3)1] Applied Bioinformatics, Center for 
Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center, and Department of Computer Science, 
University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany [2]. (4)Applied
Bioinformatics, Center for Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center, and
Department of Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076
Tuebingen, Germany. (5)1] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology and
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital Tuebingen,
Germany [2] Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the
Helmholtz Zentrum München at the University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [3] 
German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Tübingen. (6)CAS Key Laboratory of
Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China. (7)1] Institute for Diabetes
Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholtz Zentrum München at the
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany [2] German Center for Diabetes
Research (DZD), Tübingen [3] Division of Clinical Chemistry and
Pathobiochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine 4, University Hospital
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

An important role of the type 2 diabetes risk variant rs7903146 in TCF7L2 in
metabolic actions of various tissues, in particular of the liver, has recently
been demonstrated by functional animal studies. Accordingly, the TT diabetes risk
allele may lead to currently unknown alterations in human. Our study revealed no 
differences in the kinetics of glucose, insulin, C-peptide and non-esterified
fatty acids during an OGTT in homozygous participants from a German diabetes risk
cohort (n = 1832) carrying either the rs7903146 CC (n = 15) or the TT (n = 15)
genotype. However, beta-cell function was impaired for TT carriers. Covering more
than 4000 metabolite ions the plasma metabolome did not reveal any differences
between genotypes. Our study argues against a relevant impact of TCF7L2 rs7903146
on the systemic level in humans, but confirms the role in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes in humans as a mechanism impairing insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC4055885
PMID: 24925104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 10;9(6):e99310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099310. eCollection
2014.

Differential methylation of TCF7L2 promoter in peripheral blood DNA in newly
diagnosed, drug-naïve patients with type 2 diabetes.

Canivell S(1), Ruano EG(2), Sisó-Almirall A(3), Kostov B(4), González-de Paz
L(4), Fernandez-Rebollo E(2), Hanzu FA(5), Párrizas M(6), Novials A(7), Gomis
R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Les Corts Primary Health Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona,
Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Diabetes
and Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Les Corts Primary Health Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, 
Spain; University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Les Corts Primary Health
Care Centre, PHC Research Group, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and
Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Diabetes and Obesity
Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of Endocrinology and
Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain. (8)Department of
Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and
Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain;
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

TCF7L2 is the susceptibility gene for Type 2 diabetes (T2D) with the largest
effect on disease risk that has been discovered to date. However, the mechanisms 
by which TCF7L2 contributes to the disease remain largely elusive. In addition,
epigenetic mechanisms, such as changes in DNA methylation patterns, might have a 
role in the pathophysiology of T2D. This study aimed to investigate the
differences in terms of DNA methylation profile of TCF7L2 promoter gene between
type 2 diabetic patients and age- and Body Mass Index (BMI)- matched controls. We
included 93 type 2 diabetic patients that were recently diagnosed for T2D and
exclusively on diet (without any pharmacological treatment). DNA was extracted
from whole blood and DNA methylation was assessed using the Sequenom EpiTYPER
system. Type 2 diabetic patients were more insulin resistant than their matched
controls (mean HOMA IR 2.6 vs 1.8 in controls, P<0.001) and had a poorer
beta-cell function (mean HOMA B 75.7 vs. 113.6 in controls, P<0.001). Results
showed that 59% of the CpGs analyzed in TCF7L2 promoter had significant
differences between type 2 diabetic patients and matched controls. In addition,
fasting glucose, HOMA-B, HOMA-IR, total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol
correlated with methylation in specific CpG sites of TCF7L2 promoter. After
adjustment by age, BMI, gender, physical inactivity, waist circumference, smoking
status and diabetes status uniquely fasting glucose, total cholesterol and
LDL-cholesterol remained significant. Taken together, newly diagnosed, drug-naïve
type 2 diabetic patients display specific epigenetic changes at the TCF7L2
promoter as compared to age- and BMI-matched controls. Methylation in TCF7L2
promoter is further correlated with fasting glucose in peripheral blood DNA,
which sheds new light on the role of epigenetic regulation of TCF7L2 in T2D.

PMCID: PMC4051650
PMID: 24914535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;115(11):1974-84. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24869.

MiR-29b downregulates canonical Wnt signaling by suppressing coactivators of
ß-catenin in human colorectal cancer cells.

Subramanian M(1), Rao SR, Thacker P, Chatterjee S, Karunagaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu, 600036, India.

The ß-catenin/Wnt signaling pathway is activated in many cancers and its
constitutive activation has a central role in colorectal cancer pathogenesis.
Recent studies have highlighted the role of microRNAs as novel regulators of gene
expression including that of signaling intermediates from the Wnt signaling
pathway. The purpose of our study was to determine the role of miR-29b in the
regulation of Wnt signaling in human colorectal cancer cells. TOPFlash/FOPFlash
reporter assays, gene expression studies by quantitative RT-PCR and western blot 
analysis were used to study the effect of ectopic expression of miR-29b on
canonical Wnt signaling. miR-29b antagonized transactivation of ß-catenin target 
genes by downregulating coactivators of ß-catenin (TCF7L2, Snail, and BCL9L) in
SW480 cells. miR-29b targeted the 3'UTR of BCL9L and decreased its expression
with a consequent decrease in nuclear translocation of ß-catenin. Ectopic
expression of miR-29b inhibited anchorage independent cell growth, promoted
reversal of epithelial to mesenchymal transition and reduced the ability of
conditioned medium from SW480 cells to induce in vitro tube formation in
endothelial cells. These results have unraveled a novel role of miR-29b in Wnt
signaling in human colorectal cancer cells with implications in the treatment of 
colorectal cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24913975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Diabetologia. 2014 Sep;57(9):1859-68. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3287-8. Epub 2014
Jun 7.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene variants predispose to adult-onset autoimmune
diabetes.

Andersen MK(1), Sterner M, Forsén T, Käräjämäki A, Rolandsson O, Forsblom C,
Groop PH, Lahti K, Nilsson PM, Groop L, Tuomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Programs Unit, Diabetes and Obesity, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland, mette.k.andersen@helsinki.fi.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is phenotypically a 
hybrid of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Genetically LADA is poorly characterised
but does share genetic predisposition with type 1 diabetes. We aimed to improve
the genetic characterisation of LADA and hypothesised that type 2
diabetes-associated gene variants also predispose to LADA, and that the
associations would be strongest in LADA patients with low levels of GAD
autoantibodies (GADA).
METHODS: We assessed 41 type 2 diabetes-associated gene variants in Finnish
(phase I) and Swedish (phase II) patients with LADA (n = 911) or type 1 diabetes 
(n = 406), all diagnosed after the age of 35 years, as well as in non-diabetic
control individuals 40 years or older (n = 4,002).
RESULTS: Variants in the ZMIZ1 (rs12571751, p = 4.1 × 10(-5)) and TCF7L2
(rs7903146, p = 5.8 × 10(-4)) loci were strongly associated with LADA. Variants
in the KCNQ1 (rs2237895, p = 0.0012), HHEX (rs1111875, p = 0.0024 in Finns) and
MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 0.0039) loci showed the strongest association in patients
with low GADA, supporting the hypothesis that the disease in these patients is
more like type 2 diabetes. In contrast, variants in the KLHDC5 (rs10842994, p =
9.5 × 10(-4) in Finns), TP53INP1 (rs896854, p = 0.005), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, p =
7.0 × 10(-4); rs7754840, p = 8.8 × 10(-4)) and PROX1 (rs340874, p = 0.003) loci
showed the strongest association in patients with high GADA. For type 1 diabetes,
a strong association was seen for MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 3.2 × 10(-6)) and HNF1A
(rs2650000, p = 0.0012).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: LADA and adult-onset type 1 diabetes share genetic
risk variants with type 2 diabetes, supporting the idea of a hybrid form of
diabetes and distinguishing them from patients with classical young-onset type 1 
diabetes.

PMID: 24906951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Diabetologia. 2014 Sep;57(9):1869-75. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3276-y. Epub 2014
Jun 7.

Influence of TCF7L2 gene variants on the therapeutic response to the
dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitor linagliptin.

Zimdahl H(1), Ittrich C, Graefe-Mody U, Boehm BO, Mark M, Woerle HJ, Dugi KA.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Development, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma
GmbH & Co. KG, Birkendorfer Straße 65, 88397, Biberach/Riss, Germany,
heike.zimdahl-gelling@boehringer-ingelheim.com.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Individuals carrying variants of the transcription factor 7-like
2 gene (TCF7L2) are at increased risk for type 2 diabetes. These metabolic
genetic risk factors have been linked to diminished pancreatic islet-cell
responsiveness to incretins, thus pharmacological interventions aimed at
amplifying endogenous incretin biology may be affected. However, clinical
evidence from randomised controlled trials so far is lacking. We investigated the
influence of TCF7L2 risk alleles on the response to treatment with the
dipeptidylpeptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor linagliptin from four 24 week, phase III,
placebo-controlled trials.
METHODS: Pharmacogenomic samples and clinical data were available from 961
patients with type 2 diabetes. Whole-blood DNA samples were genotyped for TCF7L2 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in conjunction with assessments of 24 week
changes in HbA1c.
RESULTS: Linagliptin lowered HbA1c meaningfully in all three genotypes of
rs7903146 (non-risk variant carriers CC [n = 356]: -0.82% [-9.0 mmol/mol], p <
0.0001; heterozygous CT [n = 264]: -0.77% [-8.4 mmol/mol], p < 0.0001; homozygous
risk variant carriers TT [n = 73]: -0.57% [-6.2 mmol/mol], p < 0.0006). No
significant treatment differences were seen between CC and CT patients, although 
HbA1c response was reduced in TT compared with CC patients (~0.26% [~2.8
mmol/mol], p = 0.0182).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Linagliptin significantly improved hyperglycaemia in 
patients with type 2 diabetes both with and without the TCF7L2 gene diabetes risk
alleles. However, differences in treatment response were observed, indicating
that diabetes susceptibility genes may be an important contributor to the
inter-individual variability of treatment response.

PMCID: PMC4119242
PMID: 24906949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2014 Mar 27;68:343-9. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1095857.

Is TCF7L2 variant associated with non-diabetic chronic kidney disease
progression? Results of a family-based study.

Kilis-Pstrusinska K(1), Zwolinska D(1), Szczepanska M(2), Grzeszczak W(3); Study 
Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland. (2)Department of Paediatrics, Clinic of Paediatrics, Nephrology and
Endocrinology, Silesian Medical University, Zabrze, Poland. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Diabetology and Nephrology, Silesian Medical University,
Zabrze, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: It is assumed that genetic factors may play a significant role in
CKD development. The aim of the study was to investigate the role of rs7903146
polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene in development and progression of non-diabetic
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
MATERIAL/METHODS: 109 children and young adults with CKD caused by primary
glomerulopathy and tubulointerstitial nephropathy, stages 3-5, and their 218
biological parents with no renal dysfunction were included in the study. We
tested the transmission of alleles of rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene
from heterozygous parents to offspring affected with CKD using the
transmission/disequilibrium test. We also analysed whether rs7903146 polymorphism
had any impact on the loss of glomerular filtration rate.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 polymorphism in TCF7L2 allele transmission from
heterozygous parents to their affected children was not different from a random
proportion expected for no association, in the whole group of subjects, and in
the subgroups, depending on CKD aetiology. Lack of association between the
analysed polymorphism and the loss of glomerular filtration rate was found in the
total group of patients as well as in the subgroups, regarding the cause of CKD.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found no association between rs7903146 polymorphism in
the TCF7L2 gene and the increased risk for development of CKD caused by primary
glomerulopathy and analysed tubulointerstitial nephropathy. The progression rate 
of CKD of non-diabetic aetiology does not depend on this polymorphism.

PMID: 24864085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Aug;20(8):756-66. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau038. Epub 2014 May 
21.

Notch-dependent RBPJ<U+03BA> inhibits proliferation of human cytotrophoblasts and their 
differentiation into extravillous trophoblasts.

Velicky P(1), Haider S(1), Otti GR(1), Fiala C(2), Pollheimer J(1), Knöfler M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive Biology
Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna A-1090,
Austria. (2)Gynmed Clinic, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna A-1090, Austria
martin.knoefler@meduniwien.ac.at.

Abnormal development of invasive trophoblasts has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of human pregnancy diseases such as pre-eclampsia. However, critical
signalling pathways controlling formation and differentiation of these cells have
been poorly elucidated. Here, we provide evidence that the canonical Notch
pathway, operating through Notch-dependent activation of its key regulatory
transcription factor RBPJ<U+03BA>, controls proliferation and differentiation in villous
explant cultures and primary trophoblasts of early pregnancy. Immunofluorescence 
of first trimester placental tissue revealed expression of RBPJ<U+03BA> and its
co-activators, the MAML proteins, in nuclei of proliferative cell column
trophoblasts (CCT) and differentiated, extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs). However,
RBPJ<U+03BA> expression, transcript levels of the Notch target gene HES1 and activity of
a Notch/RBPJ<U+03BA>-dependent luciferase reporter decreased during in vitro
differentiation of primary cytotrophoblasts on fibronectin. Silencing of RBPJ<U+03BA>
using silencing RNAs (siRNAs) increased proliferation of CCTs in floating villous
explant cultures analysed by outgrowth and BrdU labelling. Similarly,
down-regulation of the transcription factor enhanced BrdU incorporation in
isolated primary cultures. However, motility of these cells was not affected. In 
addition, gene silencing of RBPJ<U+03BA> increased cyclin D1 expression in the two
trophoblast model systems as well as markers of the differentiated, EVT, i.e.
integrin a1, ADAM12 and T-cell factor 4. In summary, the data suggest that
Notch-dependent RBPJ<U+03BA> activity could be required for balanced rates of
trophoblast proliferation and differentiation in human placental anchoring villi 
preventing exaggerated trophoblast overgrowth as well as premature formation of
EVTs.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24850908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Genet. 2014 Jun;46(6):533-42. doi: 10.1038/ng.2985. Epub 2014 May 18.

Large-scale genetic study in East Asians identifies six new loci associated with 
colorectal cancer risk.

Zhang B(1), Jia WH(2), Matsuda K(3), Kweon SS(4), Matsuo K(5), Xiang YB(6), Shin 
A(7), Jee SH(8), Kim DH(9), Cai Q(1), Long J(1), Shi J(1), Wen W(1), Yang G(1),
Zhang Y(1), Li C(10), Li B(11), Guo Y(12), Ren Z(13), Ji BT(14), Pan ZZ(2),
Takahashi A(15), Shin MH(16), Matsuda F(17), Gao YT(6), Oh JH(18), Kim S(8), Ahn 
YO(19); Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO), Chan
AT(20), Chang-Claude J(21), Slattery ML(22); Colorectal Transdisciplinary
(CORECT) Study, Gruber SB(23), Schumacher FR(23), Stenzel SL(23); Colon Cancer
Family Registry (CCFR), Casey G(23), Kim HR(24), Jeong JY(9), Park JW(25), Li
HL(6), Hosono S(5), Cho SH(26), Kubo M(15), Shu XO(1), Zeng YX(2), Zheng W(1).

Collaborators: Baron JA, Berndt SI, Bezieau S, Brenner H, Caan BJ, Carlson CS,
Casey G, Chan AT, Chang-Claude J, Chanock SJ, Conti DV, Curtis K, Duggan D, Fuchs
CS, Gallinger S, Giovannucci EL, Gruber SB, Haile RW, Harrison TA, Hayes RB,
Hoffmeister M, Hopper JL, Hsu L, Hudson TJ, Hunter DJ, Hutter CM, Jackson RD,
Jenkins MA, Jiao S, Küry S, Le Marchand L, Lemire M, Lindor NM, Ma J, Newcomb PA,
Peters U, Potter JD, Qu C, Rohan T, Schoen RE, Schumacher FR, Seminara D,
Slattery ML, Thibodeau SN, White E, Zanke BW, Blalock K, Campbell PT, Casey G,
Conti DV, Edlund CK, Figueiredo J, Gauderman WJ, Gong J, Green RC, Gruber SB,
Harju JF, Harrison TA, Jacobs EJ, Jenkins MA, Jiao S, Li L, Lin Y, Manion FJ,
Moreno V, Mukherjee B, Peters U, Raskin L, Schumacher FR, Seminara D, Severi G,
Stenzel SL, Thomas DC, Casey G.

Known genetic loci explain only a small proportion of the familial relative risk 
of colorectal cancer (CRC). We conducted a genome-wide association study of CRC
in East Asians with 14,963 cases and 31,945 controls and identified 6 new loci
associated with CRC risk (P = 3.42 × 10(-8) to 9.22 × 10(-21)) at 10q22.3,
10q25.2, 11q12.2, 12p13.31, 17p13.3 and 19q13.2. Two of these loci map to genes
(TCF7L2 and TGFB1) with established roles in colorectal tumorigenesis. Four other
loci are located in or near genes involved in transcriptional regulation (ZMIZ1),
genome maintenance (FEN1), fatty acid metabolism (FADS1 and FADS2), cancer cell
motility and metastasis (CD9), and cell growth and differentiation (NXN). We also
found suggestive evidence for three additional loci associated with CRC risk near
genome-wide significance at 8q24.11, 10q21.1 and 10q24.2. Furthermore, we
replicated 22 previously reported CRC-associated loci. Our study provides
insights into the genetic basis of CRC and suggests the involvement of new
biological pathways.

PMCID: PMC4068797
PMID: 24836286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Adv Nutr. 2014 May 14;5(3):330S-6S. doi: 10.3945/an.113.005389. Print 2014 May.

Mediterranean diet and cardiovascular health: Teachings of the PREDIMED study.

Ros E(1), Martínez-González MA(2), Estruch R(3), Salas-Salvadó J(4), Fitó M(5),
Martínez JA(6), Corella D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Clinic, Endocrinology and Nutrition Service and CIBER Fisiopatología de 
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish
Government, Spain; Departments of eros@clinic.ub.es. (2)CIBER Fisiopatología de
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish
Government, Spain; Departments of Preventive Medicine and Public Health and.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August 
Pi Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Spanish Government, Spain; Departments of. (4)CIBER Fisiopatología de
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish
Government, Spain; Departments of Human Nutrition Department, Sant Joan
University Hospital, Pere Virgili Health Research Institute, Rovira i Virgili
University, Reus, Spain. (5)CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición
(CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish Government, Spain; Departments
of Cardiovascular and Nutrition Research Group and Regicor Study Group, Hospital 
del Mar Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain; and. (6)CIBER Fisiopatología de la 
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish
Government, Spain; Departments of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Physiology, and
Toxicology, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (7)CIBER Fisiopatología de la
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish
Government, Spain; Departments of Department of Preventive Medicine, University
of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

The PREDIMED (Prevención con Dieta Mediterránea) study was designed to assess the
long-term effects of the Mediterranean diet (MeDiet) without any energy
restriction on incident cardiovascular disease (CVD) as a multicenter,
randomized, primary prevention trial in individuals at high risk. Participants
were randomly assigned to 3 diet groups: 1) MeDiet supplemented with extra-virgin
olive oil (EVOO); 2) MeDiet supplemented with nuts; and 3) control diet (advice
on a low-fat diet). After 4.8 y, 288 major CVD events occurred in 7447
participants; crude hazard ratios were 0.70 (95% CI: 0.53, 0.91) for the MeDiet +
EVOO and 0.70 (95% CI: 0.53, 0.94) for the MeDiet + nuts compared with the
control group. Respective hazard ratios for incident diabetes (273 cases) among
3541 participants without diabetes were 0.60 (95% CI: 0.43, 0.85) and 0.82 (95%
CI: 0.61, 1.10) compared with the control group. After 1-y follow-up,
participants in the MeDiet + nuts group showed a significant 13.7% reduction in
prevalence of metabolic syndrome compared with reductions of 6.7% and 2.0% in the
MeDiet + EVOO and control groups, respectively. Analyses of intermediate markers 
of cardiovascular risk demonstrated beneficial effects of the MeDiets on blood
pressure, lipid profiles, lipoprotein particles, inflammation, oxidative stress, 
and carotid atherosclerosis, as well as on the expression of proatherogenic genes
involved in vascular events and thrombosis. Nutritional genomics studies
demonstrated interactions between a MeDiet and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), apolipoprotein A2 (APOA2), cholesteryl ester transfer
protein plasma (CETP), and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
polymorphisms. The PREDIMED study results demonstrate that a high-unsaturated fat
and antioxidant-rich dietary pattern such as the MeDiet is a useful tool in the
prevention of CVD.

© 2014 American Society for Nutrition.

PMCID: PMC4013190
PMID: 24829485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Nat Prod. 2014 May 23;77(5):1130-4. doi: 10.1021/np4010085. Epub 2014 May 14.

Plumbagin downregulates Wnt signaling independent of p53 in human colorectal
cancer cells.

Raghu D(1), Karunagaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras , Chennai, 
India 600036.

Plumbagin (1), a naphthoquinone, induces cell death and affects various signaling
pathways in cancer cells. Wnt signaling is active constitutively in colorectal
cancer and plays an important role in its progression and pathogenesis. It was
hypothesized that 1 is likely to modulate Wnt signaling, and this compound was
studied for its effect on this pathway in human colorectal cancer cells.
Plumbagin (1) was found to downregulate Wnt signaling when assessed by a
TOPFlash/FOPFlash reporter activity assay and also decreased the expression of
several coactivators and downstream targets of Wnt signaling such as ß-catenin,
TCF7L2, p300, Bcl9l, c-Myc, vimentin, and cyclinD1 in SW620 colorectal cancer
cells. Using isogenic HCT116p53+/+ and HCT116p53-/- colorectal cancer cells, it
was found that compound 1-mediated downregulation of Wnt signaling is
p53-independent. Interestingly, treatment with 1 upregulated the expression of
HBP1 (a negative regulator of Wnt signaling) in these cells. The results obtained
show for the first time that downregulation of Wnt signaling could be one of the 
molecular mechanisms by which plumbagin exerts its inhibitory effects in human
colorectal cancer cells.

PMID: 24828199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1109-13. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1370076. Epub
2014 May 13.

[Phenotypes of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes].

[Article in German]

Wagner R(1), Häring HU(1), Fritsche A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innere Medizin IV, Abteilung für Endokrinologie, Diabetologie, Vaskuläre
Medizin, Nephrologie und Klinische Chemie, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen.

Comment in
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1095-6.

Type 2 Diabetes is a heterogeneous disease which harbors several different
pathomechanistic entities. For a successful prevention, it is important to
understand the exact pathomechanisms. Overt type 2 Diabetes usually develops
through an intermediary state called prediabetes, which is also heterogeneous.
This state is especially important, because it already confers a higher risk for 
diabetes-associated complications. Therefore, detection of prediabetes and
prevention of its progression to diabetes would be desirable. In this review, we 
describe the phenotypes of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. We also try to
envision the first steps of a future phenotype-oriented diabetes therapy.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24823979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3331-3.

Genetic polymorphisms of TCF7L2 lack influence on risk of the polycystic ovary
syndrome - a systemic analysis.

Lin L(1), Yang J, Ding Y, Wang J, Ting L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, China E-mail : Xjll20102010@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The results of previous researches that analyzed the association
between genetic polymorphisms of transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2,
rs7903146) and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) were conflicting. Current
systematic analysis was conducted to re-explore this association using updated
materials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PubMed database was used for data collection and the
final search was conducted on January 3, 2014. For TCF7L2 rs7903146, a
non-significant slight increase in risk of PCOS development was observed under
three genetic models (dominant model: OR=1.06, 95%CI: 0.93-1.21, p>0.05;
recessive model: OR=1.12, 95%CI: 0.87-1.43, p> 0.05; homozygous model: OR=1.14,
95%CI: 0.87-1.47, p>0.05). In the subgroup analyses in Asian group, allele
susceptibility of PCOS was calculated (allele model: OR=1.00, 95%CI: 0.74-1.35,
p>0.05; dominant model: OR=0.98, 95%CI: 0.71-1.35, p>0.05; recessive model:
OR=1.79, 95%CI: 0.33-9.84, p>0.05; homozygous model: OR=1.78, 95%CI: 0.32-9.80,
p>0.05), the differences were again not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this systemic analysis suggest that the polymorphism
of TCF7L2 rs7903146 may not be associated with the susceptibility to PCOS.

PMID: 24815492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes. 2014 Sep;63(9):2962-76. doi: 10.2337/db13-1459. Epub 2014 May 8.

Altered DNA methylation and differential expression of genes influencing
metabolism and inflammation in adipose tissue from subjects with type 2 diabetes.

Nilsson E(1), Jansson PA(2), Perfilyev A(3), Volkov P(3), Pedersen M(4), Svensson
MK(5), Poulsen P(6), Ribel-Madsen R(7), Pedersen NL(8), Almgren P(9), Fadista
J(9), Rönn T(3), Klarlund Pedersen B(4), Scheele C(4), Vaag A(7), Ling C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Diabetes, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark emma_a.nilsson@med.lu.se charlotte.ling@med.lu.se. (2)Wallenberg
Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. (3)Epigenetics
and Diabetes, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University Diabetes Centre,
Lund University, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden. (4)The Centre of
Inflammation and Metabolism and the Centre for Physical Activity Research,
Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (6)Global Development, Novo Nordisk
A/S, Bagsværd, Denmark. (7)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. (8)Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (9)Diabetes and
Endocrinology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University Diabetes Centre, 
Clinical Research Centre, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (10)Epigenetics and
Diabetes, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University Diabetes Centre, Lund 
University, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden emma_a.nilsson@med.lu.se
charlotte.ling@med.lu.se.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Sep;63(9):2901-3.

Genetics, epigenetics, and environment may together affect the susceptibility for
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Our aim was to dissect molecular mechanisms underlying T2D
using genome-wide expression and DNA methylation data in adipose tissue from
monozygotic twin pairs discordant for T2D and independent case-control cohorts.
In adipose tissue from diabetic twins, we found decreased expression of genes
involved in oxidative phosphorylation; carbohydrate, amino acid, and lipid
metabolism; and increased expression of genes involved in inflammation and glycan
degradation. The most differentially expressed genes included ELOVL6, GYS2,
FADS1, SPP1 (OPN), CCL18, and IL1RN. We replicated these results in adipose
tissue from an independent case-control cohort. Several candidate genes for
obesity and T2D (e.g., IRS1 and VEGFA) were differentially expressed in
discordant twins. We found a heritable contribution to the genome-wide DNA
methylation variability in twins. Differences in methylation between monozygotic 
twin pairs discordant for T2D were subsequently modest. However, 15,627 sites,
representing 7,046 genes including PPARG, KCNQ1, TCF7L2, and IRS1, showed
differential DNA methylation in adipose tissue from unrelated subjects with T2D
compared with control subjects. A total of 1,410 of these sites also showed
differential DNA methylation in the twins discordant for T2D. For the
differentially methylated sites, the heritability estimate was 0.28. We also
identified copy number variants (CNVs) in monozygotic twin pairs discordant for
T2D. Taken together, subjects with T2D exhibit multiple transcriptional and
epigenetic changes in adipose tissue relevant to the development of the disease.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24812430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 1;135(11):2579-92. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28921. Epub 2014 Apr
30.

HS3ST2 modulates breast cancer cell invasiveness via MAP kinase- and Tcf4
(Tcf7l2)-dependent regulation of protease and cadherin expression.

Vijaya Kumar A(1), Salem Gassar E, Spillmann D, Stock C, Sen YP, Zhang T, Van
Kuppevelt TH, Hülsewig C, Koszlowski EO, Pavao MS, Ibrahim SA, Poeter M, Rescher 
U, Kiesel L, Koduru S, Yip GW, Götte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Münster University Hospital, Münster,
Germany.

Heparan sulfate 3-O-sulfotransferase 2 (HS3ST2), an enzyme mediating
3-O-sulfation of heparan sulfate (HS), is silenced by hypermethylation in breast 
cancer. As HS has an important co-receptor function for numerous signal
transduction pathways, the phenotypical changes due to HS3ST2 reexpression were
investigated in vitro using high and low invasive breast cancer cell lines.
Compared to controls, highly invasive HS3ST2-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells showed
enhanced Matrigel invasiveness, transendothelial migration and motility.
Affymetrix screening and confirmatory real-time PCR and Western blotting analysis
revealed increased expression of several matrix metalloproteinases, cadherin-11, 
E-cadherin and CEACAM-1, while protease inhibitor and annexin A10 expression were
decreased. Low invasive HS3ST2 -expressing MCF-7 cells became even less invasive,
with no change in gelatinolytic MMP activity. HS3ST2 expression increased
HS-dependent basal and FGF2-specific signaling through the constitutively active 
p44/42 MAPK pathway in MDA-MB-231 cells. Increased MAPK activation was
accompanied by upregulation of ß-catenin in MDA-MB-231, and of the transcription 
factor Tcf4 in both cell lines. Dysregulation of Tcf4-regulated ion transporters 
and increased cytosolic acidification were observed in HS3ST2-expressing
MDA-MB-231 cells, which is a possible underlying cause of increased
chemosensitivity towards doxorubicine and paclitaxel in these cells. This study
provides the first in vitro evidence of the involvement of HS3ST2 in breast
cancer cell invasion and chemosensitivity.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24752740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Metab. 2014 Jan 22;3(3):261-7. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2014.01.001. eCollection
2014.

Untangling the interplay of genetic and metabolic influences on beta-cell
function: Examples of potential therapeutic implications involving TCF7L2 and
FFAR1.

Wagner R(1), Staiger H(2), Ullrich S(2), Stefan N(2), Fritsche A(2), Häring
HU(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital of the
Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, Germany ; German Center for Diabetes
Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division
of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical
Chemistry, University Hospital of the Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen,
Germany ; Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholz 
Centre Munich at the University of Tübingen (IDM), Tübingen, Germany ; German
Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany.

Deteriorating beta-cell function is a common feature of type 2 diabetes. In this 
review, we briefly address the regulation of beta-cell function, and discuss some
of the main determinants of beta-cell failure. We will focus on the role of
interactions between the genetic background and metabolic environment (insulin
resistance, fuel supply and flux as well as metabolic signaling). We present data
on the function of the strongest common diabetes risk variant, the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 in TCF7L2. As also mirrored by its
interaction with glycemia on insulin secretion, this SNP in large part confers
resistance against the incretin effect. Genetic influence on insulin secretion
also interacts with free fatty acids, as evidenced by data on rs1573611 in FFAR1.
Several medications marketed by now or currently under development for diabetes
treatment engage these pathways, and therapeutic implications from these findings
are soon to be expected.

PMCID: PMC3986492
PMID: 24749055  [PubMed]


174. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e95045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095045. eCollection
2014.

Validation of type 2 diabetes risk variants identified by genome-wide association
studies in Han Chinese population: a replication study and meta-analysis.

Chang YC(1), Liu PH(2), Yu YH(3), Kuo SS(3), Chang TJ(3), Jiang YD(3), Nong
JY(3), Hwang JJ(3), Chuang LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital HsinChu
branch, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)Clinical Informatics and Medical Statistics Research Center, College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute
of Clinical Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) involving European
populations have successfully identified risk genetic variants associated with
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the effects conferred by these variants
in Han Chinese population have not yet been fully elucidated.
METHODS: We analyzed the effects of 24 risk genetic variants with reported
associations from European GWAS in 3,040 Han Chinese subjects in Taiwan
(including 1,520 T2DM cases and 1,520 controls). The discriminative power of the 
prediction models with and without genotype scores was compared. We further
meta-analyzed the association of these variants with T2DM by pooling all
candidate-gene association studies conducted in Han Chinese.
RESULTS: Five risk variants in IGF2BP2 (rs4402960, rs1470579), CDKAL1
(rs10946398), SLC30A8 (rs13266634), and HHEX (rs1111875) genes were nominally
associated with T2DM in our samples. The odds ratio was 2.22 (95% confidence
interval, 1.81-2.73, P<0.0001) for subjects with the highest genetic score
quartile (score>34) as compared with subjects with the lowest quartile
(score<29). The incoporation of genotype score into the predictive model
increased the C-statistics from 0.627 to 0.657 (P<0.0001). These estimates are
very close to those observed in European populations. Gene-environment
interaction analysis showed a significant interaction between rs13266634 in
SLC30A8 gene and age on T2DM risk (P<0.0001). Further meta-analysis pooling 20
studies in Han Chinese confirmed the association of 10 genetic variants in
IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, JAZF1, SCL30A8, HHEX, TCF7L2, EXT2, and FTO genes with T2DM. The
effect sizes conferred by these risk variants in Han Chinese were similar to
those observed in Europeans but the allele frequencies differ substantially
between two populations.
CONCLUSION: We confirmed the association of 10 variants identified by European
GWAS with T2DM in Han Chinese population. The incorporation of genotype scores
into the prediction model led to a small but significant improvement in T2DM
prediction.

PMCID: PMC3988150
PMID: 24736664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int J Endocrinol. 2014;2014:769671. doi: 10.1155/2014/769671. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes and obesity: follow-up of findings from
genome-wide association studies.

Basile KJ(1), Johnson ME(1), Xia Q(1), Grant SF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, 34th and Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, 34th and Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA ; Center 
for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute,
34th and Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA ; Department of
Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA ; 1216F Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research 
Institute, 34th and Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Elucidating the underlying genetic variations influencing various complex
diseases is one of the major challenges currently facing clinical genetic
research. Although these variations are often difficult to uncover, approaches
such as genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been successful at finding
statistically significant associations between specific genomic loci and disease 
susceptibility. GWAS has been especially successful in elucidating genetic
variants that influence type 2 diabetes (T2D) and obesity/body mass index (BMI). 
Specifically, several GWASs have confirmed that a variant in transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) confers risk for T2D, while a variant in fat mass and
obesity-associated protein (FTO) confers risk for obesity/BMI; indeed both of
these signals are considered the most statistically associated loci discovered
for these respective traits to date. The discovery of these two key loci in this 
context has been invaluable for providing novel insight into mechanisms of
heritability and disease pathogenesis. As follow-up studies of TCF7L2 and FTO
have typically lead the way in how to follow up a GWAS discovery, we outline what
has been learned from such investigations and how they have implications for the 
myriad of other loci that have been subsequently reported in this disease
context.

PMCID: PMC3955626
PMID: 24719615  [PubMed]


176. Bioessays. 2014 May;36(5):526-37. doi: 10.1002/bies.201300180. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

How does the Mediterranean diet promote cardiovascular health? Current progress
toward molecular mechanisms: gene-diet interactions at the genomic,
transcriptomic, and epigenomic levels provide novel insights into new mechanisms.

Corella D(1), Ordovás JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y
Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Epidemiological evidence supports a health-promoting effect of the Mediterranean 
Diet (MedDiet), especially in the prevention of cardiovascular diseases. These
cardiovascular benefits have been attributed to a number of components of the
MedDiet such as monounsaturated fatty acids, antioxidant vitamins and
phytochemicals. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Likewise,
little is known about the genes that define inter-individual variation in
response to the MedDiet, although the TCF7L2 gene is emerging as an illustrative 
candidate for determining relative risk of cardiovascular events in response to
the MedDiet. Moreover, omics technologies are providing evidence supporting
potential mechanisms, some of them implicating epigenetics (i.e. microRNAs,
methylation), and certain data suggest that some traditional foods could
contribute via microRNAs possibly acting as exogenous regulators of gene
expression. Future research should aim at increasing and consolidating the
nutrigenetic and nutrigenomic knowledge of the MedDiet in order to provide sound,
personalized and optimized nutritional recommendations.

© 2014 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24706458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 1;89(3):340-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.03.006. Epub
2014 Mar 23.

DIF-1 inhibits tumor growth in vivo reducing phosphorylation of GSK-3ß and
expressions of cyclin D1 and TCF7L2 in cancer model mice.

Takahashi-Yanaga F(1), Yoshihara T(2), Jingushi K(2), Igawa K(3), Tomooka K(3),
Watanabe Y(4), Morimoto S(2), Nakatsu Y(5), Tsuzuki T(5), Nakabeppu Y(6),
Sasaguri T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Global Medical Science Education Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. Electronic address: yanaga@cliphrarm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular and Material Science,
Institute for Materials Chemistry and Engineering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (4)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Ehime
University, Matsuyama, Japan. (5)Department of Medical Biophysics and Radiation
Biology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and
Neuroscience, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (7)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
sasaguri@cliphrarm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

We reported that differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), synthesized by
Dictyostelium discoideum, inhibited proliferation of various tumor cell lines in 
vitro by suppressing the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. However, it remained
unexplored whether DIF-1 also inhibits tumor growth in vivo. In the present
study, therefore, we examined in-vivo effects of DIF-1 using three cancer models:
Mutyh-deficient mice with oxidative stress-induced intestinal tumors and nude
mice xenografted with the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116 and cervical
cancer cell line HeLa. In exploration for an appropriate route of administration,
we found that orally administered DIF-1 was absorbed through the digestive tract 
to elevate its blood concentration to levels enough to suppress tumor cell
proliferation. Repeated oral administration of DIF-1 markedly reduced the number 
and size of intestinal tumors that developed in Mutyh-deficient mice, reducing
the phosphorylation level of GSK-3ß Ser(9) and the expression levels of early
growth response-1 (Egr-1), transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and cyclin D1. 
DIF-1 also inhibited the growth of HCT-116- and HeLa-xenograft tumors together
with decreasing phosphorylation level of GSK-3ß Ser(9), although it was not
statistically significant in HeLa-xenograft tumors. DIF-1 also suppressed the
expressions of Egr-1, TCF7L2 and cyclin D1 in HCT-116-xenograft tumors and those 
of ß-catenin, TCF7L2 and cyclin D1 in HeLa-xenograft tumors. This is the first
report to show that DIF-1 inhibits tumor growth in vivo, consistent with its
in-vitro action, suggesting that this compound may have potential as a novel
anti-tumor agent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24670930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;23(1):103-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.48. Epub 2014 Mar
26.

Characterization of the transcriptional machinery bound across the widely
presumed type 2 diabetes causal variant, rs7903146, within TCF7L2.

Xia Q(1), Deliard S(1), Yuan CX(2), Johnson ME(1), Grant SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Proteomics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)1] Division of Human
Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2]
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and
Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Resolving the underlying functional mechanism to a given genetic association has 
proven extremely challenging. However, the strongest associated type 2 diabetes
(T2D) locus reported to date, TCF7L2, presents an opportunity for translational
analyses, as many studies in multiple ethnicities strongly point to SNP rs7903146
in intron 3 as being the causal variant within this gene. We carried out oligo
pull-down combined with mass spectrophotometry (MS) to elucidate the specific
transcriptional machinery across this SNP using protein extracts from HCT116
cells. We observed that poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is by far the
most abundant binding factor. Pursuing the possibility of a feedback mechanism,
we observed that PARP-1, along with the next most abundant binding proteins, DNA 
topoisomerase I and ATP-dependent RNA helicase A, dimerize with the TCF7L2
protein and with each other. We uncovered further evidence of a feedback
mechanism using a luciferase reporter approach, including observing expression
differences between alleles for rs7903146. We also found that there was an
allelic difference in the MS results for proteins with less abundant binding,
namely X-ray repair cross-complementing 5 and RPA/p70. Our results point to a
protein complex binding across rs7903146 within TCF7L2 and suggests a possible
mechanism by which this locus confers its T2D risk.

PMCID: PMC4266734
PMID: 24667787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2014 Nov;30(8):701-6. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2538.

Metabolic, hormonal characteristics and genetic variants of TCF7L2 associated
with development of gestational diabetes mellitus in Mexican women.

Reyes-López R(1), Pérez-Luque E, Malacara JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Médicas, División Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad
de Guanajuato, 20 de Enero 929, Colonia Obregón, León, Guanajuato, 37320, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Variation in TCF7L2 gene is associated with type 2 diabetes and with 
gestational diabetes mellitus in several populations, but there are no data in
Mexican women with gestational diabetes mellitus. In this study, we examined
metabolic and hormonal measurements as well as TCF7L2 genetic variants.
METHODS: We selected 108 pregnant women with normal glucose tolerance and 90 with
gestational diabetes mellitus according to 2010 American Diabetes Association
criteria matched for gestational week. We collected data on blood pressure, body 
mass index (BMI) and concentrations of blood glucose, HbA1c , lipids profile,
insulin and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). The genotyping of rs7903146 and
rs12255372 polymorphisms were made with polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: Actual and pre-gestational BMI, fasting glucose and HbA1c were higher
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02) in
gestational diabetes mellitus women than euglycemic women. No significant
differences were found for lipids, insulin and homeostasis model
assessment-insulin resistance. Gestational diabetes mellitus women had high GLP-1
levels (32 vs 24, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.004) and decreased ß-cell function (266 vs 438,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). The frequency of rs12255372 risk allele in gestational diabetes women
was significantly higher than that in euglycemic women (<U+03C7>² <U+2009>=<U+2009>8.96; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003)
and confers a risk for gestational diabetes mellitus (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.1, 95% CI 2.8-29,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0002; and OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.3, 95% CI 1.6-11.4, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003 based on dominant and
co-dominant model, respectively). The generalized linear model showed that low
beta function, high pre-gestational BMI and rs12255372 risk allele are
independently associated with gestational diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: The elevated GLP-1 levels in gestational diabetes women suggested
some abnormality in insulin secretion. The low ß-cell function, high
pre-gestational BMI and rs12255372 risk allele are risk factors independently
associated with the development of gestational diabetes.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24639413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e91790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091790. eCollection
2014.

Cross-sectional and longitudinal replication analyses of genome-wide association 
loci of type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese.

Zhao Q(1), Xiao J(2), He J(3), Zhang X(2), Hong J(2), Kong X(2), Mills KT(1),
Weng J(4), Jia W(5), Yang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China. 
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America; Department
of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United
States of America. (4)Sun Yat-Sen University Third Affiliated Hospital,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (5)Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

This study aimed to examine genomic loci of type 2 diabetes (T2D) initially
identified by genome-wide association studies in populations of European ancestry
for their associations with T2D and quantitative glycemic traits, as well as
their effects on longitudinal change in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and T2D
development, in the Chinese population. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP)
from 25 loci were genotyped in a large case-control sample of 10,001 subjects
(5,338 T2D cases and 4,663 controls) and a prospective cohort of 1,881 Chinese.
In the case-control sample, 8 SNPs in or near WFS1, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, CDC123,
HHEX, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, and MTNR1B were significantly associated with T2D (P<0.05). 
Thirteen SNPs were associated with quantitative glycemic traits. For example, the
most significant SNP, rs10811661 near CDKN2A/2B (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.11×10(-8) for T2D), was
also associated with 2-h glucose level of an oral glucose tolerance test
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.11×10(-3)) and insulinogenic index (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.71×10(-2)). In the cohort study,
individuals carrying more risk alleles of the replicated SNPs had greater FPG
increase and T2D incidence in a 7.5-year follow-up period, with each quartile
increase in the number of risk alleles being associated with a 0.06 mmol/l
greater increase in FPG (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03) and 19% higher odds of developing T2D
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.058). Our study identified the associations of several established
T2D-loci in Europeans with T2D and quantitative glycemic traits in the Chinese
population. The prospective data also suggest their potential role in the risk
prediction of T2D in the Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC3956742
PMID: 24637646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 18;289(16):11230-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.544999. Epub
2014 Mar 10.

Insulin receptor substrate 1/2 (IRS1/2) regulates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through
blocking autophagic degradation of dishevelled2.

Geng Y(1), Ju Y, Ren F, Qiu Y, Tomita Y, Tomoeda M, Kishida M, Wang Y, Jin L, Su 
F, Wei C, Jia B, Li Y, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Wnt signaling plays a pivotal role in cell proliferation, tissue homeostasis, and
tumorigenesis. Dishevelled (Dvl) is a central node of Wnt signaling. Insulin
receptor substrates (IRSs), as a critical component of insulin signaling, are
involved in cell proliferation, metabolism, and cancer development. In this
study, we report that IRS1/2 promotes Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by stabilizing
Dvl2. We found that IRS1/2 interacts with Dvl2. Overexpression of IRS1/2
increased the protein level of Dvl2 and promoted canonical Wnt signaling, as
evidenced by the increased T cell-specific factor 4 transcriptional activity and 
the up-regulation of expression of CYCLIN D1 and c-MYC, two Wnt target genes
critical for cell growth, whereas depletion of IRS1/2 reduced the level of Dvl2
and attenuated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Biochemical analyses revealed that IRS1/2
decreased Lys-63-linked ubiquitination of Dvl2 and stabilized Dvl2 protein via
suppressing its autophagy-mediated degradation. We further revealed that IRS1/2
blocks autophagy-induced formation of the Dvl2-p62/SQSTM1 complex, resulting in
disabled association of Dvl2 to autophagosomes. We demonstrated that IRS1/2
promoted the induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell
proliferation in response to Wnt stimulation, whereas depletion of Dvl2 impaired 
the IRS1/2-mediated EMT and cell growth. Our findings revealed that IRS1/2
promotes EMT and cell proliferation through stabilizing Dvl2.

PMCID: PMC4036261
PMID: 24616100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2014 May;12(4):210-9. doi: 10.1089/met.2014.0004. Epub 
2014 Mar 10.

Relationships between TCF7L2 genetic polymorphisms and polycystic ovary syndrome 
risk: a meta-analysis.

Shen WJ(1), Li TR, Hu YJ, Liu HB, Song M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Gynecology, The First Hospital of China Medical University ,
Shenyang, People's Republic of China .

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between
genetic polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
risk.
METHODS: The PubMed, Centralised Information Service for Complementary Medicine
(CISCOM), Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), Web 
of Science, Google Scholar, EBSCO, Cochrane Library, and Common Biorepository
Model (CBM) databases were searched for relevant articles published before
November 1st, 2013, without language restrictions. Meta-analysis was conducted
using the STATA 12.0 software. The relationships were evaluated by calculating
the pooled odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Seven
case-control studies with a total 2458 PCOS patients and 5109 healthy subjects'
met our inclusion criteria for qualitative data analysis. Two common
polymorphisms (rs7903146 C<U+2192>T and rs12255372 G<U+2192>T) in the TCF7L2 gene were
assessed.
RESULTS: The results of our meta-analysis suggested that TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms might be strongly correlated with an increased risk of PCOS (allele
model, OR=1.33, 95% CI=1.15-1.54, P<0.001; dominant model, OR=1.40, 95%
CI=1.12-1.75, P=0.003), especially for the rs7903146 C<U+2192>T polymorphism. A subgroup
analysis was done to investigate the effect of ethnicity on an individual's risk 
of PCOS. Our results revealed positive significant correlations between TCF7L2
genetic polymorphisms and an increased risk of PCOS among Caucasians (allele
model, OR=1.26, 95% CI=1.08-1.47, P=0.004; dominant model, OR=1.33, 95%
CI=1.00-1.76, P=0.046) and Asians (allele model, OR=2.02, 95% CI=1.42-2.89,
P<0.001; dominant model, OR=2.02, 95% CI=1.40-2.92, P<0.001), but not among
Africans (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide convincing evidence that TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms may contribute to susceptibility to PCOS, especially for the
rs7903146 C<U+2192>T polymorphism among Caucasians and Asians.

PMID: 24611738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e91264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091264. eCollection 
2014.

High frequency of fusion transcripts involving TCF7L2 in colorectal cancer: novel
fusion partner and splice variants.

Nome T(1), Hoff AM(1), Bakken AC(1), Rognum TO(2), Nesbakken A(3), Skotheim
RI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research, Norwegian
Radium Hospital - Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer
Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (2)University
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of forensic pathology and clinical forensic
medicine, Division for forensic medicine, The Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, Oslo, Norway. (3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Oslo
University Hospital-Aker, Oslo, Norway.

VTI1A-TCF7L2 was reported as a recurrent fusion gene in colorectal cancer (CRC), 
found to be expressed in three out of 97 primary cancers, and one cell line,
NCI-H508, where a genomic deletion joins the two genes [1]. To investigate this
fusion further, we analyzed high-throughput DNA and RNA sequencing data from
seven CRC cell lines, and identified the gene RP11-57H14.3 (ENSG00000225292) as a
novel fusion partner for TCF7L2. The fusion was discovered from both genome and
transcriptome data in the HCT116 cell line. By triplicate nested RT-PCR, we
tested both the novel fusion transcript and VTI1A-TCF7L2 for expression in a
series of 106 CRC tissues, 21 CRC cell lines, 14 normal colonic mucosa, and 20
normal tissues from miscellaneous anatomical sites. Altogether, 42% and 45% of
the CRC samples expressed VTI1A-TCF7L2 and TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3 fusion
transcripts, respectively. The fusion transcripts were both seen in 29% of the
normal colonic mucosa samples, and in 25% and 75% of the tested normal tissues
from other organs, revealing that the TCF7L2 fusion transcripts are neither
specific to cancer nor to the colon and rectum. Seven different splice variants
were detected for the VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion, of which three are novel. Four
different splice variants were detected for the TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3 fusion. In
conclusion, we have identified novel variants of VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion transcripts,
including a novel fusion partner gene, RP11-57H14.3, and demonstrated detectable 
levels in a large fraction of CRC samples, as well as in normal colonic mucosa
and other tissue types. We suggest that the fusion transcripts observed in a high
frequency of samples are transcription induced chimeras that are expressed at low
levels in most samples. The similar fusion transcripts induced by genomic
rearrangements observed in individual cancer cell lines may yet have oncogenic
potential as suggested in the original study by Bass et al.

PMCID: PMC3946716
PMID: 24608966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Endocrinology. 2014 May;155(5):1908-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2042. Epub 2014 Feb 
26.

Wnt-dependent T-cell factor-4 controls human etravillous trophoblast motility.

Meinhardt G(1), Haider S, Haslinger P, Proestling K, Fiala C, Pollheimer J,
Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine (G.M., S.H., P.H., J.P., 
M.K.), Reproductive Biology Unit, and Department of Gynecology (K.P.), Medical
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; and Gynmed Clinic (C.F.), A-1150
Vienna, Austria.

Formation of migratory extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) is critical for human
placentation and hence embryonic development. However, key regulatory growth
factors, hormones, and nuclear proteins controlling the particular
differentiation process remain poorly understood. Here, the role of the Wingless 
(Wnt)-dependent transcription factor T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) in proliferation and
motility was investigated using different trophoblast cell models.
Immunofluorescence of first-trimester placental tissues revealed induction of
TCF-4 and nuclear recruitment of its coactivator ß-catenin in nonproliferating
EVTs, whereas membrane-associated ß-catenin decreased upon differentiation. In
addition, EVTs expressed the TCF-4/ß-catenin coactivator Pygopus 2 as well as
repressors of the Groucho/transducin-like enhancer of split family. Western
blotting revealed Pygopus 2 expression and up-regulation of integrin a1 and
nuclear TCF-4 in purified first-trimester cytotrophoblasts (CTBs) differentiating
on fibronectin. Concomitantly, elevated TCF-4 mRNA, quantitated by real-time PCR,
and increased TCF-dependent luciferase reporter activity were noticed in EVTs of 
villous explant cultures and differentiated primary CTBs. Gene silencing using
specific small interfering RNA decreased TCF-4 transcript and protein levels,
TCF-dependent reporter activity as well as basal and Wnt3a-stimulated migration
of trophoblastic SGHPL-5 cells and primary CTBs through fibronectin-coated
transwells. In contrast, proliferation of SGHPL-5 cells and primary cells,
measured by cumulative cell numbers and 5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine labeling,
respectively, was not affected. Moreover, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of TCF-4
in primary CTBs diminished markers of the differentiated EVT, such as integrin a1
and a5, Snail1, and Notch2. In summary, the data suggest that Wnt/TCF-4-dependent
signaling could play a role in EVT differentiation promoting motility and
expression of promigratory genes.

PMID: 24605829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1004160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004160.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of human pancreatic islets from type 2
diabetic and non-diabetic donors identifies candidate genes that influence
insulin secretion.

Dayeh T(1), Volkov P(1), Salö S(1), Hall E(1), Nilsson E(1), Olsson AH(1),
Kirkpatrick CL(2), Wollheim CB(2), Eliasson L(3), Rönn T(1), Bacos K(1), Ling
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Diabetes, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, CRC, Malmö, Sweden. (2)Department of Cell
Physiology and Metabolism, University Medical Center, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Islet Cell Exocytosis, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, CRC, Malmö, Sweden.

Impaired insulin secretion is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Epigenetics
may affect disease susceptibility. To describe the human methylome in pancreatic 
islets and determine the epigenetic basis of T2D, we analyzed DNA methylation of 
479,927 CpG sites and the transcriptome in pancreatic islets from T2D and
non-diabetic donors. We provide a detailed map of the global DNA methylation
pattern in human islets, ß- and a-cells. Genomic regions close to the
transcription start site showed low degrees of methylation and regions further
away from the transcription start site such as the gene body, 3'UTR and
intergenic regions showed a higher degree of methylation. While CpG islands were 
hypomethylated, the surrounding 2 kb shores showed an intermediate degree of
methylation, whereas regions further away (shelves and open sea) were
hypermethylated in human islets, ß- and a-cells. We identified 1,649 CpG sites
and 853 genes, including TCF7L2, FTO and KCNQ1, with differential DNA methylation
in T2D islets after correction for multiple testing. The majority of the
differentially methylated CpG sites had an intermediate degree of methylation and
were underrepresented in CpG islands (~ 7%) and overrepresented in the open sea
(~ 60%). 102 of the differentially methylated genes, including CDKN1A, PDE7B,
SEPT9 and EXOC3L2, were differentially expressed in T2D islets. Methylation of
CDKN1A and PDE7B promoters in vitro suppressed their transcriptional activity.
Functional analyses demonstrated that identified candidate genes affect
pancreatic ß- and a-cells as Exoc3l silencing reduced exocytosis and
overexpression of Cdkn1a, Pde7b and Sept9 perturbed insulin and glucagon
secretion in clonal ß- and a-cells, respectively. Together, our data can serve as
a reference methylome in human islets. We provide new target genes with altered
DNA methylation and expression in human T2D islets that contribute to perturbed
insulin and glucagon secretion. These results highlight the importance of
epigenetics in the pathogenesis of T2D.

PMCID: PMC3945174
PMID: 24603685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 3;9(3):e86931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086931. eCollection 
2014.

Admixture mapping and subsequent fine-mapping suggests a biologically relevant
and novel association on chromosome 11 for type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

Jeff JM(1), Armstrong LL(2), Ritchie MD(3), Denny JC(4), Kho AN(5), Basford
MA(6), Wolf WA(7), Pacheco JA(8), Li R(9), Chisholm RL(8), Roden DM(10), Hayes
MG(11), Crawford DC(12).

Author information: 
(1)Charles Bronfman Institute of Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America. (2)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. (3)Center for System Genomics, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, 
United States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical
Pharmacology,Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America; Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee, United States of America. (5)Division of General Internal Medicine,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. (6)Office of Personalized Medicine, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (7)Division of Genetics,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(8)Center for Genetic Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (9)Office of Population 
Genomics, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America. (10)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical
Pharmacology,Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America; Office of Personalized Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (11)Division of
Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America; Center for 
Genetic Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America. (12)Center for Human Genetics Research,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex metabolic disease that disproportionately
affects African Americans. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
several loci that contribute to T2D in European Americans, but few studies have
been performed in admixed populations. We first performed a GWAS of 1,563 African
Americans from the Vanderbilt Genome-Electronic Records Project and Northwestern 
University NUgene Project as part of the electronic Medical Records and Genomics 
(eMERGE) network. We successfully replicate an association in TCF7L2, previously 
identified by GWAS in this African American dataset. We were unable to identify
novel associations at p<5.0×10(-8) by GWAS. Using admixture mapping as an
alternative method for discovery, we performed a genome-wide admixture scan that 
suggests multiple candidate genes associated with T2D. One finding, TCIRG1, is a 
T-cell immune regulator expressed in the pancreas and liver that has not been
previously implicated for T2D. We performed subsequent fine-mapping to further
assess the association between TCIRG1 and T2D in >5,000 African Americans. We
identified 13 independent associations between TCIRG1, CHKA, and ALDH3B1 genes on
chromosome 11 and T2D. Our results suggest a novel region on chromosome 11
identified by admixture mapping is associated with T2D in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC3940426
PMID: 24595071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jun;41(6):4063-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3275-6. Epub 2014
Feb 27.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism and clinical phenotype
in end-stage renal disease patients.

Buraczynska M(1), Zukowski P, Ksiazek P, Kuczmaszewska A, Janicka J, Zaluska W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for DNA Analysis and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of
Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Dr K. Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954, Lublin,
Poland, monika.buraczynska@umlub.pl.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been associated 
with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in different populations. Here we
investigated the potential association of the rs7903146 polymorphism in the
TCF7L2 gene with clinical profile of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients. We 
examined a cohort of 1065 ESRD patients with diabetic and non-diabetic renal
disease. The control group consisted of 924 healthy individuals. All subjects
were genotyped for the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism by polymerase
chain reaction. The genotype distribution and allele frequencies were
significantly different between ESRD patients and controls (p < 0.01). The OR for
the TT genotype was 2.81 (95% CI 2.08-3.79). Genotype and allele frequencies were
compared between subgroups of patients with different clinical phenotypes. The
frequency of the T allele was significantly higher in patients with diabetic
nephropathy versus non-diabetic renal disease (p = 0.007, OR 1.70, 95% CI
1.36-2.11). The statistically significant differences were demonstrated between
patients with and without cardiovascular disease, with the OR for T allele 1.57
(95% CI 1.31-1.90). The odds ratio for TT genotype was 2.38 (95% CI 1.62-3.51).
In our study the T allele of the rs7903146 SNP in the TCF7L2 gene confers the
risk of developing diabetic nephropathy. We described for the first time a strong
relationship between the TCF7L2 gene variant rs7903146 and cardiovascular disease
in end-stage renal disease patients.

PMCID: PMC4033800
PMID: 24574000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 8:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S8-S3. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

QChIPat: a quantitative method to identify distinct binding patterns for two
biological ChIP-seq samples in different experimental conditions.

Liu B, Yi J, Sv A, Lan X, Ma Y, Huang TH, Leone G, Jin VX.

BACKGROUND: Many computational programs have been developed to identify enriched 
regions for a single biological ChIP-seq sample. Given that many biological
questions are often asked to compare the difference between two different
conditions, it is important to develop new programs that address the comparison
of two biological ChIP-seq samples. Despite several programs designed to address 
this question, these programs suffer from some drawbacks, such as inability to
distinguish whether the identified differential enriched regions are indeed
significantly enriched, lack of distinguishing binding patterns, and neglect of
the normalization between samples.
RESULTS: In this study, we developed a novel quantitative method for comparing
two biological ChIP-seq samples, called QChIPat. Our method employs a new global 
normalization method: nonparametric empirical Bayes (NEB) correction
normalization, utilizes pre-defined enriched regions identified from
single-sample peak calling programs, uses statistical methods to define
differential enriched regions, then defines binding (histone modification)
pattern information for those differential enriched regions. Our program was
tested on a benchmark data: histone modifications data used by ChIPDiffs. It was 
then applied on two study cases: one to identify differential histone
modification sites for ChIP-seq of H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 data in AKT1-transfected 
MCF10A cells; the other to identify differential binding sites for ChIP-seq of
TCF7L2 data in MCF7 and PANC1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Several advantages of our program include: 1) it considers a control
(or input) experiment; 2) it incorporates a novel global normalization strategy: 
nonparametric empirical Bayes correction normalization; 3) it provides the
binding pattern information among different enriched regions. QChIPat is
implemented in R, Perl and C++, and has been tested under Linux. The R package is
available at http://motif.bmi.ohio-state.edu/QChIPat.

PMCID: PMC4042236
PMID: 24564479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(3):876-86. doi: 10.2337/dc13-1276.

The pharmacogenetics of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review.

Maruthur NM(1), Gribble MO, Bennett WL, Bolen S, Wilson LM, Balakrishnan P, Sahu 
A, Bass E, Kao WH, Clark JM.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Nisa M. Maruthur, maruthur@jhmi.edu.

OBJECTIVE: We performed a systematic review to identify which genetic variants
predict response to diabetes medications.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a search of electronic databases
(PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane Database) and a manual search to identify original,
longitudinal studies of the effect of diabetes medications on incident diabetes, 
HbA1c, fasting glucose, and postprandial glucose in prediabetes or type 2
diabetes by genetic variation. Two investigators reviewed titles, abstracts, and 
articles independently. Two investigators abstracted data sequentially and
evaluated study quality independently. Quality evaluations were based on the
Strengthening the Reporting of Genetic Association Studies guidelines and Human
Genome Epidemiology Network guidance.
RESULTS: Of 7,279 citations, we included 34 articles (N = 10,407) evaluating
metformin (n = 14), sulfonylureas (n = 4), repaglinide (n = 8), pioglitazone (n =
3), rosiglitazone (n = 4), and acarbose (n = 4). Studies were not standalone
randomized controlled trials, and most evaluated patients with diabetes.
Significant medication-gene interactions for glycemic outcomes included 1)
metformin and the SLC22A1, SLC22A2, SLC47A1, PRKAB2, PRKAA2, PRKAA1, and STK11
loci; 2) sulfonylureas and the CYP2C9 and TCF7L2 loci; 3) repaglinide and the
KCNJ11, SLC30A8, NEUROD1/BETA2, UCP2, and PAX4 loci; 4) pioglitazone and the
PPARG2 and PTPRD loci; 5) rosiglitazone and the KCNQ1 and RBP4 loci; and 5)
acarbose and the PPARA, HNF4A, LIPC, and PPARGC1A loci. Data were insufficient
for meta-analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We found evidence of pharmacogenetic interactions for metformin,
sulfonylureas, repaglinide, thiazolidinediones, and acarbose consistent with
their pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. While high-quality controlled
studies with prespecified analyses are still lacking, our results bring the
promise of personalized medicine in diabetes one step closer to fruition.

PMCID: PMC3931386
PMID: 24558078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2014 Feb;122(2):71-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1363231. 
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation variations caused by chronic
glucolipotoxicity in beta-cells.

Hu Y(1), Xu XH(1), He K(1), Zhang LL(1), Wang SK(2), Pan YQ(3), He BS(3), Feng
TT(1), Mao XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Science and Education,
Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. 
(3)Central Laboratory, Nanjing First Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

There is a growing body of literature suggesting the role of interactions between
genes and the environment in development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
However, the interplay between environment and genetic in developing and
progressing T2MD is not fully understood. To determine the effects of
high-glucose-lipid on the status of DNA methylation in beta cells, and clarify
the mechanism of glucolipotoxicity on beta-cell deterioration, the DNA
methylation profile was detected in beta-cells cultured with high-glucose-lipid
medium.We utilized a high throughput NimbleGen RN34 CpG Island & Promoter
Microarray to investigate the DNA methylation profile in beta-cells cultured with
high-glucose-lipid medium. To validate the results of microarray, the
immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) PCR was used to test the methylation status of some
selected genes. The mRNA and protein expression of insulin and Tcf7l2 in these
cells were quantified by RT-PCR and western blot, respectively.We have identified
a lot of loci which experienced aberrant DNA methylation in beta-cells cultured
with high-glucose-lipid medium. The results of MeDIP PCR were consistency to the 
microarray. An opposite regulation in transcription and translation of Tcf7l2
gene was found. Furthermore, the insulin mRNA and protein expression in
beta-cells also decreased after cultured with high-glucose-lipid medium compared 
with the control cells.We conclude that chronic glucolipotoxicity could induce
aberrant DNA methylation of some genes and may affect these genes expression in
beta-cells, which might contribute to beta-cell function failure in T2DM and be
helpful to explain, at least partially, the mechanism of glucolipotoxicity on
beta-cells deterioration.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24554506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Sci China Life Sci. 2014 Mar;57(3):340-55. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4579-9. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Transcriptomic analysis reveals key regulators of mammogenesis and the
pregnancy-lactation cycle.

Zhou Y(1), Gong W, Xiao J, Wu J, Pan L, Li X, Wang X, Wang W, Hu S, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Genome and Precision Medicine Technologies, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing, China.

An organ unique to mammals, the mammary gland develops 90% of its mass after
birth and experiences the pregnancylactation-involution cycle (PL cycle) during
reproduction. To understand mammogenesis at the transcriptomic level and using a 
ribo-minus RNA-seq protocol, we acquired greater than 50 million reads each for
the mouse mammary gland during pregnancy (day 12 of pregnancy), lactation (day 14
of lactation), and involution (day 7 of involution). The pregnancy-, lactation-
and involution-related sequencing reads were assembled into 17344, 10160, and
13739 protein-coding transcripts and 1803, 828, and 1288 non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs), respectively. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were defined in the
three samples, which comprised 4843 DEGs (749 up-regulated and 4094
down-regulated) from pregnancy to lactation and 4926 DEGs (4706 up-regulated and 
220 down-regulated) from lactation to involution. Besides the obvious and
substantive up- and down-regulation of the DEGs, we observe that lysosomal
enzymes were highly expressed and that their expression coincided with milk
secretion. Further analysis of transcription factors such as Trps1, Gtf2i,
Tcf7l2, Nupr1, Vdr, Rb1, and Aebp1, and ncRNAs such as mir-125b, Let7, mir-146a, 
and mir-15 has enabled us to identify key regulators in mammary gland development
and the PL cycle.

PMID: 24554470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 4;111(9):3472-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309342111.
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Shp2/MAPK signaling controls goblet/paneth cell fate decisions in the intestine.

Heuberger J(1), Kosel F, Qi J, Grossmann KS, Rajewsky K, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction in Development and Cancer and Immune
Regulation and Cancer, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany.

In the development of the mammalian intestine, Notch and Wnt/ß-catenin signals
control stem cell maintenance and their differentiation into absorptive and
secretory cells. Mechanisms that regulate differentiation of progenitors into the
three secretory lineages, goblet, paneth, or enteroendocrine cells, are not fully
understood. Using conditional mutagenesis in mice, we observed that Shp2-mediated
MAPK signaling determines the choice between paneth and goblet cell fates and
also affects stem cells, which express the leucine-rich repeat-containing
receptor 5 (Lgr5). Ablation of the tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in the intestinal
epithelium reduced MAPK signaling and led to a reduction of goblet cells while
promoting paneth cell development. Conversely, conditional mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase 1 (Mek1) activation rescued the Shp2 phenotype, promoted
goblet cell and inhibited paneth cell generation. The Shp2 mutation also expanded
Lgr5+ stem cell niches, which could be restricted by activated Mek1 signaling.
Changes of Lgr5+ stem cell quantities were accompanied by alterations of paneth
cells, indicating that Shp2/MAPK signaling might affect stem cell niches directly
or via paneth cells. Remarkably, inhibition of MAPK signaling in intestinal
organoids and cultured cells changed the relative abundance of Tcf4 isoforms and 
by this, promoted Wnt/ß-catenin activity. The data thus show that Shp2-mediated
MAPK signaling controls the choice between goblet and paneth cell fates by
regulating Wnt/ß-catenin activity.

PMCID: PMC3948231
PMID: 24550486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Mar;103(3):e3-6. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.051. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism rs7903146 is associated 
with stroke in type 2 diabetes patients with long disease duration.

Choi HJ(1), Lee DH(1), Jeon HJ(1), Kim DS(2), Lee YH(2), Oh T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University College of
Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Chungbuk
National University College of Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University College of
Medicine, Cheongju Si, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
tgohkjs@chungbuk.ac.kr.

Associations between TCF7L2 SNP and diabetic complications and diabetes-related
factors were investigated. Subjects with rs7903146 variant had significantly
higher prevalence of stroke (24.1% vs. 11.1%; P=0.039) among subjects exhibiting 
a long disease duration (=10 years). In conclusion, the TCF7L2 SNP variant may
confer a higher risk of stroke in diabetic patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24529562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Jan 9;2014:645975. doi: 10.1155/2014/645975.
eCollection 2014.

Treatment with Rhizoma Dioscoreae extract has protective effect on osteopenia in 
ovariectomized rats.

Zhang Z(1), Xiang L(1), Bai D(1), Fu X(2), Wang W(1), Li Y(1), Liu H(1), Pan
J(1), Li Y(1), Xiao GG(3), Ju D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Theory, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 
100700, China. (2)Clinical Medical College of Chinese and Western Medicine,
Shaanxi University of Chinese Medicine, Xi'an 712046, China. (3)Functional
Genomics and Proteomics Laboratory, Osteoporosis Research Center, Creighton
University Medical Center, 601 North 30th Street, Suite 6730, Omaha, NE 68131,
USA. (4)Institute of Basic Theory, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100700, China ; Institute of Basic Theory, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, No. 16 Nanxiaojie, Dongzhimennei, Beijing 100700, China.

The aims of this study were to evaluate the osteoprotective effect of aqueous
extract from Rhizoma Dioscoreae (RDE) on rats with ovariectomy- (OVX-) induced
osteopenia. Our results show that RDE could inhibit bone loss of OVX rats after a
12-week treatment. The microarray analysis showed that 68 genes were upregulated 
and that 100 genes were downregulated in femurs of the RDE group rats compared to
those in the OVX group. The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed that several 
downregulated genes had the potential to code for proteins that were involved in 
the Wnt/ ß -catenin signaling pathway (Sost, Lrp6, Tcf7l2, and Alpl) and the
RANKL/RANK signaling pathway (Map2k6 and Nfatc4). These results revealed that the
mechanism for an antiosteopenic effect of RDE might lie in the synchronous
inhibitory effects on both the bone formation and the bone resorption, which is
associated with modulating the Wnt/ ß -catenin signaling and the RANKL/RANK
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3913014
PMID: 24526913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Nov;22(11):1243-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.17. Epub 2014 Feb
12.

Redundant enhancers and causal variants in the TCF7L2 gene.

Ruiz-Narváez EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Slone Epidemiology Center at Boston University, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA.

PMCID: PMC4200428
PMID: 24518834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Gene. 2013 Oct 26. pii: S0378-1119(13)01448-0. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.039.
[Epub ahead of print]

The Adiponectin Variants Contribute to the Genetic Background of Type 2 Diabetes 
in Turkish Population.

Arikoglu H(1), Ozdemir H(1), Kaya DE(1), Ipekci SH(2), Arslan A(3), Kayis SA(4), 
Gonen MS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Konya, 
Turkey. (2)Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology,
Konya, Turkey. (3)Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey. (4)Selcuk University, Faculty of Agriculture,
Department of Animal Science, Biometry-Genetics Unit, Konya, Turkey. (5)Necmeddin
Erbakan University, Meram Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology,
Konya, Turkey.

Adiponectin, an adipose tissue specific protein encoded by the Adiponectin gene, 
modulates insulin sensitivity and plays an important role in regulating energy
homeostasis. Many studies have shown that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in the Adiponectin gene are associated with low plasma adiponectin levels,
insulin resistance and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus. The aim of 
the present study was to evaluate the contribution of the Adiponectin gene
polymorphisms in genetic background of type 2 diabetes in a Turkish population.
In total, 169 unrelated and non-obese diabetic patients and 119 age- and
BMI-matched non-diabetic individuals with no family history of diabetes were
enrolled in this study. We detected a significant association between type 2
diabetes and two SNPs: SNP -11391G>A, which is located in the promoter region of 
the Adiponectin gene, and SNP +276G>T, which is found in intron 2 of the gene
(P<0.05). The silence SNP G15G (+45T>G) in exon 1 and SNP +349A>G in intron 2
also showed a weak association with type 2 diabetes (P=0.06 and P=0.07,
respectively), while SNPs -3971A>G in intron 1 and Y111H, R112C and H241P in exon
3 showed no association (P>0.05). In conclusion, these findings suggest that
Adiponectin gene polymorphisms might be effective on susceptibility for type 2
diabetes development which emerged from the interactions between multiple genes, 
variants and environmental factors.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513330  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


197. Springerplus. 2014 Jan 22;3:41. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-41. eCollection 2014.

Role of the single nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 of TCF7L2 in inducing
nonsense-mediated decay.

Nicod N(1), Pradas-Juni M(1), Gomis R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory, Hospital Clinic, University of
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Rosselló 153, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 (C/T), located in 
intron 4 of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), has been associated 
with an increased risk of developing Type 2 Diabetes, although the molecular
mechanism remain elusive. The TCF7L2 gene is alternatively spliced but an
association between genotype and splice variants has not been shown convincingly.
We hypothesized that a yet unknown extra exon, containing either the C or T
genotype of the SNP rs7903146, could introduce a premature stop codon and
consequently result in nonsense-mediated decay (NMD).
FINDINGS: Running the sequences C and T of the SNP region in different servers we
found that the two alleles could display differential recognition by splicing
factors. The C variant showed the possible inclusion of an unknown exon. This
unknown exon contained a stop codon and thus could induce NMD. We then determined
that the splicing pattern in isolated mouse islets and MIN6 cells was similar to 
that in human pancreatic islets. Therefore, we used MIN6 cells to study the
splicing of human intron 4: two mini-genes of intron 4 containing either the C/C 
genotype or the T/T genotype were transfected into MIN6 cells. Our constructs
were spliced normally, excluding intron 4, but we did not observe the presence of
an extra exon with either construct.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that an extra exon could theoretically exist, although we
were not able to capture it in our model. A better model is needed to determine
whether a theoretical extra exon can induce NMD.

PMCID: PMC3909145
PMID: 24498581  [PubMed]


198. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan 30;10(1):e1004102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004102.
eCollection 2014.

Comprehensive functional annotation of 77 prostate cancer risk loci.

Hazelett DJ(1), Rhie SK(1), Gaddis M(2), Yan C(1), Lakeland DL(3), Coetzee SG(4);
Ellipse/GAME-ON consortium; Practical consortium, Henderson BE(5), Noushmehr
H(4), Cozen W(6), Kote-Jarai Z(7), Eeles RA(8), Easton DF(9), Haiman CA(5), Lu
W(10), Farnham PJ(2), Coetzee GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology and Preventive Medicine, Norris Cancer Center,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (3)Sonny Astani Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (4)Department of Genetics, University of
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. (5)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris
Cancer Center, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. (6)USC Keck School of Medicine,
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. (7)The Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. (8)The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
United Kingdom ; Royal Marsden National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust,
London and Sutton, United Kingdom. (9)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revolutionized the field of cancer
genetics, but the causal links between increased genetic risk and
onset/progression of disease processes remain to be identified. Here we report
the first step in such an endeavor for prostate cancer. We provide a
comprehensive annotation of the 77 known risk loci, based upon highly correlated 
variants in biologically relevant chromatin annotations--we identified 727 such
potentially functional SNPs. We also provide a detailed account of possible
protein disruption, microRNA target sequence disruption and regulatory response
element disruption of all correlated SNPs at r(2) = 0.88%. 88% of the 727 SNPs
fall within putative enhancers, and many alter critical residues in the response 
elements of transcription factors known to be involved in prostate biology. We
define as risk enhancers those regions with enhancer chromatin biofeatures in
prostate-derived cell lines with prostate-cancer correlated SNPs. To aid the
identification of these enhancers, we performed genomewide ChIP-seq for
H3K27-acetylation, a mark of actively engaged enhancers, as well as the
transcription factor TCF7L2. We analyzed in depth three variants in risk
enhancers, two of which show significantly altered androgen sensitivity in LNCaP 
cells. This includes rs4907792, that is in linkage disequilibrium (r(2) = 0.91)
with an eQTL for NUDT11 (on the X chromosome) in prostate tissue, and rs10486567,
the index SNP in intron 3 of the JAZF1 gene on chromosome 7. Rs4907792 is within 
a critical residue of a strong consensus androgen response element that is
interrupted in the protective allele, resulting in a 56% decrease in its androgen
sensitivity, whereas rs10486567 affects both NKX3-1 and FOXA-AR motifs where the 
risk allele results in a 39% increase in basal activity and a 28% fold-increase
in androgen stimulated enhancer activity. Identification of such enhancer
variants and their potential target genes represents a preliminary step in
connecting risk to disease process.

PMCID: PMC3907334
PMID: 24497837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Mar;103(3):e40-3. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.040. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Gender-dependent associations of CDKN2A/2B, KCNJ11, POLI, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2
variants with type 2 diabetes in (North African) Tunisian Arabs.

Turki A(1), Al-Zaben GS(2), Khirallah M(3), Marmouch H(4), Mahjoub T(1), Almawi
WY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Biology and Genetics of Hematological and Autoimmune
diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir,
Tunisia. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, 
Bahrain. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir,
Tunisia. (4)Department of Endocrinology, CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir,
Tunisia. (5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, 
Bahrain. Electronic address: wassim@agu.edu.bh.

We investigated the impact of gender on T2DM association with confirmed
susceptibility loci. CDKN2A/2B rs10811661, KCNJ11 rs5219, and TCF7L2 rs7903146
were associated with T2DM in females, while POLI rs488846 was associated with
T2DM among males; the association of SLC30A8 rs13266634 and TCF7L2 rs4506565,
rs12243326, and rs12255372 with T2DM was gender-independent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24485399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1687-97. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1517.
Epub 2014 Jan 27.

A functional germline variant in GLI1 implicates hedgehog signaling in clinical
outcome of stage II and III colon carcinoma patients.

Szkandera J(1), Pichler M, Absenger G, Stotz M, Weissmueller M, Samonigg H,
Asslaber M, Lax S, Leitner G, Winder T, Renner W, Gerger A.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Clinical Oncology, Department of Medicine; 
Research Unit: Genetic Epidemiology and Pharmacogenetics, Division of Clinical
Oncology; Institute of Pathology; Clinical Institute of Medical and Laboratory
Diagnostics, Medical University of Graz; Department of Pathology, General
Hospital Graz West, Graz; Department of Pathology, General Hospital of Leoben,
Leoben, Austria; and Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Zuerich,
Zuerich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: Cumulating evidence indicates that germline variants in the Wnt, Notch, 
and Hedgehog pathways are involved in colon carcinoma progression and metastasis.
We investigated germline polymorphisms in a comprehensive panel of Wnt, Notch,
and Hedgehog pathway genes to predict time to recurrence (TTR) and overall
survival in patients with stage II and III colon carcinoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 742 consecutively collected patients with stage
II and III colon carcinoma were included in this retrospective study. Genomic DNA
was analyzed for 18 germline polymorphisms in Wnt, Notch, and Hedgehog pathway
genes (SFRP, DKK 2 and 3, AXIN2, APC, MYC, TCF7L2, NOTCH2, and GLI1) by TaqMan
5'-exonuclease assays.
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, the homozygous mutant variant of GLI1 rs2228226 
G>C was significantly associated with decreased TTR in a recessive genetic model 
after adjustment for multiple testing [HR = 2.35; confidence interval (95% CI),
1.48-3.74; P < 0.001] and remained significant in multivariate analysis including
clinical stage, lymphovascular-, vascular-, and perineural-invasion (HR = 2.43;
CI 95%, 1.52-3.87; P < 0.001). In subanalyses, the association was limited to
patients with surgery alone (HR = 3.21; CI 95%, 1.59-6.49; P = 0.001), in
contrast with patients with adjuvant chemotherapy (HR = 0.82; CI 95%, 0.35-1.95; 
P = 0.657). When the subgroup of patients with "high-risk" GLI1 rs2228226 C/C
genotype was analyzed, no benefit of adjuvant 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy
could be found.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study identifying GLI1 rs2228226 G>C as an
independent prognostic marker in patients with stage II and III colon carcinoma. 
Prospective studies are warranted to validate our findings.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24470513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Feb;103(2):328-37. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.016. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Genetic variants for type 2 diabetes and new-onset cancer in Chinese with type 2 
diabetes.

Ma RC(1), So WY(2), Tam CH(3), Luk AO(3), Ho JS(3), Wang Y(3), Lam VK(3), Lee
HM(3), Kong AP(3), Tong PC(3), Xu G(4), Chow CC(3), Ng MC(3), Yang XL(3), Chan
JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; Hong Kong Institute
of Diabetes and Obesity, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Lee Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Electronic address: rcwma@cuhk.edu.hk. (2)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, 
New Territories, Hong Kong. Electronic address: wingyeeso@cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. (4)Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and
Obesity, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Lee Ka Shing Institute of
Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of cancer. This study
aimed to evaluate associations between recently reported type 2 diabetes (T2D)
susceptibility genetic variants and cancer risk in a prospective cohort of
Chinese patients with T2D.
METHODS: Seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8,
CDKN2A/B, HHEX and TCF7L2, all identified from genome-wide association studies of
T2D, were genotyped in 5900 T2D patients [age mean ± SD = 57 ± 13 years, % males 
= 46] without any known cancer at baseline. Associations between new-onset of
cancer and SNPs were tested by Cox proportional hazard models with adjustment of 
conventional risk factors.
RESULTS: During the mean follow-up period of 8.5 ± 3.3 years, 429 patients (7.3%)
developed cancer. Of the T2D-related SNPs, the G-alleles of HHEX rs7923837
(hazard ratio [HR] (95% C.I.) = 1.34 (1.08-1.65); P = 6.7 ×10(-3) under dominant 
model) and TCF7L2 rs290481 (HR (95% C.I.) = 1.16 (1.01-1.33); P = 0.040 under
additive model) were positively associated with cancer risk, while the G-allele
of CDKAL1 rs7756992 was inversely associated (HR (95% C.I.) = 0.80 (0.65-1.00); P
= 0.048 under recessive model). The risk alleles of these significant SNPs
exhibited combined effect on increasing cancer risk (per-allele HR (95% C.I.) =
1.25 (1.12-1.39); P = 4.8 × 10(-5)). The adjusted cancer risk was 2.41 (95% C.I. 
1.23-4.69) for patients with four risk alleles comparing to patients without risk
allele.
CONCLUSIONS: T2D-related variants HHEX rs7923837, TCF7L2 rs290481 and CDKAL1
rs7756992 increased cancer risk in patients with diabetes.
IMPACT: Our findings provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of cancer in
diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24468095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Diabetologia. 2014 Apr;57(4):785-96. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3154-z. Epub 2014
Jan 26.

Alternative human liver transcripts of TCF7L2 bind to the gluconeogenesis
regulator HNF4a at the protein level.

Neve B(1), Le Bacquer O, Caron S, Huyvaert M, Leloire A, Poulain-Godefroy O,
Lecoeur C, Pattou F, Staels B, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), Lille, France,
bernadette.neve@good.ibl.fr.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Gene polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are associated with increased risk 
of type 2 diabetes and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) plays a role in
hepatic glucose metabolism. We therefore addressed the impact of TCF7L2 isoforms 
on hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and the regulation of gluconeogenesis
genes.
METHODS: Liver TCF7L2 transcripts were analysed by quantitative PCR in 33
non-diabetic and 31 type 2 diabetic obese individuals genotyped for TCF7L2
rs7903146. To analyse transcriptional regulation by TCF7L2, small interfering RNA
transfection, luciferase reporter and co-immunoprecipitation assays were
performed in human hepatoma HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: In livers of diabetic compared with normoglycaemic individuals, five
C-terminal TCF7L2 transcripts showed increased expression. The type 2 diabetes
risk allele of rs7903146 positively correlated with TCF7L2 expression in livers
from normoglycaemic individuals only. In HepG2 cells, transcript and TCF7L2
protein levels were increased upon incubation in high glucose and insulin. Of the
exon 13 transcripts, six were increased in a glucose dose-responsive manner.
TCF7L2 transcriptionally regulated 29 genes related to glucose metabolism,
including glucose-6-phosphatase. In cultured HepG2 cells, TCF7L2 did not regulate
HNF4<U+0391> and FOXO1 transcription, but did affect HNF4a protein expression. The
TCF7L2 isoforms T6 and T8 (without exon 13 and with exon 15/14, respectively)
specifically interacted with HNF4a.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The different levels of expression of alternative
C-terminal TCF7L2 transcripts in HepG2 cells, in livers of normoglycaemic
individuals carrying the rs7901346 type 2 diabetes risk allele and in livers of
diabetic individuals suggest that these transcripts play a role in the
pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. We also report for the first time a protein
interaction in HepG2 cells between HNF4a and the T6 and T8 isoforms of TCF7L2,
which suggests a distinct role for these specific alternative transcripts.

PMID: 24463962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Pharmacogenomics. 2014 Feb;15(2):235-49. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.234.

Pancreatic gene variants potentially associated with dipeptidyl peptidase-4
inhibitor treatment response in Type 2 diabetes.

Jamaluddin JL(1), Huri HZ, Vethakkan SR, Mustafa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

In the adult pancreas, the expression of the genes PAX4, KCNQ1, TCF7L2, KCNJ11,
ABCC8, MTNR1B and WFS1 are mainly restricted to ß cells to maintain glucose
homeostasis. We have identified these genes as the main regulators of
incretin-mediated actions, and therefore they may potentially influence the
response of DPP-4 inhibitors. This review represents the first detailed
exploration of pancreatic ß-cell genes and their variant mechanisms, which could 
potentially affect the response of DPP-4 inhibitors in Type 2 diabetes. We have
focused on the signaling pathways of these genes to understand their roles in
gastrointestinal incretin-mediated effects; and finally, we sought to associate
gene mechanisms with their Type 2 diabetes risk variants to predict the responses
of DPP-4 inhibitors for this disease.

PMID: 24444412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;99(3):E484-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3962. Epub
2014 Jan 13.

The postprandial chylomicron triacylglycerol response to dietary fat in healthy
male adults is significantly explained by a combination of single nucleotide
polymorphisms in genes involved in triacylglycerol metabolism.

Desmarchelier C(1), Martin JC, Planells R, Gastaldi M, Nowicki M, Goncalves A,
Valéro R, Lairon D, Borel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), Unité Mixte de Recherche
(UMR) INRA1260, F-13005, Marseille, France; Inserm, UMR_S 1062, F-13005,
Marseille, France; and Aix-Marseille Université, Nutrition, Obésité et Risques
Thrombotiques, F-13005, Marseille, France.

CONTEXT: The postprandial chylomicron (CM) triacylglycerol (TG) response to
dietary fat, which is positively associated with atherosclerosis and
cardiovascular disease risk, displays a high interindividual variability. This is
assumed to be due, at least partly, to polymorphisms in genes involved in lipid
metabolism. Existing studies have focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), resulting in only a low explained variability.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify a combination of SNPs associated with the
postprandial CM TG response.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: Thirty-three healthy male volunteers were subjected to 
4 standardized fat tolerance test meals (to correct for intraindividual
variability) and genotyped using whole-genome microarrays. The plasma CM TG
concentration was measured at regular interval times after each meal. The
association of SNPs in or near candidate genes (126 genes representing 6225 SNPs)
with the postprandial CM TG concentration (0-8 h areas under the curve averaged
for the 4 test meals) was assessed by partial least squares regression, a
multivariate statistical approach.
RESULTS: Data obtained allowed us to generate a validated significant model (P = 
1.3 × 10(-7)) that included 42 SNPs in 23 genes (ABCA1, APOA1, APOA5, APOB, BET1,
CD36, COBLL1, ELOVL5, FRMD5, GPAM, INSIG2, IRS1, LDLR, LIPC, LPL, LYPLAL1, MC4R, 
NAT2, PARK2, SLC27A5, SLC27A6, TCF7L2, and ZNF664) and explained 88% of the
variance. In 39 of these SNPs, univariate analysis showed that subjects with
different genotypes exhibited significantly different (q < .05) postprandial CM
TG responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Using a multivariate approach, we report a combination of SNPs that 
explains a significant part of the variability in the postprandial CM TG
response.

PMID: 24423365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Chin Med. 2014 Jan 14;9(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1749-8546-9-3.

Effects of a novel curcumin derivative on insulin synthesis and secretion in
streptozotocin-treated rat pancreatic islets in vitro.

Aziz MT, El-Asmar MF, Rezq AM, Wassef MA, Fouad H(1), Roshdy NK, Ahmed HH, Rashed
LA, Sabry D, Taha FM, Hassouna A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, POB
11562, Cairo, Egypt. hananfouadbostamy24@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Hyperglycemia induces activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
pathway, which suppresses insulin gene expression and reduces DNA binding of
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor (PDX)-1. This study aims to investigate
the effects of a novel curcumin derivative (NCD) on JNK signaling pathway on
insulin synthesis and secretion in streptozotocin (STZ)-treated rat pancreatic
islets in vitro.
METHODS: Isolated rat pancreatic islets were divided into five groups: untreated 
control group; group treated with NCD (10 µM); group exposed to STZ (5 mM); group
treated with NCD (10 µM) and then exposed to STZ (5 mM); and group exposed to STZ
(5 mM) and then treated with NCD (10 µM). The pancreatic islets from all groups
were used for DNA fragmentation assays and quantitative assessments of the JNK,
Pdx1, glucose transporter-2 (GLUT2), heme oxygenase (HO)-1, transcription factor 
7-like 2 (TCF7L2), and glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 gene expression levels. The 
intracellular calcium, zinc, and the phosphorylated and total JNK protein levels 
were assessed. The insulin (secreted/total) and C-peptide levels were examined in
islet culture medium.
RESULTS: NCD protected pancreatic islets against STZ-induced DNA damage, improved
total insulin (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), secreted insulin (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), and C-peptide levels
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), normalized mRNA expressions of insulin, Pdx1, and GLUT2
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001), and significantly elevated calcium and zinc levels (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001).
All effects were significant when islets were treated with NCD before STZ
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05). JNK gene overexpression and JNK protein levels induced by STZ were
significantly inhibited after NCD treatment of islets ( P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001). NCD-treated 
islets showed significantly elevated gene expressions of HO-1, TCF7L2, and GLP-1 
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001), and these upregulated gene expressions were more significantly
elevated with NCD treatment before STZ than after STZ (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: NCD improved insulin synthesis and secretion in vitro in isolated
pancreatic islets treated with STZ through inhibition of the JNK pathway,
up-regulation of the gene expressions of HO-1, TCF7L2, and GLP-1 and enhancing
effects on calcium and zinc levels.

PMCID: PMC3896850
PMID: 24422903  [PubMed]


206. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2080-2. doi: 10.1002/hep.27000. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Deciphering liver zonation: new insights into the ß-catenin, Tcf4, and HNF4a
triad.

Berasain C(1), Avila MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Centro de Investigación Médica
Aplocada (CIMA), Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Clínica
Universidad de Navarra, 31008, Pamplona, Spain.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2344-57.

PMID: 24407883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Mar;33(3):581-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1620. Epub 2014 Jan
8.

Revealing the molecular mechanism of colorectal cancer by establishing
LGALS3-related protein-protein interaction network and identifying signaling
pathways.

Han L(1), Wu Z(2), Zhao Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Economics Division, School of Social and International Studies, University of 
Bradford, Bradford BD7 1DP, UK. (2)Department of Oncology, Chongqing Cancer
Institute, Shapingba, Chongqing 400030, P.R. China.

LGALS3 plays a role in colorectal cancer, however, the detailed molecular
mechanism remains to be determined, while signaling pathways provide valuable
information for understanding the underlying mechanism of the cancer. The purpose
of this study was to explore the roles of LGALS3 and signaling pathways in the
pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. In this study, microarray data GSE8671 were
downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database and differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) in colorectal cancer were identified by Significant Analysis of
Microarray. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed on the top 500 upregulated 
and 500 downregulated genes using DAVID. The signaling pathways were predicted by
the signaling pathway impact analysis (SPIA) with pGFdr<0.05 and transcription
factors were identified by TFats. The LGALS3-related protein-protein interaction 
network (PPI) was established by STRING and Cytoscape. In total, 6,593
upregulated and 5,897 downregulated DEGs were identified and 41 downregulated
genes, including CLND8 and CLND23 were enriched in cell adhesion. In addition, 21
pathways, such as the cell cycle, p53 signaling pathway and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling
pathway, were selected. MYC and TCF7L2 were found to be activated while FOXO3 was
suppressed in colorectal cancer. Eight downregulated and 10 upregulated genes
were identified in the LGALS3 PPI network. Results of the present study shed new 
light on the molecular mechanism of colorectal cancer and these findings have the
potential to be used in colorectal cancer treatment.

PMID: 24398765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e83093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083093.
eCollection 2013.

Use of net reclassification improvement (NRI) method confirms the utility of
combined genetic risk score to predict type 2 diabetes.

Tam CH(1), Ho JS(1), Wang Y(1), Lam VK(1), Lee HM(1), Jiang G(1), Lau ES(1), Kong
AP(2), Fan X(3), Woo JL(1), Tsui SK(4), Ng MC(5), So WY(2), Chan JC(2), Ma RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China ; Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes
and Obesity, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China ; Li Ka
Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (4)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (5)Center for Genomics and
Personalized Medicine Research, Center for Diabetes Research, Wake Forest School 
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified more than 70
novel loci for type 2 diabetes (T2D), some of which have been widely replicated
in Asian populations. In this study, we investigated their individual and
combined effects on T2D in a Chinese population.
METHODOLOGY: We selected 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in T2D genes
relating to beta-cell function validated in Asian populations and genotyped them 
in 5882 Chinese T2D patients and 2569 healthy controls. A combined genetic score 
(CGS) was calculated by summing up the number of risk alleles or weighted by the 
effect size for each SNP under an additive genetic model. We tested for
associations by either logistic or linear regression analysis for T2D and
quantitative traits, respectively. The contribution of the CGS for predicting T2D
risk was evaluated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis and net
reclassification improvement (NRI).
RESULTS: We observed consistent and significant associations of IGF2BP2, WFS1,
CDKAL1, SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, TCF7L2 and KCNQ1 (8.5×10(-18)<P<8.5×10(-3)), as 
well as nominal associations of NOTCH2, JAZF1, KCNJ11 and HNF1B (0.05<P<0.1) with
T2D risk, which yielded odds ratios ranging from 1.07 to 2.09. The 8 significant 
SNPs exhibited joint effect on increasing T2D risk, fasting plasma glucose and
use of insulin therapy as well as reducing HOMA-ß, BMI, waist circumference and
younger age of diagnosis of T2D. The addition of CGS marginally increased AUC
(2%) but significantly improved the predictive ability on T2D risk by 11.2% and
11.3% for unweighted and weighted CGS, respectively using the NRI approach
(P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In a Chinese population, the use of a CGS of 8 SNPs modestly but
significantly improved its discriminative ability to predict T2D above and beyond
that attributed to clinical risk factors (sex, age and BMI).

PMCID: PMC3869744
PMID: 24376643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Adv Gerontol. 2014;27(4):704-9.

[Frequency of some diseases and conditions in geriatric patients with coronary
heart disease and various genotypes of transcription factor 7-like 2 protein].

[Article in Russian]

Khoroshinina LP, Tur'eva LV, Glotov OS, Poliakova IV, Baranov VS.

In 2009-2010, 98 patients diagnosed with the coronary heart disease, but without 
the expressed metabolic violations, decompensated conditions and diseases were
surveyed. Patients of 60-90 years were divided by age into two groups: younger
than 75 years--47 people; 75 years and older--51; there were 41 women and 57 men;
the ratio between women and men was 1:1.4; average age was 76.0 ± 1.3 years. The 
average age of women was 76.0 ± 1.8 years, men--76.1 ± 2,0 years. 96.0 ± 2.0% of 
geriatric patients with CHD complained of steno-cardiac pains in pre-cardiac
area; the excess mass of a body was observed in 43.4 ± 5.0% of geriatric patients
with CHD, acute myocardial infarction in the anamnesis was noted in 52.5 ± 6.9%
(n = 52); hypertensive illness had 98.0 ± 1.4% (n = 97). Patients had the
favorable average levels of lipoproteins of high density (not lower than 1
mmol/l). A significant number (79.2 ± 5.6%) of patients had hemodynamically
significant narrowing of coronary vessels (75% and more), while the area of
myocardial hypokinesia was observed in 41.2 ± 6.9% of patients, sharp violation
of brain blood circulation was noted in 14.1 ± 9.8%. Wild type homozygous
genotype of TCF7L2 gene was detected significantly more often (77.6 ± 4.7%) in
patients of advanced and senile age with CHD, regardless of age group, exis-tence
of accompanying diseases and conditions, such as previous myocardial damage,
acute disorders of cerebral circulation and fatty degeneration of the liver.
However allele of risk T (totally C/Tand T/T) of TCF7L2 gene came to light in
22.4 ± 9.1% of geriatric patients with CHD, that contributes to development of a 
metabolic syndrome in such patients and reduces term of their life.

PMID: 25946847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:394523. doi: 10.1155/2013/394523. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

IRS1, TCF7L2, ADRB1, PPARG, and HHEX polymorphisms associated with atherogenic
risk in Mexican population.

Estrada-Velasco BI(1), Cruz M(2), Madrid-Marina V(1), Martínez-Nava GA(1),
Gomez-Zamudio J(2), Burguete-García AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública,
Avenida Universidad 655, Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, 62100 Cuernavaca, 
MOR, Mexico. (2)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de
Especialidades, IMSS, Avenida Cuauhtémoc 330, Doctores, Cuauhtémoc, CMN Siglo
XXI, 06720 México, DF, Mexico.

Objective. We aimed to explore the association between polymorphisms of IRS1
(rs1801278), TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), ADRB1 (rs1801253), PPARG
(rs1801282), and HHEX (rs5015480) genes with atherogenic risk (AI = Total
cholesterol/HDL) in MetS, T2D, and healthy populations from the Mexican Social
Security Institute. Methodology and Results. Four hundred thirty-five MetS, 517
T2D, and 547 healthy individuals were selected. The association between the SNPs 
and the atherogenic index was evaluated by multiple linear regression and
multinomial logistic regression models. The ADRB1 gene showed a statistically
significant association with high-risk atherogenic index, OR = 2.94 (IC 95%
1.64-5.24; P < 0.0001) for the Arg/Gly variant, under the dominant model an OR = 
2.96 (IC 95% 1.67-5.25; P < 0.0001), and under the Log additive model an OR =
2.52 (IC 95% 1.54-4.15; P < 0.0001). Conclusions. The Arg389Gly polymorphism of
the ADRB1 gene may be a worthy biological marker to predict the risk of
developing cardiovascular diseases given a high-risk atherogenic index.

PMCID: PMC3859263
PMID: 24371822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003973. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

An Lmx1b-miR135a2 regulatory circuit modulates Wnt1/Wnt signaling and determines 
the size of the midbrain dopaminergic progenitor pool.

Anderegg A(1), Lin HP(1), Chen JA(2), Caronia-Brown G(1), Cherepanova N(1), Yun
B(1), Joksimovic M(1), Rock J(3), Harfe BD(3), Johnson R(4), Awatramani R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of Neurology
and Center for Genetic Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department
of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

MicroRNAs regulate gene expression in diverse physiological scenarios. Their role
in the control of morphogen related signaling pathways has been less studied,
particularly in the context of embryonic Central Nervous System (CNS)
development. Here, we uncover a role for microRNAs in limiting the spatiotemporal
range of morphogen expression and function. Wnt1 is a key morphogen in the
embryonic midbrain, and directs proliferation, survival, patterning and
neurogenesis. We reveal an autoregulatory negative feedback loop between the
transcription factor Lmx1b and a newly characterized microRNA, miR135a2, which
modulates the extent of Wnt1/Wnt signaling and the size of the dopamine
progenitor domain. Conditional gain of function studies reveal that Lmx1b
promotes Wnt1/Wnt signaling, and thereby increases midbrain size and dopamine
progenitor allocation. Conditional removal of Lmx1b has the opposite effect, in
that expansion of the dopamine progenitor domain is severely compromised. Next,
we provide evidence that microRNAs are involved in restricting dopamine
progenitor allocation. Conditional loss of Dicer1 in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
results in expanded Lmx1a/b+ progenitors. In contrast, forced elevation of
miR135a2 during an early window in vivo phenocopies the Lmx1b conditional
knockout. When En1::Cre, but not Shh::Cre or Nes::Cre, is used for recombination,
the expansion of Lmx1a/b+ progenitors is selectively reduced. Bioinformatics and 
luciferase assay data suggests that miR135a2 targets Lmx1b and many genes in the 
Wnt signaling pathway, including Ccnd1, Gsk3b, and Tcf7l2. Consistent with this, 
we demonstrate that this mutant displays reductions in the size of the Lmx1b/Wnt1
domain and range of canonical Wnt signaling. We posit that microRNA modulation of
the Lmx1b/Wnt axis in the early midbrain/isthmus could determine midbrain size
and allocation of dopamine progenitors. Since canonical Wnt activity has recently
been recognized as a key ingredient for programming ESCs towards a dopaminergic
fate in vitro, these studies could impact the rational design of such protocols.

PMCID: PMC3861205
PMID: 24348261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Dec 4;12(4):6268-74. doi: 10.4238/2013.December.4.14.

Colorectal cancer susceptibility variants alter risk of breast cancer in a
Chinese Han population.

Wei W(1), Jiang M, Luo L, Li Z, Wang P, Dong WQ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, China.

Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) and candidate gene studies have
revealed many novel loci associated with colorectal cancer susceptibility. We
evaluated the effect of these colorectal cancer-associated variants on the risk
of breast cancer in a Chinese Han population. Seven single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3856806 in PPARG, rs7014346 in POU5F1P1, rs989902 in
PTPN13, rs1801278 in IRS1, rs7003146 in TCF7L2, rs1503185 in PTPRJ, and
rs63750447 in MLH1) were genotyped in Han Chinese subjects, including 216
patients with breast cancer and 216 matched controls, using the Sequenom
MassARRAY platform. The association of genotypes with susceptibility to breast
cancer was analyzed using the odds ratio (OR), with 95% confidence interval (CI) 
and logistic regression. Three SNPs (rs7014346, rs989902, and rs7003146) were
found to be significantly associated with the susceptibility of breast cancer.
The GA and AA genotypes of rs7003146 in TCF7L2, and the CA and CC genotype of
rs989902 in PTPN13 were associated with reduced breast cancer risk in the Chinese
Han population based on the best-fit dominant model. The GG genotype of rs7014346
in POU5F1P1 was also significantly associated with decreased breast cancer risk
under the best-fit additive model. Our results confirmed the association of
rs7014346 in POU5F1P1, rs989902 in PTPN13, and rs7003146 in TCF7L2 with
variations in the risk of breast cancer in a Chinese Han population.

PMID: 24338422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Jan;111(1):46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.11.004. Epub
2013 Nov 18.

Maternal-fetal metabolic gene-gene interactions and risk of neural tube defects.

Lupo PJ(1), Mitchell LE(2), Canfield MA(3), Shaw GM(4), Olshan AF(5), Finnell
RH(6), Zhu H(7); National Birth Defects Prevention Study.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Human Genetics Center, Division of Epidemiology,
Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, University of Texas School of Public
Health, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin,
TX, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA. (5)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (6)Dell Pediatric Research Institute, Department of
Nutritional Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (7)Dell
Pediatric Research Institute, Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Electronic address: hzhu@austin.utexas.edu.

Single-gene analyses indicate that maternal genes associated with metabolic
conditions (e.g., obesity) may influence the risk of neural tube defects (NTDs). 
However, to our knowledge, there have been no assessments of maternal-fetal
metabolic gene-gene interactions and NTDs. We investigated 23 single nucleotide
polymorphisms among 7 maternal metabolic genes (ADRB3, ENPP1, FTO, LEP, PPARG,
PPARGC1A, and TCF7L2) and 2 fetal metabolic genes (SLC2A2 and UCP2). Samples were
obtained from 737 NTD case-parent triads included in the National Birth Defects
Prevention Study for birth years 1999-2007. We used a 2-step approach to evaluate
maternal-fetal gene-gene interactions. First, a case-only approach was applied to
screen all potential maternal and fetal interactions (n = 76), as this design
provides greater power in the assessment of gene-gene interactions compared to
other approaches. Specifically, ordinal logistic regression was used to calculate
the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for each maternal-fetal
gene-gene interaction, assuming a log-additive model of inheritance. Due to the
number of comparisons, we calculated a corrected p-value (q-value) using the
false discovery rate. Second, we confirmed all statistically significant
interactions (q < 0.05) using a log-linear approach among case-parent triads. In 
step 1, there were 5 maternal-fetal gene-gene interactions with q < 0.05. The
"top hit" was an interaction between maternal ENPP1 rs1044498 and fetal SLC2A2
rs6785233 (interaction OR = 3.65, 95% CI: 2.32-5.74, p = 2.09×10(-8), q=0.001),
which was confirmed in step 2 (p = 0.00004). Our findings suggest that maternal
metabolic genes associated with hyperglycemia and insulin resistance and fetal
metabolic genes involved in glucose homeostasis may interact to increase the risk
of NTDs.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4394735
PMID: 24332798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Carcinogenesis. 2014 May;35(5):1012-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt404. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

Genome-wide association study identifies 25 known breast cancer susceptibility
loci as risk factors for triple-negative breast cancer.

Purrington KS, Slager S, Eccles D, Yannoukakos D, Fasching PA, Miron P, Carpenter
J, Chang-Claude J, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Kristensen V, Anton-Culver H,
Goodfellow P, Tapper WJ, Rafiq S, Gerty SM, Durcan L, Konstantopoulou I, Fostira 
F, Vratimos A, Apostolou P, Konstanta I, Kotoula V, Lakis S, Dimopoulos MA,
Skarlos D, Pectasides D, Fountzilas G, Beckmann MW, Hein A, Ruebner M, Ekici AB, 
Hartmann A, Schulz-Wendtland R, Renner SP, Janni W, Rack B, Scholz C, Neugebauer 
J, Andergassen U, Lux MP, Haeberle L, Clarke C, Pathmanathan N, Rudolph A,
Flesch-Janys D, Nickels S, Olson JE, Ingle JN, Olswold C, Slettedahl S,
Eckel-Passow JE, Anderson SK, Visscher DW, Cafourek VL, Sicotte H, Prodduturi N, 
Weiderpass E, Bernstein L, Ziogas A, Ivanovich J, Giles GG, Baglietto L, Southey 
M, Kosma VM, Fischer HP; GENICA Network, Reed MW, Cross SS, Deming-Halverson S,
Shrubsole M, Cai Q, Shu XO, Daly M, Weaver J, Ross E, Klemp J, Sharma P, Torres
D, Rüdiger T, Wölfing H, Ulmer HU, Försti A, Khoury T, Kumar S, Pilarski R,
Shapiro CL, Greco D, Heikkilä P, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Irwanto A, Liu J,
Pankratz VS, Wang X, Severi G, Mannermaa A, Easton D, Hall P, Brauch H, Cox A,
Zheng W, Godwin AK, Hamann U, Ambrosone C, Toland AE, Nevanlinna H, Vachon CM,
Couch FJ.

Triple-negative (TN) breast cancer is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer
associated with a unique set of epidemiologic and genetic risk factors. We
conducted a two-stage genome-wide association study of TN breast cancer (stage 1:
1529 TN cases, 3399 controls; stage 2: 2148 cases, 1309 controls) to identify
loci that influence TN breast cancer risk. Variants in the 19p13.1 and PTHLH loci
showed genome-wide significant associations (P < 5 × 10(-) (8)) in stage 1 and 2 
combined. Results also suggested a substantial enrichment of significantly
associated variants among the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) analyzed in 
stage 2. Variants from 25 of 74 known breast cancer susceptibility loci were also
associated with risk of TN breast cancer (P < 0.05). Associations with TN breast 
cancer were confirmed for 10 loci (LGR6, MDM4, CASP8, 2q35, 2p24.1,
TERT-rs10069690, ESR1, TOX3, 19p13.1, RALY), and we identified associations with 
TN breast cancer for 15 additional breast cancer loci (P < 0.05: PEX14, 2q24.1,
2q31.1, ADAM29, EBF1, TCF7L2, 11q13.1, 11q24.3, 12p13.1, PTHLH, NTN4, 12q24,
BRCA2, RAD51L1-rs2588809, MKL1). Further, two SNPs independent of previously
reported signals in ESR1 [rs12525163 odds ratio (OR) = 1.15, P = 4.9 × 10(-) (4)]
and 19p13.1 (rs1864112 OR = 0.84, P = 1.8 × 10(-) (9)) were associated with TN
breast cancer. A polygenic risk score (PRS) for TN breast cancer based on known
breast cancer risk variants showed a 4-fold difference in risk between the
highest and lowest PRS quintiles (OR = 4.03, 95% confidence interval 3.46-4.70, P
= 4.8 × 10(-) (69)). This translates to an absolute risk for TN breast cancer
ranging from 0.8% to 3.4%, suggesting that genetic variation may be used for TN
breast cancer risk prediction.

PMCID: PMC4004200
PMID: 24325915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:686315. doi: 10.1155/2013/686315. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Pharmacogenetics of oral antidiabetic drugs.

Becker ML(1), Pearson ER, Tkác I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, 3015 CE Rotterdam, The Netherlands ;
Pharmacy Foundation of Haarlem Hospitals, 2035 RC Haarlem, The Netherlands.

Oral antidiabetic drugs (OADs) are used for more than a half-century in the
treatment of type 2 diabetes. Only in the last five years, intensive research has
been conducted in the pharmacogenetics of these drugs based mainly on the
retrospective register studies, but only a handful of associations detected in
these studies were replicated. The gene variants in CYP2C9, ABCC8/KCNJ11, and
TCF7L2 were associated with the effect of sulfonylureas. CYP2C9 encodes
sulfonylurea metabolizing cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 2C9, ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes
encode proteins constituting ATP-sensitive K(+) channel which is a therapeutic
target for sulfonylureas, and TCF7L2 is a gene with the strongest association
with type 2 diabetes. SLC22A1, SLC47A1, and ATM gene variants were repeatedly
associated with the response to metformin. SLC22A1 and SLC47A1 encode metformin
transporters OCT1 and MATE1, respectively. The function of a gene variant near
ATM gene identified by a genome-wide association study is not elucidated so far. 
The first variant associated with the response to gliptins is a polymorphism in
the proximity of CTRB1/2 gene which encodes chymotrypsinogen. Establishment of
diabetes pharmacogenetics consortia and reduction in costs of genomics might lead
to some significant clinical breakthroughs in this field in a near future.

PMCID: PMC3845331
PMID: 24324494  [PubMed]


216. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;19(9):1010-6. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.159. Epub 2013 Dec
10.

Genome-wide association study of bipolar disorder accounting for effect of body
mass index identifies a new risk allele in TCF7L2.

Winham SJ(1), Cuellar-Barboza AB(2), Oliveros A(3), McElroy SL(4), Crow S(5),
Colby C(1), Choi DS(6), Chauhan M(7), Frye M(8), Biernacka JM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester,
MN, USA. (2)1] Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Universidad
Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico [2] Department of Psychiatry and
Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester,
MN, USA. (4)1] Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, OH, USA [2] University of
Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (6)1] Department of
Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA [2]
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo
Clinic Health Systems Austin, Austin, MN, USA. (8)Department of Psychiatry and
Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA. (9)1] Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA [2] Department of
Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is associated with higher body mass index (BMI) and
increased metabolic comorbidity. Considering the associated phenotypic traits in 
genetic studies of complex diseases, either by adjusting for covariates or by
investigating interactions between genetic variants and covariates, may help to
uncover the missing heritability. However, obesity-related traits have not been
incorporated in prior genome-wide analyses of BD as covariates or potential
interacting factors. To investigate the genetic factors underlying BD while
considering BMI, we conducted genome-wide analyses using data from the Genetic
Association Information Network BD study. We analyzed 729,454 genotyped
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers on 388 European-American BD cases
and 1020 healthy controls with available data for maximum BMI. We performed
genome-wide association analyses of the genetic effects while accounting for the 
effect of maximum BMI, and also evaluated SNP-BMI interactions. A joint test of
main and interaction effects demonstrated significant evidence of association at 
the genome-wide level with rs12772424 in an intron of TCF7L2 (P=2.85E-8). This
SNP exhibited interaction effects, indicating that the bipolar susceptibility
risk of this SNP is dependent on BMI. TCF7L2 codes for the transcription factor
TCF/LF, part of the Wnt canonical pathway, and is one of the strongest genetic
risk variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D). This is consistent with BD
pathophysiology, as the Wnt pathway has crucial implications in neurodevelopment,
neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, and is involved in the mechanisms of action of 
BD and depression treatments. We hypothesize that genetic risk for BD is BMI
dependent, possibly related to common genetic risk with T2D.

PMID: 24322204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Diabetologia. 2014 Mar;57(3):542-53. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3131-6. Epub 2013
Dec 8.

TCF7L2 in mouse pancreatic beta cells plays a crucial role in glucose homeostasis
by regulating beta cell mass.

Takamoto I(1), Kubota N, Nakaya K, Kumagai K, Hashimoto S, Kubota T, Inoue M,
Kajiwara E, Katsuyama H, Obata A, Sakurai Y, Iwamoto M, Kitamura T, Ueki K,
Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common genetic variations of the transcription factor 7-like 2
gene (encoded by TCF7L2), one of the T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor transcription factors for the converging wingless-type MMTV integration
site family (Wnt)/ß-catenin signalling pathway, are known to be associated with
type 2 diabetes. Individuals with at-risk alleles of TCF7L2 exhibit impaired
insulin secretion. Although previous studies using animal models have revealed
the existence of a relationship between the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway and 
glucose homeostasis, it remains unclear whether TCF7L2 in the pancreatic beta
cells might be causally involved in insulin secretion in vivo. In this study, we 
investigated the role of TCF7L2 expressed in the pancreatic beta cells in glucose
homeostasis.
METHODS: Three independent groups of genetically engineered mice (DN mice) were
generated, in which expression of the dominant-negative form of Tcf7l2 was driven
under a rat insulin promoter. Phenotypes of both adult and newborn mice were
evaluated. The levels of genes and proteins expressed in isolated islets were
determined by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR and western blot analysis,
respectively.
RESULTS: Adult DN mice showed impaired glucose tolerance and decreased insulin
secretion in both oral and intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests. Marked
reduction of the beta cell area and whole-pancreas insulin content was observed
in both the adult and newborn DN mice. Islets from the DN mice showed decreased
gene expressions of Ccnd1, Ccnd2, Irs1, Irs2, Ins1, Ins2 and Mafa, consistent
with the deleterious effects of the dominant-negative form of Tcf7l2 on beta cell
proliferation and insulin production.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 expressed in the pancreatic beta cells plays a
crucial role in glucose metabolism through regulation of the beta cell mass.

PMID: 24317852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 18;105(24):1852-61. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt331. Epub
2013 Dec 7.

Aspirin use, 8q24 single nucleotide polymorphism rs6983267, and colorectal cancer
according to CTNNB1 alterations.

Nan H(1), Morikawa T, Suuriniemi M, Imamura Y, Werner L, Kuchiba A, Yamauchi M,
Hunter DJ, Kraft P, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S, Freedman ML, Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Division of Cancer Epidemiology, Department of
Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD (HN); Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine
(HN, DJH, ELG, CSF, ATC) and Department of Epidemiology (DJH, PK, ELG, SO),
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Center for
Molecular Oncologic Pathology (TM, YI, AK, MY, SO), Department of Medical
Oncology (TM, MS, YI, AK, MY, CSF, SO, MLF), and Department of Biostatistics and 
Computational Biology (LW), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Department 
of Epidemiology (DJH, ELG, SO) and Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA (DJH, ELG); Broad Institute, Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Cambridge, MA (MLF); Division of Gastroenterology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (ATC).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 18;105(24):1847-8.

BACKGROUND: Regular aspirin use reduces the risk for colorectal cancer (CRC),
possibly through inhibition of WNT/cadherin-associated protein ß1 (CTNNB1 or
ß-catenin) signaling. The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs6983267 on
chromosome 8q24 is a CRC susceptibility locus that affects binding activity of
transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2) to CTNNB1, thereby altering expression of 
target oncogenes, including MYC.
METHODS: We evaluated regular aspirin use and CRC risk according to genotypes of 
SNP rs6983267 and CTNNB1 expression status in two prospective case-control
studies (840 CRC case patients and 1686 age- and race-matched control subjects)
nested within the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study. We estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using
unconditional logistic regression models. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: A lower risk of CRC was associated with regular aspirin use and the T
allele of rs6983267. The effect of aspirin was confined to individuals with
protective T allele of rs6983267 (additive matching factors-adjusted OR for T
allele = 0.83; 95% CI = 0.74 to 0.94; P trend = .002; P interaction = .01).
Additionally, the T allele of rs6983267 was associated with a reduced expression 
of MYC oncogene (P trend = .03). Moreover, among individuals with protective T
allele, the effect of regular aspirin use was limited to those with positive
nuclear CTNNB1 expression. In a functional analysis, in vitro treatment of LS174T
cells (a cell line heterozygous for rs6983267) with aspirin was statistically
significantly associated with higher G/T allelic ratio of TCF7L2
immunoprecipitated DNA (P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support an influence of aspirin on WNT/CTNNB1 signaling 
and suggest that aspirin chemoprevention may be tailored according to rs6983267
genotype.

PMCID: PMC3866156
PMID: 24317174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):2158-71. doi: 10.2337/db13-0949. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Impact of type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants on quantitative glycemic traits
reveals mechanistic heterogeneity.

Dimas AS(1), Lagou V(2), Barker A(3), Knowles JW(4), Mägi R(5), Hivert MF(6),
Benazzo A(7), Rybin D(8), Jackson AU(9), Stringham HM(9), Song C(10),
Fischer-Rosinsky A(11), Boesgaard TW(12), Grarup N(13), Abbasi FA(4), Assimes
TL(4), Hao K(14), Yang X(15), Lecoeur C(16), Barroso I(17), Bonnycastle LL(18),
Böttcher Y(19), Bumpstead S(20), Chines PS(18), Erdos MR(18), Graessler J(21),
Kovacs P(22), Morken MA(18), Narisu N(18), Payne F(20), Stancakova A(23), Swift
AJ(18), Tönjes A(24), Bornstein SR(21), Cauchi S(16), Froguel P(25), Meyre D(26),
Schwarz PE(21), Häring HU(27), Smith U(28), Boehnke M(9), Bergman RN(29), Collins
FS(18), Mohlke KL(30), Tuomilehto J(31), Quertemous T(4), Lind L(32), Hansen
T(33), Pedersen O(34), Walker M(35), Pfeiffer AF(36), Spranger J(11), Stumvoll
M(24), Meigs JB(37), Wareham NJ(3), Kuusisto J(23), Laakso M(23), Langenberg
C(3), Dupuis J(38), Watanabe RM(39), Florez JC(40), Ingelsson E(41), McCarthy
MI(42), Prokopenko I(43); MAGIC Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Alexander Fleming, Biomedical Sciences Research Center, Vari, Athens, Greece.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K. (3)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, U.K. (4)Department of
Medicine and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA. (5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 
(6)Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec,
CanadaGeneral Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(7)Department of Biology and Evolution, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Boston University Data Coordinating Center, Boston, MA. (9)Department of
Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan School 
of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI. (10)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular
Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
SwedenDepartment of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department
of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Berlin, Germany. (12)Steno Diabetes Center,
Gentofte, Denmark. (13)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (14)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Institute
of Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY.
(15)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. (16)CNRS UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur
Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé University, Lille, France. (17)Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Hinxton, U.K.University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories and National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, U.K. (18)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD. (19)IFB AdiposityDiseases, Leipzig University Medical
Center, Leipzig, Germany. (20)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, U.K.
(21)Department of Medicine III, Division of Prevention and Care of Diabetes,
University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (22)Interdisciplinary Center for
Clinical Research Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (23)Department of Medicine,
University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(24)IFB AdiposityDiseases, Leipzig University Medical Center, Leipzig,
GermanyDepartment of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (25)CNRS 
UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé
University, Lille, FranceDepartment of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial
College London, London, U.K. (26)CNRS UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur
Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé University, Lille, FranceDepartment of Clinical
Epidemiology & Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. (28)Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Center of
Excellence for Metabolic and Cardiovascular Research, Department of Molecular and
Clinical Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden. (29)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. (30)Department of Genetics,
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. (31)Diabetes
Prevention Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
FinlandCentre for Vascular Prevention, Danube University Krems, Krems,
AustriaKing Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (32)Department of Medical
Sciences, Akademiska Sjukhuset, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (33)The Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (34)The Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkHagedorn Research
Institute, Copenhagen, DenmarkInstitute of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health
Sciences, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark. (35)Institute of Cellular
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
(36)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Berlin, GermanyDepartment of Clinical Nutrition, German Institute of 
Human Nutrition, Nuthetal, Germany. (37)General Medicine Division, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MADepartment of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA. (38)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public
Health, Boston, MAThe National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham
Heart Study, Framingham, MA. (39)Departments of Preventive Medicine and
Physiology & Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA. (40)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MACenter for Human Genetic Research and Diabetes Research Center
(Diabetes Unit), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MAProgram in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA. (41)Wellcome Trust Centre
for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Department of Medical
Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. (42)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology &
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Oxford National Institute for
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, U.K.
(43)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K.Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London,
London, U.K.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1836-7.

Patients with established type 2 diabetes display both ß-cell dysfunction and
insulin resistance. To define fundamental processes leading to the diabetic
state, we examined the relationship between type 2 diabetes risk variants at 37
established susceptibility loci, and indices of proinsulin processing, insulin
secretion, and insulin sensitivity. We included data from up to 58,614
nondiabetic subjects with basal measures and 17,327 with dynamic measures. We
used additive genetic models with adjustment for sex, age, and BMI, followed by
fixed-effects, inverse-variance meta-analyses. Cluster analyses grouped risk loci
into five major categories based on their relationship to these continuous
glycemic phenotypes. The first cluster (PPARG, KLF14, IRS1, GCKR) was
characterized by primary effects on insulin sensitivity. The second cluster
(MTNR1B, GCK) featured risk alleles associated with reduced insulin secretion and
fasting hyperglycemia. ARAP1 constituted a third cluster characterized by defects
in insulin processing. A fourth cluster (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX/IDE, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/2B) was defined by loci influencing insulin processing and secretion
without a detectable change in fasting glucose levels. The final group contained 
20 risk loci with no clear-cut associations to continuous glycemic traits. By
assembling extensive data on continuous glycemic traits, we have exposed the
diverse mechanisms whereby type 2 diabetes risk variants impact disease
predisposition.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMCID: PMC4030103
PMID: 24296717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Circ Res. 2014 Jan 31;114(3):454-68. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302810. Epub
2013 Nov 25.

The hippo pathway is activated and is a causal mechanism for adipogenesis in
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Chen SN(1), Gurha P, Lombardi R, Ruggiero A, Willerson JT, Marian AJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Medicine
and Department of Medicine, The University of Texas Health Sciences Center at
Houston, Houston, TX; and Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Jan 31;114(3):402-5.

RATIONALE: Mutations in the intercalated disc proteins, such as plakophilin 2
(PKP2), cause arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC). AC is characterized by the
replacement of cardiac myocytes by fibro-adipocytes, cardiac dysfunction,
arrhythmias, and sudden death.
OBJECTIVE: To delineate the molecular pathogenesis of AC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Localization and levels of selected intercalated disc
proteins, including signaling molecules, were markedly reduced in human hearts
with AC. Altered protein constituents of intercalated discs were associated with 
activation of the upstream Hippo molecules in the human hearts, in
Nkx2.5-Cre:Dsp(W/F) and Myh6:Jup mouse models of AC, and in the PKP2 knockdown
HL-1 myocytes (HL-1(PKP2:shRNA)). Level of active protein kinase C-a isoform,
which requires PKP2 for activity, was reduced. In contrast, neurofibromin 2 (or
Merlin), a molecule upstream of the Hippo pathway and that is inactivated by
protein kinase C-a isoform, was activated. Consequently, the downstream Hippo
molecules mammalian STE20-like protein kinases 1/2 (MST1/2), large tumor
suppressor kinases 1/2 (LATS1/2), and Yes-associated protein (YAP) (the latter is
the effector of the pathway) were phosphorylated. Coimmunoprecipitation detected 
binding of phosphorylated YAP, phosphorylated ß-catenin, and junction protein
plakoglobin (the latter translocated from the junction). RNA sequencing,
transcript quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and reporter assays showed
suppressed activity of SV40 transcriptional enhancer factor domain (TEAD) and
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), which are transcription factors of the
Hippo and the canonical Wnt signaling, respectively. In contrast, adipogenesis
was enhanced. Simultaneous knockdown of Lats1/2, molecules upstream to YAP,
rescued inactivation of YAP and ß-catenin and adipogenesis in the
HL-1(PKP2:shRNA) myocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular remodeling of the intercalated discs leads to pathogenic
activation of the Hippo pathway, suppression of the canonical Wnt signaling, and 
enhanced adipogenesis in AC. The findings offer novel mechanisms for the
pathogenesis of AC.

PMCID: PMC3946717
PMID: 24276085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Nov-Dec;56(3):251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2013.09.013.

Genetic epidemiology of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases in Africa.

Tekola-Ayele F(1), Adeyemo AA, Rotimi CN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

The burdens of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are
increasing in Africa. T2D and CVD are the result of the complex interaction
between inherited characteristics, lifestyle, and environmental factors. The
epidemic of obesity is largely behind the exploding global incidence of T2D.
However, not all obese individuals develop diabetes and positive family history
is a powerful risk factor for diabetes and CVD. Recent implementations of high
throughput genotyping and sequencing approaches have advanced our understanding
of the genetic basis of diabetes and CVD by identifying several genomic loci that
were not previously linked to the pathobiology of these diseases. However,
African populations have not been adequately represented in these global genomic 
efforts. Here, we summarize the state of knowledge of the genetic epidemiology of
T2D and CVD in Africa and highlight new genomic initiatives that promise to
inform disease etiology, public health and clinical medicine in Africa.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3840391
PMID: 24267432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2013;23(4):309-16.

TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G>T) polymorphism contributes to breast carcinogenesis:
evidence from a meta-analysis.

Wang Z(1), Zhang Q, Chen F, Wang Y, Nie W, Yang B, Guan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
Univercity.

Studies on the association between the TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism and breast 
cancer risk have reported conflicting results. To characterize the relationship
between this polymorphism and breast cancer risk, we conducted a comprehensive
literature search for relevant studies and performed a meta-analysis. A total of 
four studies including 5280 cases and 6026 controls were eligible for our
analysis. Overall, we did find that this polymorphism correlates with breast
cancer risk [TT versus GG: odds ratio (OR)=1.19, 95% confidence interval
(CI)=1.02-1.40; GT versus GG: OR=1.10, 95% CI=1.01-1.19; T versus G: OR=1.12, 95%
CI=1.05-1.19]. Furthermore, in the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, we did also
find that this polymorphism associated with an increased breast cancer risk in
white individuals (T versus G: OR=1.11, 95% CI=1.04-1.18). In summary, this
meta-analysis suggests that the rs12255372 T allele is a low-penetrant risk
factor for breast carcinogenesis. In the future, larger-scale and more
well-designed studies based on homogeneous breast cancer patients are needed to
validate our findings, especially in Asians.

PMID: 24266846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. BMB Rep. 2013 Dec;46(12):567-74.

CREB and FoxO1: two transcription factors for the regulation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis.

Oh KJ, Han HS, Kim MJ, Koo SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
koohoi@korea.ac.kr.

Liver plays a major role in maintaining glucose homeostasis in mammals. Under
fasting conditions, hepatic glucose production is critical as a source of fuel to
maintain the basic functions in other tissues, including skeletal muscle, red
blood cells, and the brain. Fasting hormones glucagon and cortisol play major
roles during the process, in part by activating the transcription of key enzyme
genes in the gluconeogenesis such as phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)
and glucose 6 phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase). Conversely, gluconeogenic
transcription is repressed by pancreatic insulin under feeding conditions, which 
effectively inhibits transcriptional activator complexes by either promoting
post-translational modifications or activating transcriptional inhibitors in the 
liver, resulting in the reduction of hepatic glucose output. The transcriptional 
regulatory machineries have been highlighted as targets for type 2 diabetes drugs
to control glycemia, so understanding of the complex regulatory mechanisms for
transcription circuits for hepatic gluconeogenesis is critical in the potential
development of therapeutic tools for the treatment of this disease. In this
review, the current understanding regarding the roles of two key transcriptional 
activators, CREB and FoxO1, in the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenic program is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4133859
PMID: 24238363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2013 Dec;12(4):310-5. doi: 10.1177/1534734613504435.
Epub 2013 Nov 9.

Association of variant rs7903146 (C/T) single nucleotide polymorphism of TCF7L2
gene with impairment in wound healing among north Indian type 2 diabetes
population: a case-control study.

Singh K(1), Agrawal NK, Gupta SK, Singh K.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
India.

The variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been shown to be
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its several secondary
complications. Here, we aimed to examine the possible role of one of the common
variant of this gene, rs7903146 (C/T), with impairment of wound healing in cases 
with T2DM. A total of 750 individuals, including 322 patients with T2DM and 120
patients with diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) and 308 controls, were analyzed for
rs7903146 variant of the TCF7L2 gene. Genotyping was done by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. For rs7903146 variant, TT
genotype frequency in patients with DFU was 10.8% and in controls was 5.2%. Risk 
genotype (TT) frequencies showed statistically significant difference between the
DFU patients versus non-DM control group (odds ratio = 2.44, P = .037, 95%
confidence interval = 1.05-5.64) compared with nonrisk genotype (CC + CT). In the
present study, a positive significant association between DFU and the TT genotype
of rs7903146 (C/T) variant of TCF7L2 gene was found.

PMID: 24214952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2344-57. doi: 10.1002/hep.26924. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

T-cell factor 4 and ß-catenin chromatin occupancies pattern zonal liver
metabolism in mice.

Gougelet A(1), Torre C, Veber P, Sartor C, Bachelot L, Denechaud PD, Godard C,
Moldes M, Burnol AF, Dubuquoy C, Terris B, Guillonneau F, Ye T, Schwarz M,
Braeuning A, Perret C, Colnot S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR8104, Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1016, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2080-2.

ß-catenin signaling can be both a physiological and oncogenic pathway in the
liver. It controls compartmentalized gene expression, allowing the liver to
ensure its essential metabolic function. It is activated by mutations in 20%-40% 
of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) with specific metabolic features. We decipher
the molecular determinants of ß-catenin-dependent zonal transcription using mice 
with ß-catenin-activated or -inactivated hepatocytes, characterizing in vivo
their chromatin occupancy by T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 and ß-catenin, transcriptome, 
and metabolome. We find that Tcf-4 DNA bindings depend on ß-catenin.
Tcf-4/ß-catenin binds Wnt-responsive elements preferentially around
ß-catenin-induced genes. In contrast, genes repressed by ß-catenin bind Tcf-4 on 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (Hnf-4)-responsive elements. ß-Catenin, Tcf-4, and
Hnf-4a interact, dictating ß-catenin transcription, which is antagonistic to that
elicited by Hnf-4a. Finally, we find the drug/bile metabolism pathway to be the
one most heavily targeted by ß-catenin, partly through xenobiotic nuclear
receptors.CONCLUSIONS: ß-catenin patterns the zonal liver together with Tcf-4,
Hnf-4a, and xenobiotic nuclear receptors. This network represses lipid metabolism
and exacerbates glutamine, drug, and bile metabolism, mirroring HCCs with
ß-catenin mutational activation.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24214913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 24;8(10):e78430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078430.
eCollection 2013.

Plasma metabolomics reveal alterations of sphingo- and glycerophospholipid levels
in non-diabetic carriers of the transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism
rs7903146.

Then C(1), Wahl S, Kirchhofer A, Grallert H, Krug S, Kastenmüller G,
Römisch-Margl W, Claussnitzer M, Illig T, Heier M, Meisinger C, Adamski J,
Thorand B, Huth C, Peters A, Prehn C, Heukamp I, Laumen H, Lechner A, Hauner H,
Seissler J.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Diabetes Zentrum - Campus Innenstadt,
Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany ; Clinical Cooperation Group
Diabetes, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München and Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Munich, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
have been shown to display a powerful association with type 2 diabetes. The aim
of the present study was to evaluate metabolic alterations in carriers of a
common TCF7L2 risk variant.
METHODS: Seventeen non-diabetic subjects carrying the T risk allele at the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 locus and 24 subjects carrying no risk allele were submitted to 
intravenous glucose tolerance test and euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp. Plasma 
samples were analysed for concentrations of 163 metabolites through targeted mass
spectrometry.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 risk allele carriers had a reduced first-phase insulin response
and normal insulin sensitivity. Under fasting conditions, carriers of TCF7L2
rs7903146 exhibited a non-significant increase of plasma sphingomyelins (SMs),
phosphatidylcholines (PCs) and lysophosphatidylcholines (lysoPCs) species. A
significant genotype effect was detected in response to challenge tests in 6 SMs 
(C16:0, C16:1, C18:0, C18:1, C24:0, C24:1), 5 hydroxy-SMs (C14:1, C16:1, C22:1,
C22:2, C24:1), 4 lysoPCs (C14:0, C16:0, C16:1, C17:0), 3 diacyl-PCs (C28:1,
C36:6, C40:4) and 4 long-chain acyl-alkyl-PCs (C40:2, C40:5, C44:5, C44:6).
DISCUSSION: Plasma metabolomic profiling identified alterations of phospholipid
metabolism in response to challenge tests in subjects with TCF7L2 rs7903146
genotype. This may reflect a genotype-mediated link to early metabolic
abnormalities prior to the development of disturbed glucose tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3813438
PMID: 24205231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Feb;99(2):E384-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3165. Epub
2013 Nov 7.

Top single nucleotide polymorphisms affecting carbohydrate metabolism in
metabolic syndrome: from the LIPGENE study.

Delgado-Lista J(1), Perez-Martinez P, Solivera J, Garcia-Rios A, Perez-Caballero 
AI, Lovegrove JA, Drevon CA, Defoort C, Blaak EE, Dembinska-Kiec A, Risérus U,
Herruzo-Gomez E, Camargo A, Ordovas JM, Roche H, Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit (J.D.-L., P.P-M., A.G.-R., A.I.P.-C., A.C.,
J.L.-M.), Department of Medicine, and Neurosurgery Unit (J.S.), Instituto
Maimónedes de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba/Hospital Universitario Reina
Sofía/Universidad de Córdoba, 14004 Cordoba, Spain and Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutricion, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, 28029 Madrid, Spain; Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences and
Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research (J.A.L.), University of
Reading, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AP, United Kingdom; Department of Nutrition
(C.A.D.), Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, 0313 Oslo, Norway; Unité Mixte de Recherche, Inserm 1062 (C.D.), Research
Unit in Nutrition, Obesity and Risk of Thrombosis, Faculté de Médecine,
Aix-Marseille University, F-13385 Marseille, France; Department of Human Biology 
(E.E.B.), Nutrition and Toxicology Research Institute, Maastricht, 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands; Department of Clinical Biochemistry (A.D.-K.),
Jagiellonian University Medical College, 31-008, Krakow, Poland; Clinical
Nutrition and Metabolism (U.R.), Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Uppsala University, 753 12 Uppsala, Sweden; Department of
Computer Engineering (E.H.-G.), University of Cordoba, 14071 Cordoba, Spain; Jean
Mayer US Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at
Tufts University (J.M.O.), Boston, Massachusetts 20111; and Nutrigenomics
Research Group (H.R.), UCD School of Public Health and Population Science, UCD
Conway Institute, University College Dublin 2010, Ireland.

RATIONALE: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a high-prevalence condition characterized
by altered energy metabolism, insulin resistance, and elevated cardiovascular
risk.
OBJECTIVES: Although many individual single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have 
been linked to certain MetS features, there are few studies analyzing the
influence of SNPs on carbohydrate metabolism in MetS.
METHODS: A total of 904 SNPs (tag SNPs and functional SNPs) were tested for
influence on 8 fasting and dynamic markers of carbohydrate metabolism, by
performance of an intravenous glucose tolerance test in 450 participants in the
LIPGENE study.
FINDINGS: From 382 initial gene-phenotype associations between SNPs and any
phenotypic variables, 61 (16% of the preselected variables) remained significant 
after bootstrapping. Top SNPs affecting glucose metabolism variables were as
follows: fasting glucose, rs26125 (PPARGC1B); fasting insulin, rs4759277 (LRP1); 
C-peptide, rs4759277 (LRP1); homeostasis assessment of insulin resistance,
rs4759277 (LRP1); quantitative insulin sensitivity check index, rs184003 (AGER); 
sensitivity index, rs7301876 (ABCC9), acute insulin response to glucose, rs290481
(TCF7L2); and disposition index, rs12691 (CEBPA).
CONCLUSIONS: We describe here the top SNPs linked to phenotypic features in
carbohydrate metabolism among approximately 1000 candidate gene variations in
fasting and postprandial samples of 450 patients with MetS from the LIPGENE
study.

PMID: 24203067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):397-404. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2831. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

miR-139 regulates the proliferation and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma
through the WNT/TCF-4 pathway.

Gu W(1), Li X, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, P.R.
China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are key post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but their speci<U+FB01>c roles and functions have yet to
be fully elucidated. In the present study, a significant downregulation of
miR-139 expression was demonstrated in HCC samples and HCC cells using
quantitative PCR (qPCR). Upregulation of miR-139 in vitro, attenuated HCC cell
growth, migration/invasion and induced apoptosis. Based on computational and
expression analysis, we noted that miR-139 can control the expression of T-cell
factor-4 (TCF-4) as a target gene. A reporter assay with the 3'UTR of TCF-4
cloned downstream of a luciferase gene showed decreased luciferase activity in
the presence of miR-139, providing strong evidence that miR-139 is a direct
regulator of TCF-4. Furthermore, we observed that restoration of TCF-4 activity
resulted in effects that were similar to those following transfection of the
miR-139 inhibitor into HCC cells. Finally, mechanistic investigation revealed
that the overexpression of miR-139 suppressed the ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional
activity by targeting TCF-4. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that miR-139
downregulation is common in HCC and that overexpression of miR-139 expression
inhibits cell proliferation and invasion, suggesting that miR-139 may provide a
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of HCC patients.

PMID: 24190507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Gene. 2014 Jan 10;533(2):554-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.104. Epub 2013 Oct
22.

Polymorphisms of transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene in Tunisian women
with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Ben-Salem A(1), Ajina M, Suissi M, Daher HS, Almawi WY, Mahjoub T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genome and Multifactorial Diseases, LR12ES07, Faculty of
Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine
disorder that affects women in their child-bearing age, and is often associated
with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2DM). Given the overlap between
PCOS and T2DM, we investigated the association of transcription factor-7-like 2
(TCF7L2) variants rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and rs12255372 with the
susceptibility to PCOS.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Study subjects comprised 119 Tunisian women with PCOS (mean
age 29.8±4.7years), and 150 control women (mean age 30.6±5.9years). TCF7L2
genotyping was done by the allelic discrimination/real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: Minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of rs4506565 (P=0.61), rs7903146
(P=0.68), rs12243326 (P=0.56), and rs12255372 (P=0.60) were comparable between
PCOS cases and control subjects. As the four tested TCF7L2 variants were in
linkage disequilibrium, 4-locus (rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, rs12255372)
haplotype analysis demonstrated that haplotype 2111 was initially negatively
associated with PCOS [P=0.035; OR (95% CI)=0.13 (0.02-0.85)], which was later
lost upon correcting for multiple comparisons [Pc=0.248].
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that there is weak or no contribution of TCF7L2 gene
polymorphism to PCOS in Tunisian women. Further studies with larger samples are
necessary to confirm this observation.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2013 Nov;102(2):117-22. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep 14.

A replication study of 19 GWAS-validated type 2 diabetes at-risk variants in the 
Lebanese population.

Almawi WY(1), Nemr R, Keleshian SH, Echtay A, Saldanha FL, AlDoseri FA, Racoubian
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Bahrain. 
Electronic address: wassim@agu.edu.bh.

AIM: Recent genome-wide association scans (GWAS) and replication studies have
expanded the list of validated type 2 diabetes (T2DM) susceptibility loci. We
replicated T2DM association of 19 SNPs from 15 candidate loci in Lebanese Arabs.
METHODS: Case-control association study, comprising 995 T2DM patients and 1076
control participants. We genotyped by the allelic discrimination method 19 SNPs
in/near ADAM30, NOTCH2, THADA, TMEFF2, COL8A1, ADAMTS9-AS2, WFS1, JAZF1, SLC30A8,
KCNQ1, LOC387761, ALX4, TSPAN8, FTO, and HNF1.
RESULTS: Allele frequencies of the tested SNPs were comparable with those of
Caucasians. COL8A1 rs792837 (P=2.9 × 10(-9)), KCNQ1 rs2237892 (P=1.8 × 10(-18))
and rs2237895 (P=0.002), ALX4 rs729287 (Pc=7.5 × 10(-5)), and HNF1 rs4430796
(P=0.003) were significantly associated with T2DM, with similar effect sizes to
those of Europeans. While FTO rs8050136 and rs17817449, ADAMTS9 rs4607103, and
WFS1 rs10010131 were initially associated with T2DM, this was lost upon multiple 
testing correction. The remaining variants were not associated with T2DM,
possibly resulting from insufficient power to detect smaller allele effects.
CONCLUSION: In addition to previous findings on the association of IGF2BP2,
CDKAL1, TCF7L2 variants with T2DM among Lebanese, here we extend these by
validating the association of five additional loci with T2DM in Lebanese Arabs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24145053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Metabolism. 2014 Jan;63(1):9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.09.010. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Anti-diabetic actions of glucagon-like peptide-1 on pancreatic beta-cells.

Lee YS(1), Jun HS.

Author information: 
(1)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong,
Yeonsu-ku, Incheon 406-840, South Korea.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), an incretin hormone, is released from intestinal
L-cells in response to nutrients. GLP-1 lowers blood glucose levels by
stimulating insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells in a glucose-dependent
manner. In addition, GLP-1 slows gastric emptying, suppresses appetite, reduces
plasma glucagon, and stimulates glucose disposal, which are beneficial for
glucose homeostasis. Therefore, incretin-based therapies such as GLP-1 receptor
agonists and inhibitors of dipeptidyl peptidase IV, an enzyme which inactivates
GLP-1, have been developed for treatment of diabetes. This review outlines our
knowledge of the actions of GLP-1 on insulin secretion and biosynthesis,
beta-cell proliferation and regeneration, and protection against beta-cell
damage, as well as the involvement of recently discovered signaling pathways of
GLP-1 action, mainly focusing on pancreatic beta-cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 24140094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Dec;9(12):3199-209. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70343f. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Identification and comparative analysis of hepatitis C virus-host cell protein
interactions.

Dolan PT(1), Zhang C, Khadka S, Arumugaswami V, Vangeloff AD, Heaton NS,
Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Sun R, LaCount DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, RHPH 514, 575 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
dlacount@purdue.edu.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) alters the global behavior of the host cell to create an 
environment conducive to its own replication, but much remains unknown about how 
HCV proteins elicit these changes. Thus, a better understanding of the interface 
between the virus and host cell is required. Here we report the results of a
large-scale yeast two-hybrid screen to identify protein-protein interactions
between HCV genotype 2a (strain JFH1) and cellular factors. Our study identified 
112 unique interactions between 7 HCV and 94 human proteins, over 40% of which
have been linked to HCV infection by other studies. These interactions develop a 
more complete picture of HCV infection, providing insight into HCV manipulation
of pathways, such as lipid and cholesterol metabolism, that were previously
linked to HCV infection and implicating novel targets within
microtubule-organizing centers, the complement system and cell cycle regulatory
machinery. In an effort to understand the relationship between HCV and related
viruses, we compared the HCV 2a interactome to those of other HCV genotypes and
to the related dengue virus. Greater overlap was observed between HCV and dengue 
virus targets than between HCV genotypes, demonstrating the value of parallel
screening approaches when comparing virus-host cell interactomes. Using siRNAs to
inhibit expression of cellular proteins, we found that five of the ten shared
targets tested (CUL7, PCM1, RILPL2, RNASET2, and TCF7L2) were required for
replication of both HCV and dengue virus. These shared interactions provide
insight into common features of the viral life cycles of the family Flaviviridae.

PMCID: PMC4171131
PMID: 24136289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2013 Dec;23(12):697-705. doi:
10.1097/FPC.0000000000000012.

Impact of TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms on hydrochlorothiazide-induced
diabetes.

Karnes JH(1), Gong Y, Pacanowski MA, McDonough CW, Arwood MJ, Langaee TY, Pepine 
CJ, Johnson JA, Cooper-Dehoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee bDepartment of Pharmacotherapy and Translational
Research cDepartment of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, Center for
Pharmacogenomics dDepartment of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida eOffice of Clinical Pharmacology,
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Thiazide diuretics have been associated with increased risk for new
onset diabetes (NOD), but pharmacogenetic markers of thiazide-induced NOD are not
well studied. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the transcription factor 
7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) represent the strongest and most reproducible genetic
associations with diabetes. We investigated the association of tag SNPs in TCF7L2
with thiazide-induced NOD.
METHODS: We identified cases that developed NOD and age, sex, and
race/ethnicity-matched controls from the INternational VErapamil SR-Trandolapril 
STudy (INVEST). INVEST compared cardiovascular outcomes between two
antihypertensive treatment strategies in ethnically diverse patients with
hypertension and coronary artery disease. We genotyped 101 TCF7L2 tag SNPs and
used logistic regression to test for pharmacogenetic (SNP×hydrochlorothiazide
treatment) interactions. Permuted interaction P values were corrected with the
PACT test and adjusted for diabetes-related variables.
RESULTS: In INVEST whites, we observed three TCF7L2 SNPs with significant
SNP×treatment interactions for NOD. The strongest pharmacogenetic interaction was
observed for rs7917983 [synergy index 3.37 (95% CI 1.72-6.59), P=5.0×10,
PACT=0.03], which was associated with increased NOD risk in
hydrochlorothiazide-treated patients [odds ratio 1.53 (1.04-2.25), P=0.03] and
decreased NOD risk in non hydrochlorothiazide-treated patients [odds ratio 0.48
(0.27-0.86), P=0.02]. The TCF7L2 SNP rs4506565, previously associated with
diabetes, showed a similar, significant pharmacogenetic association.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that hydrochlorothiazide treatment is an
environmental risk factor that increases diabetes risk beyond that attributed to 
TCF7L2 variation in white, hypertensive patients. Further study and replication
of our results is needed to confirm pharmacogenetic influences of TCF7L2 SNPs on 
thiazide-induced NOD.

PMCID: PMC3893755
PMID: 24128935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Exp Med. 2013 Oct 21;210(11):2151-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130443. Epub 2013 Oct
7.

Transcription factor Runx2 controls the development and migration of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells.

Sawai CM(1), Sisirak V, Ghosh HS, Hou EZ, Ceribelli M, Staudt LM, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) rapidly produce type I interferon (IFN-I) in 
response to viruses and are essential for antiviral immune responses. Although
related to classical DCs (cDCs) in their development and expression profile, pDCs
possess many distinct features. Unlike cDCs, pDCs develop in the bone marrow (BM)
and emerge into peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues as fully differentiated
cells. We now report that pDCs specifically express Runx2, a Runt family
transcription factor that is essential for bone development. pDCs in
Runx2-deficient mice developed normally in the BM but were greatly reduced in the
periphery. The defect was cell-intrinsic and was associated with the retention of
mature Ly49Q(+) pDCs in the BM. Runx2 was required for the expression of several 
pDC-enriched genes, including the chemokine receptors Ccr2 and Ccr5. Mature pDCs 
expressed high levels of Ccr5 at the cell surface, and Ccr5-deficient pDCs in a
competitive setting were reduced in the periphery relative to the BM. Thus, Runx2
is required for the emergence of mature BM pDCs into the periphery, in a process 
that is partially dependent on Ccr5. These results establish Runx2 as a
lineage-specific regulator of immune system development.

PMCID: PMC3804932
PMID: 24101375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 3;8(10):e74642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074642. eCollection
2013.

Genome-wide association study of gene by smoking interactions in coronary artery 
calcification.

Polfus LM(1), Smith JA, Shimmin LC, Bielak LF, Morrison AC, Kardia SL, Peyser PA,
Hixson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e93722.

Many GWAS have identified novel loci associated with common diseases, but have
focused only on main effects of individual genetic variants rather than
interactions with environmental factors (GxE). Identification of GxE interactions
is particularly important for coronary heart disease (CHD), a major preventable
source of morbidity and mortality with strong non-genetic risk factors.
Atherosclerosis is the major cause of CHD, and coronary artery calcification
(CAC) is directly correlated with quantity of coronary atherosclerotic plaque. In
the current study, we tested for genetic variants influencing extent of CAC via
interaction with smoking (GxS), by conducting a GxS discovery GWAS in Genetic
Epidemiology Network of Arteriopathy (GENOA) sibships (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>915 European
Americans) followed by replication in Framingham Heart Study (FHS) sibships
(N<U+200A>=<U+200A>1025 European Americans). Generalized estimating equations accounted for the
correlation within sibships in strata-specific groups of smokers and nonsmokers, 
as well as GxS interaction. Primary analysis found SNPs that showed suggestive
associations (p=10(-5)) in GENOA GWAS, but these index SNPs did not replicate in 
FHS. However, secondary analysis was able to replicate candidate gene regions in 
FHS using other SNPs (+/-250 kb of GENOA index SNP). In smoker and nonsmoker
groups, replicated genes included TCF7L2 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.0×10(-5)) and WWOX
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.5×10(-6)); and TNFRSF8 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.8×10(-5)), respectively. For GxS
interactions, replicated genes included TBC1D4 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.9×10(-5)) and ADAMTS9
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.1×10(-5)). Interestingly, these genes are involved in inflammatory
pathways mediated by the NF-<U+03BA>B axis. Since smoking is known to induce chronic and
systemic inflammation, association of these genes likely reflects roles in CAC
development via inflammatory pathways. Furthermore, the NF-<U+03BA>B axis regulates bone
remodeling, a key physiological process in CAC development. In conclusion, GxS
GWAS has yielded evidence for novel loci that are associated with CAC via
interaction with smoking, providing promising new targets for future
population-based and functional studies of CAC development.

PMCID: PMC3789744
PMID: 24098343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 15;110(42):17053-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313650110. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Paracrine activation of WNT/ß-catenin pathway in uterine leiomyoma stem cells
promotes tumor growth.

Ono M(1), Yin P, Navarro A, Moravek MB, Coon JS 5th, Druschitz SA, Serna VA,
Qiang W, Brooks DC, Malpani SS, Ma J, Ercan CM, Mittal N, Monsivais D, Dyson MT, 
Yemelyanov A, Maruyama T, Chakravarti D, Kim JJ, Kurita T, Gottardi CJ, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611.

Uterine leiomyomas are extremely common estrogen and progesterone-dependent
tumors of the myometrium and cause irregular uterine bleeding, severe anemia, and
recurrent pregnancy loss in 15-30% of reproductive-age women. Each leiomyoma is
thought to arise from a single mutated myometrial smooth muscle stem cell.
Leiomyoma side-population (LMSP) cells comprising 1% of all tumor cells and
displaying tumor-initiating stem cell characteristics are essential for estrogen-
and progesterone-dependent in vivo growth of tumors, although they have
remarkably lower estrogen/progesterone receptor levels than mature myometrial or 
leiomyoma cells. However, how estrogen/progesterone regulates the growth of LMSP 
cells via mature neighboring cells is unknown. Here, we demonstrate a critical
paracrine role of the wingless-type (WNT)/ß-catenin pathway in
estrogen/progesterone-dependent tumorigenesis, involving LMSP and differentiated 
myometrial or leiomyoma cells. Estrogen/progesterone treatment of mature
myometrial cells induced expression of WNT11 and WNT16, which remained
constitutively elevated in leiomyoma tissues. In LMSP cells cocultured with
mature myometrial cells, estrogen-progesterone selectively induced nuclear
translocation of ß-catenin and induced transcriptional activity of its
heterodimeric partner T-cell factor and their target gene AXIN2, leading to the
proliferation of LMSP cells. This effect could be blocked by a WNT antagonist.
Ectopic expression of inhibitor of ß-catenin and T-cell factor 4 in LMSP cells,
but not in mature leiomyoma cells, blocked the estrogen/progesterone-dependent
growth of human tumors in vivo. We uncovered a paracrine role of the
WNT/ß-catenin pathway that enables mature myometrial or leiomyoma cells to send
mitogenic signals to neighboring tissue stem cells in response to estrogen and
progesterone, leading to the growth of uterine leiomyomas.

PMCID: PMC3801037
PMID: 24082114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Feb;92(2):185-96. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1089-y. Epub
2013 Sep 27.

Tissue-specific differences in the regulation of KIBRA gene expression involve
transcription factor TCF7L2 and a complex alternative promoter system.

Guske K(1), Schmitz B, Schelleckes M, Duning K, Kremerskothen J, Pavenstädt HJ,
Brand SM, Brand E.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine D, Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology, University
Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Münster, Germany.

KIBRA has been described as a key regulator of the Hippo signaling pathway,
regulating organ size control, cell contact inhibition, cell growth, as well as
tumorigenesis and cystogenesis. Since there is scarce information on KIBRA gene
expression regulation, we analyzed the molecular basis of tissue-specific KIBRA
expression in human kidney epithelial (IHKE, HPCT) and neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y,
SK-SN-SH) cells. We detected four novel and differentially used transcription
start sites, two of which positioned in the first intron, generating two novel
alternative exons. We identified one constitutively active core promoter (P1a)
and three alternative promoters (P1b, P2, and P3), which were exclusively active 
in kidney cells. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) selectively activated
KIBRA at P1a, P2, and P3 in kidney cells. The two genetic variants -580C>T
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and -1691C>T (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) significantly affected the transcriptional
activity of the KIBRA core promoter. We propose a novel functional structure of
the KIBRA gene and provide detailed insight into molecular cell type-specific
KIBRA transcriptional regulation by TCF7L2, the Yes-associated protein 1 and TEA 
domain family member. Our findings provide a potential basis for future studies
on malfunctioning KIBRA regulation in pathophysiological conditions such as
cancer development.KEY MESSAGE: KIBRA expression is regulated by three
independent, cell type-specific promoters Two novel TSS were located within
intron one resulting in two alternative exons TSS utilization is cell
type-specific TCF7L2, YAP1, and TEAD are involved in the differential KIBRA
expression regulation.

PMID: 24072042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Neural Dev. 2013 Sep 25;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-19.

The ventral habenulae of zebrafish develop in prosomere 2 dependent on Tcf7l2
function.

Beretta CA(1), Dross N, Bankhead P, Carl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Ludolf-Krehl-Strasse 13-17, Mannheim 68167, Germany.
matthias.carl@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: The conserved habenular neural circuit relays cognitive information
from the forebrain into the ventral mid- and hindbrain. In zebrafish, the
bilaterally formed habenulae in the dorsal diencephalon are made up of the
asymmetric dorsal and symmetric ventral habenular nuclei, which are homologous to
the medial and lateral nuclei respectively, in mammals. These structures have
been implicated in various behaviors related to the serotonergic/dopaminergic
neurotransmitter system. The dorsal habenulae develop adjacent to the medially
positioned pineal complex. Their precursors differentiate into two main neuronal 
subpopulations which differ in size across brain hemispheres as signals from
left-sided parapineal cells influence their differentiation program. Unlike the
dorsal habenulae and despite their importance, the ventral habenulae have been
poorly studied. It is not known which genetic programs underlie their development
and why they are formed symmetrically, unlike the dorsal habenulae. A main reason
for this lack of knowledge is that the vHb origin has remained elusive to date.
RESULTS: To address these questions, we applied long-term 2-photon microscopy
time-lapse analysis of habenular neural circuit development combined with depth
color coding in a transgenic line, labeling all main components of the network.
Additional laser ablations and cell tracking experiments using the
photoconvertible PSmOrange system in GFP transgenic fish show that the ventral
habenulae develop in prosomere 2, posterior and lateral to the dorsal habenulae
in the dorsal thalamus. Mutant analysis demonstrates that the ventral habenular
nuclei only develop in the presence of functional Tcf7l2, a downstream modulator 
of the Wnt signaling cascade. Consistently, photoconverted thalamic tcf7l2exl/exl
mutant cells do not contribute to habenula formation.
CONCLUSIONS: We show in vivo that dorsal and ventral habenulae develop in
different regions of prosomere 2. In the process of ventral habenula formation,
functional tcf7l2 gene activity is required and in its absence, ventral habenular
neurons do not develop. Influenced by signals from parapineal cells, dorsal
habenular neurons differentiate at a time at which ventral habenular cells are
still on their way towards their final destination. Thus, our finding may provide
a simple explanation as to why only neuronal populations of the dorsal habenulae 
differ in size across brain hemispheres.

PMCID: PMC3827927
PMID: 24067090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Sep 25;14:98. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-98.

Genetic variants associated with fasting glucose and insulin concentrations in an
ethnically diverse population: results from the Population Architecture using
Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study.

Fesinmeyer MD(1), Meigs JB, North KE, Schumacher FR, Buková P, Franceschini N,
Haessler J, Goodloe R, Spencer KL, Voruganti VS, Howard BV, Jackson R, Kolonel
LN, Liu S, Manson JE, Monroe KR, Mukamal K, Dilks HH, Pendergrass SA, Nato A, Wan
P, Wilkens LR, Le Marchand L, Ambite JL, Buyske S, Florez JC, Crawford DC,
Hindorff LA, Haiman CA, Peters U, Pankow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota School 
of Public Health, Minneapolis MN, USA. pankow@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Multiple genome-wide association studies (GWAS) within European
populations have implicated common genetic variants associated with insulin and
glucose concentrations. In contrast, few studies have been conducted within
minority groups, which carry the highest burden of impaired glucose homeostasis
and type 2 diabetes in the U.S.
METHODS: As part of the 'Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology 
(PAGE) Consortium, we investigated the association of up to 10 GWAS-identified
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 8 genetic regions with glucose or
insulin concentrations in up to 36,579 non-diabetic subjects including 23,323
European Americans (EA) and 7,526 African Americans (AA), 3,140 Hispanics, 1,779 
American Indians (AI), and 811 Asians. We estimated the association between each 
SNP and fasting glucose or log-transformed fasting insulin, followed by
meta-analysis to combine results across PAGE sites.
RESULTS: Overall, our results show that 9/9 GWAS SNPs are associated with glucose
in EA (p = 0.04 to 9 × 10-15), versus 3/9 in AA (p= 0.03 to 6 × 10-5), 3/4 SNPs
in Hispanics, 2/4 SNPs in AI, and 1/2 SNPs in Asians. For insulin we observed a
significant association with rs780094/GCKR in EA, Hispanics and AI only.
CONCLUSIONS: Generalization of results across multiple racial/ethnic groups helps
confirm the relevance of some of these loci for glucose and insulin metabolism.
Lack of association in non-EA groups may be due to insufficient power, or to
unique patterns of linkage disequilibrium.

PMCID: PMC3849560
PMID: 24063630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Diabetes Care. 2014 Feb;37(2):475-82. doi: 10.2337/dc13-1458. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near genes modulating insulin secretion
predisposes obese youth to prediabetes.

Giannini C(1), Dalla Man C, Groop L, Cobelli C, Zhao H, Shaw MM, Duran E,
Pierpont B, Bale AE, Caprio S, Santoro N.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Nicola Santoro, nicola.santoro@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Paralleling the rise of pediatric obesity, the prevalence of impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing among youth. In
this study, we asked whether the co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near five
genes modulating insulin secretion (TCF7L2 rs7903146, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, CDKAL1
rs7754840, HHEX rs1111875, and HNF1A rs1169288) is associated with a higher risk 
of IGT/T2D in obese children and adolescents.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 714 obese subjects (290 boys and 424
girls; mean age 13.6 ± 3.1 years; mean z score BMI 2.2 ± 0.4) and evaluated the
insulin secretion by using the oral minimal model and, in a subgroup of 37
subjects, the hyperglycemic clamp. Also, 203 subjects were followed up for a mean
of 2.1 years.
RESULTS: We observed that the increase of risk alleles was associated with a
progressive worsening of insulin secretion (P < 0.001) mainly due to an
impairment of the dynamic phase of insulin secretion (P = 0.004); the higher the 
number of the risk alleles, the higher the chance of progression from normal
glucose tolerance (NGT) to IGT/T2D (P = 0.022). Also, for those who were IGT at
baseline, a higher risk score was associated with a lower odds to revert to NGT
(P = 0.026).
CONCLUSIONS: Obese children and adolescents developing IGT/T2D have a higher
genetic predisposition than those who do not show these diseases, and this
predisposition is mainly related to gene variants modulating the early phase of
insulin secretion. Although these data are very interesting, they need to be
replicated in other cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3898754
PMID: 24062323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Sep 23;14:96. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-96.

The TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T) allele is associated with type 2 diabetes in urban
Ghana: a hospital-based case-control study.

Danquah I(1), Othmer T, Frank LK, Bedu-Addo G, Schulze MB, Mockenhaupt FP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine and International Health, Charité,
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Spandauer Damm 130, 14050 Berlin, Germany.
ina.danquah@dife.de.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus is increasing dramatically in sub-Saharan
Africa, and genetic predisposition is likely involved in that. Yet, genetic
variants known to confer increased susceptibility among Caucasians are far from
being established in African populations. In Ghanaian adults, we examined
associations of several of these polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A hospital-based case-control study on type 2 diabetes (and
hypertension) was conducted in Kumasi, Ghana. TCF7L2 rs7903146, KCNJ11 rs5219,
PPAR<U+03B3> rs1801282 and CAPN10 rs3842570, rs3792267, and rs5030952 were typed and
associations with type 2 diabetes and phenotypic traits examined.
RESULTS: 675 patients with type 2 diabetes and 377 controls were compared. The
minor allele frequency of the TCF7L2 (T) allele was 0.33. In the multivariate
model, this allele increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 39% (95% confidence
interval (CI), 1.07-1.81; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014). The minor alleles KCNJ11 (G) and PPAR<U+03B3> (G) 
were practically absent (each, 0.001). Minor allele frequencies of CAPN10 were
for -43 (A) 0.11 and for -63 (C) 0.46. These variants showed no significant
associations with type 2 diabetes. Two CAPN10 haplotypes tended to protect
against type 2 diabetes: 211 (aOR, 0.32; 95% CI, 0.03-1.92; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.31) and 221
(aOR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.48-1.10; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.13).
CONCLUSIONS: In urban Ghana, the frequency of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T) allele is 
comparable to the one in Caucasians; the association with type 2 diabetes is
slightly weaker. The risk allele KCNJ11 (G) and the protective allele PPAR<U+03B3> (G)
are virtually absent. The potential influence of comparatively rare CAPN10
haplotypes on type 2 diabetes risk in this population requires further
evaluation. Large-scale genetic studies among native Africans aiming at
fine-mapping the candidate genes are needed to identify the actual factors
involved in their increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3848778
PMID: 24059590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Metab. 2013 Jun 17;2(3):243-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.06.003.
eCollection 2013.

Nor-1, a novel incretin-responsive regulator of insulin genes and insulin
secretion.

Ordelheide AM(1), Gerst F, Rothfuss O, Heni M, Haas C, Thielker I,
Herzberg-Schäfer S, Böhm A, Machicao F, Ullrich S, Stefan N, Fritsche A, Häring
HU, Staiger H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Tübingen,
Germany ; Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholz 
Centre Munich at the University of Tübingen, Germany ; German Center for Diabetes
Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany.

B-cell failure at the onset of type 2 diabetes is caused by a decline in ß-cell
function in the postprandial state and loss of pancreatic ß-cell mass. Recently, 
we showed an association between increased insulin secretion and a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), SNP rs12686676, in the NR4A3 gene locus encoding
the nuclear receptor Nor-1. Nor-1 is expressed in ß-cells, however, not much is
known about its function with regard to insulin gene expression and insulin
secretion. Nor-1 is induced in a glucose-/incretin-dependent manner via the PKA
pathway and directly induces insulin gene expression. Additionally, it stimulates
insulin secretion possibly via regulation of potentially important genes in
insulin exocytosis. Moreover, we show that the minor allele of NR4A3 SNP
rs12686676 fully rescues incretin resistance provoked by a well-described
polymorphism in TCF7L2. Thus, Nor-1 represents a promising new target for
pharmacological intervention to fight diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3773820
PMID: 24044104  [PubMed]


243. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.003.
Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Malondialdehyde regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in murine islets
via TCF7L2-dependent Wnt signaling pathway.

Wang X(1), Lei XG, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China; Animal Science Department, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Evidence showed strong relations between malondialdehyde (MDA) levels and
different pathological stages of diabetes. Here, an explicit system with freshly 
isolated islets and precisely controlled MDA gradient was employed to investigate
the physiological effect of MDA on GSIS. Promoter analysis, pathway mapping,
Q-PCR profiling, and siRNA verification were performed to clarify the
intracellular signaling pathways. MDA at a moderately high level (5 and 10µM)
promoted GSIS and accompanied with ATP/ADP ratio, cytosolic Ca(2+) level, and key
regulators (GK, GLUT2, PDX1, and UCP2) changes in islets. Both upstream (PI3K and
p-AKT) and downstream (TCF7L2 and TCF7) factors of Wnt pathway showed greatest
changes. Knockdown of TCF7L2 blocked the MDA-induced GSIS elevation. These
results indicated that MDA acted as a signaling messenger and regulated islet
GSIS mainly through Wnt pathway. Therefore, the elevated MDA level and
up-regulated Wnt signaling pathway could be an etiological factor in the
development of hyperinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. JAMA. 2013 Sep 11;310(10):1013. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.277647.

Mediterranean diet may reduce stroke risk in individuals with genetic
predisposition to diabetes.

Mitka M.

PMID: 24026584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Oct;121(9):526-30. doi:
10.1055/s-0033-1347199. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Rs290487 of TCF7L2 gene is not associated with type 2 diabetes in Chinese Han
population: a case control study and meta-analysis.

Ren Q(1), Xiao J, Han X, Luo Y, Yang W, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Peking University Diabetes Center, Beijing, China.

AIMS: rs290487 in TCF7L2 was originally identified to be associated with type 2
diabetes in Taiwan Chinese population. However, discrepancies were noted in
subsequent replicated studies. So the aim of this study is to investigate the
effect of rs290487 in TCF7L2 on genetic susceptibility of type 2 diabetes in a
large sample of Chinese -population.
RESULTS: In meta analysis of 9 studies with 9 422 cases and 8 585 control
subjects, no association was found between rs290487 and type 2 diabetes in China 
(OR=1.06, 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.96-1.17, p=0.19). In case control
study, rs290487 was genotyped in 5 151 diabetic patients and 4 650 non-diabetic
controls. After adjusting for sex, age and BMI, and using an additive genetic
model, logistic regression analysis revealed no association between rs290487 and 
type 2 diabetes (OR=1.015, 95%CI 0.949-1.087, p=0.662). No association was found 
between rs290487 and type 2 diabetes in northern and southern Chinese population 
separately.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we have found no association between rs290487 and type 2
diabetes in Chinese population. This SNP is unlikely an influential genetic
variant with type 2 diabetes in Chinese population.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24002895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Front Horm Res. 2013;40:28-39. doi: 10.1159/000341682. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Genetics of polycystic ovary syndrome.

Barber TM(1), Franks S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic and Vascular Health, Warwick Medical School, University 
of Warwick, Coventry, UK. T.Barber@warwick.ac.uk

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an oligogenic condition, with a heritability 
of ~70%. PCOS is also associated with obesity, which itself is heavily influenced
by genetic variants. PCOS is inherently difficult to study genetically, and most 
of the current literature (>70 studies based on the candidate gene approach) is
inconclusive, with many studies being underpowered resulting in inconsistencies, 
controversies and lack of clear consensus. A further problem is that the
candidate gene approach relies upon some prior understanding of pathogenesis to
determine the candidacy of the gene chosen (with >20,000 genes to choose from
within the human genome). PCOS has a complex and incompletely understood
pathogenesis, thereby limiting the candidate gene approach for this condition.
Thankfully, this limitation is overcome through use of the genome-wide
association study (GWAS), the first of which in PCOS has already been published. 
The GWAS does not rely upon any a priori understanding of pathogenesis, and as
such holds the potential to reveal hitherto unexpected or even unknown pathogenic
pathways that may be implicated in the development of PCOS. Data from future GWAS
in PCOS should transform our understanding of PCOS pathogenesis, and also provide
a basis on which to develop future novel therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24002403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Adipocyte. 2013 Jul 1;2(3):143-7. doi: 10.4161/adip.24751. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Regulation of alternative splicing in obesity and weight loss.

Kaminska D(1), Pihlajamäki J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition; University of Eastern
Finland; Kuopio, Finland.

Alternative splicing (AS) is a mechanism by which multiple mRNA transcripts are
generated from a single gene. According to recent reports approximately 95-100%
of human multi-exon genes undergo AS. This increases the amount of functionally
different protein isoforms, and in some cases leads to metabolic diseases. Herein
we provide a brief overview of the basic aspects of splicing regulation in
obesity and insulin resistance with specific examples. In addition, we review our
recent findings demonstrating that weight loss regulates AS of TCF7L2 gene in
both liver and adipose tissue, and that this splicing associates with changes in 
fatty acid and glucose metabolism. Future studies using global analysis of
transcript variants and splicing regulators are needed for exploring the
association of AS with metabolic alterations in obesity and type 2 diabetes
(T2D). Understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind the aberrantly spliced
transcripts may also provide opportunities for new diagnostic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3756102
PMID: 23991360  [PubMed]


248. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 19;8(8):e71399. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071399. eCollection
2013.

Association of genetic variants with isolated fasting hyperglycaemia and isolated
postprandial hyperglycaemia in a Han Chinese population.

Kong X(1), Hong J, Chen Y, Chen L, Zhao Z, Li Q, Ge J, Chen G, Guo X, Lu J, Weng 
J, Jia W, Ji L, Xiao J, Shan Z, Liu J, Tian H, Ji Q, Zhu D, Zhou Z, Shan G, Yang 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Diabetes Prevention and
Control, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Though multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with type 2 diabetes have been identified, the genetic bases of isolated fasting 
hyperglycaemia (IFH) and isolated postprandial hyperglycaemia (IPH) were still
unclear. In present study, we aimed to investigate the association of genome-wide
association study-validated genetic variants and IFH or IPH in Han Chinese.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genotyped 27 validated SNPs in 6,663 unrelated
individuals comprising 341 IFH, 865 IPH, 1,203 combined fasting hyperglycaemia
and postprandial hyperglycaemia, and 4,254 normal glycaemic subjects of Han
ancestry. The distributions of genotype frequencies of FTO, CDKAL1 and GCKR were 
significant different between individuals with IFH and those with IPH (SNP(ptrend
): rs8050136(0.0024), rs9939609(0.0049), rs7756992(0.0122), rs780094(0.0037)).
Risk allele of FTO specifically increased the risk of IFH (rs8050136: OR 1.403
[95% CI 1.125-1.750], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0027; rs9939609: 1.398 [1.120-1.744], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0030). G 
allele of CDKAL1 specifically increased the risk of IPH (1.217 [1.092-1.355],
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0004). G allele of GCKR increased the risk of IFH (1.167 [0.999-1.362],
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0513), but decreased the risk of IPH (0.891 [0.801-0.991], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0331). In 
addition, TCF7L2 and KCNQ1 increased the risk of both IFH and IPH. When combined,
each additional risk allele associated with IFH increased the risk for IFH by
1.246-fold (p<0.0001), while each additional risk allele associated with IPH
increased the risk for IPH by 1.190-fold (p<0.0001).
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that genotype distributions of
variants from FTO, GCKR, CDKAL1 were different between IPH and IFH in Han
Chinese. Variants of genes modulating insulin sensitivity (FTO, GCKR) contributed
to the risk of IFH, while variants of genes related to beta cell function
(CDKAL1) increase the risk of IPH.

PMCID: PMC3747192
PMID: 23990951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 20;8(8):e72822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072822. eCollection
2013.

Limited TCF7L2 expression in MS lesions.

Lürbke A(1), Hagemeier K, Cui QL, Metz I, Brück W, Antel J, Kuhlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

Multiple sclerosis is the most frequent demyelinating disease in the human CNS
characterized by inflammation, demyelination, relative axonal loss and gliosis.
Remyelination occurs, but is frequently absent or restricted to a small
remyelinated rim at the lesion border. Impaired differentiation of
oligodendroglial precursor cells is one factor contributing to limited
remyelination, especially in chronic MS. TCF7L2 is an oligodendroglial
transcription factor regulating myelin gene expression during developmental
myelination as well as remyelination. TCF7L2 binds to co-effectors such as
ß-catenin or histone deacetylases and thereby activates or inhibits the
transcription of downstream genes involved in oligodendroglial differentiation.
To determine whether TCF7L2 can be used as a marker for differentiating or
myelinating oligodendrocytes, we analyzed the expression patterns of TCF7L2
during myelination and remyelination in human and murine CNS tissue samples.
Here, we demonstrate that marked expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is
restricted to a well defined time period during developmental myelination in
human and mouse CNS tissue samples. In demyelinating diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, TCF7L2 is reexpressed in oligodendrocytes in a subset of MS patients, 
but is also present in tissue samples from patients with non-demyelinating,
inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, TCF7L2 expression was also detected in
astrocytes. HDAC2, a potential binding partner of TCF7L2 that promotes
oligodendroglial differentiation and myelination, is expressed in the majority of
oligodendrocytes in controls and MS tissue samples. In summary, our data
demonstrate that the expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is limited to a
certain differentiation stage; however the expression of TCF7L2 is neither
restricted to the oligodendroglial lineage nor to (re-)myelinating conditions.

PMCID: PMC3748032
PMID: 23977356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 19;8(8):e71509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071509. eCollection
2013.

Genome-wide association study reveals genetic architecture of eating behavior in 
pigs and its implications for humans obesity by comparative mapping.

Do DN(1), Strathe AB, Ostersen T, Jensen J, Mark T, Kadarmideen HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark.

This study was aimed at identifying genomic regions controlling feeding behavior 
in Danish Duroc boars and its potential implications for eating behavior in
humans. Data regarding individual daily feed intake (DFI), total daily time spent
in feeder (TPD), number of daily visits to feeder (NVD), average duration of each
visit (TPV), mean feed intake per visit (FPV) and mean feed intake rate (FR) were
available for 1130 boars. All boars were genotyped using the Illumina Porcine
SNP60 BeadChip. The association analyses were performed using the GenABEL package
in the R program. Sixteen SNPs were found to have moderate genome-wide
significance (p<5E-05) and 76 SNPs had suggestive (p<5E-04) association with
feeding behavior traits. MSI2 gene on chromosome (SSC) 14 was very strongly
associated with NVD. Thirty-six SNPs were located in genome regions where QTLs
have previously been reported for behavior and/or feed intake traits in pigs. The
regions: 64-65 Mb on SSC 1, 124-130 Mb on SSC 8, 63-68 Mb on SSC 11, 32-39 Mb and
59-60 Mb on SSC 12 harbored several signifcant SNPs. Synapse genes (GABRR2,
PPP1R9B, SYT1, GABRR1, CADPS2, DLGAP2 and GOPC), dephosphorylation genes (PPM1E, 
DAPP1, PTPN18, PTPRZ1, PTPN4, MTMR4 and RNGTT) and positive regulation of peptide
secretion genes (GHRH, NNAT and TCF7L2) were highly significantly associated with
feeding behavior traits. This is the first GWAS to identify genetic variants and 
biological mechanisms for eating behavior in pigs and these results are important
for genetic improvement of pig feed efficiency. We have also conducted pig-human 
comparative gene mapping to reveal key genomic regions and/or genes on the human 
genome that may influence eating behavior in human beings and consequently affect
the development of obesity and metabolic syndrome. This is the first
translational genomics study of its kind to report potential candidate genes for 
eating behavior in humans.

PMCID: PMC3747221
PMID: 23977060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. World J Diabetes. 2013 Aug 15;4(4):114-23. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v4.i4.114.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes.

Ali O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Omar Ali, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is the result of interaction between environmental factors 
and a strong hereditary component. We review the heritability of T2D as well as
the history of genetic and genomic research in this area. Very few T2D risk genes
were identified using candidate gene and linkage-based studies, but the advent of
genome-wide association studies has led to the identification of multiple genes, 
including several that were not previously known to play any role in T2D. Highly 
replicated genes, for example TCF7L2, KCNQ1 and KCNJ11, are discussed in greater 
detail. Taken together, the genetic loci discovered to date explain only a small 
proportion of the observed heritability. We discuss possible explanations for
this "missing heritability", including the role of rare variants,
gene-environment interactions and epigenetics. The clinical utility of current
findings and avenues of future research are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC3746083
PMID: 23961321  [PubMed]


252. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 9;8(8):e71730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071730. eCollection 
2013.

Association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphism and cancer risk: a meta-analysis.

Chen J(1), Yuan T, Liu M, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of the
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been suggested to 
play an important role in the pathogenesis of cancer. However, the results have
been inconsistent. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis to clarify the
associations between TCF7L2 polymorphism and cancer risk.
METHODS: Published literature from PubMed and EMBASE were retrieved. Pooled odds 
ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence interval (CIs) were calculated using fixed- or
random-effects model.
RESULTS: A total of 19 studies (14,814 cases and 33,856 controls) were identified
for the analysis of the association between TCF7L2 polymorphism and cancer risk. 
The results showed that TCF7L2 polymorphism was associated with breast cancer
(Homogeneous model: OR=1.17, 95%CI=1.02-1.35, I (2)<U+200A>=21.8%, p for
heterogeneity=0.276; Heterogeneous model: OR=1.11, 95%CI=1.03-1.20, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, 
p for heterogeneity=0.543), prostate cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=0.89,
95%CI=0.84-0.96, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.640; Heterogeneous model:
OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.95, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.871), and colon
cancer (Heterogeneous model: OR=1.15, 95%CI=1.01-1.31, I (2)<U+200A>=0.0%, p for
heterogeneity=0.658), but not with colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis indicated that there were significantly
associations between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and risk of breast,
prostate and colon cancers, rather than colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and
ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3739728
PMID: 23951231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Diabetologia. 2013 Nov;56(11):2414-23. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3021-y. Epub 2013 
Aug 14.

Parental history of type 2 diabetes, TCF7L2 variant and lower insulin secretion
are associated with incident hypertension. Data from the DESIR and RISC cohorts.

Bonnet F(1), Roussel R, Natali A, Cauchi S, Petrie J, Laville M, Yengo L, Froguel
P, Lange C, Lantieri O, Marre M, Balkau B, Ferrannini E; DESIR and RISC Study
Groups.

Author information: 
(1)Service Endocrinologie-Diabétologie, CHU Rennes, Université Rennes 1, Inserm
UMR 991, Rennes, France, fabrice.bonnet@chu-rennes.fr.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The relationship between insulin secretion and the incidence of 
hypertension has not been well characterised. We hypothesised that both a
parental history of diabetes and TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, which increases
susceptibility to diabetes because of impaired beta cell function, are associated
with incident hypertension. In a separate cohort, we assessed whether low insulin
secretion is related to incident hypertension.
METHODS: Nine year incident hypertension was studied in 2,391 normotensive
participants from the Data from an Epidemiological Study on the Insulin
Resistance Syndrome (DESIR) cohort. The relationship between insulin secretion
and 3 year incident hypertension was investigated in 1,047 non-diabetic,
normotensive individuals from the Relationship between Insulin Sensitivity and
Cardiovascular Disease (RISC) cohort. Insulin secretion during OGTT was expressed
in relation to the degree of insulin resistance, as assessed by a
hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp.
RESULTS: In the DESIR cohort, a parental history of diabetes and the TCF7L2
at-risk variant were both associated with hypertension incidence at year 9,
independently of waist circumference, BP, fasting glucose, insulin levels and
HOMA-IR at inclusion (p = 0.02 for parental history, p = 0.006 for TCF7L2). In
the RISC cohort, a lower insulin secretion rate during the OGTT at baseline was
associated with both higher BP and a greater risk of hypertension at year 3. This
inverse correlation between the insulin secretion rate and incident hypertension 
persisted after controlling for baseline insulin resistance, glycaemia and BP (p 
= 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Parental history of diabetes, TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and a reduced insulin secretion rate were consistently associated
with incident hypertension. A low insulin secretion rate might be a new risk
factor for incident hypertension, beyond insulin resistance.

PMID: 23942764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Diabetes Care. 2013 Nov;36(11):3803-11. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0955. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Mediterranean diet reduces the adverse effect of the TCF7L2-rs7903146
polymorphism on cardiovascular risk factors and stroke incidence: a randomized
controlled trial in a high-cardiovascular-risk population.

Corella D(1), Carrasco P, Sorlí JV, Estruch R, Rico-Sanz J, Martínez-González MÁ,
Salas-Salvadó J, Covas MI, Coltell O, Arós F, Lapetra J, Serra-Majem L,
Ruiz-Gutiérrez V, Warnberg J, Fiol M, Pintó X, Ortega-Azorín C, Muñoz MÁ,
Martínez JA, Gómez-Gracia E, González JI, Ros E, Ordovás JM.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Dolores Corella, dolores.corella@uv.es.

OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms are strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes, but controversially with plasma lipids and
cardiovascular disease. Interactions of the Mediterranean diet (MedDiet) on these
associations are unknown. We investigated whether the TCF7L2-rs7903146 (C>T)
polymorphism associations with type 2 diabetes, glucose, lipids, and
cardiovascular disease incidence were modulated by MedDiet.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A randomized trial (two MedDiet intervention groups 
and a control group) with 7,018 participants in the PREvención con
DIetaMEDiterránea study was undertaken and major cardiovascular events assessed. 
Data were analyzed at baseline and after a median follow-up of 4.8 years.
Multivariable-adjusted Cox regression was used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs)
for cardiovascular events.
RESULTS: The TCF7L2-rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with type 2 diabetes
(odds ratio 1.87 [95% CI 1.62-2.17] for TT compared with CC). MedDiet interacted 
significantly with rs7903146 on fasting glucose at baseline (P interaction =
0.004). When adherence to the MedDiet was low, TT had higher fasting glucose
concentrations (132.3 ± 3.5 mg/dL) than CC+CT (127.3 ± 3.2 mg/dL) individuals (P 
= 0.001). Nevertheless, when adherence was high, this increase was not observed
(P = 0.605). This modulation was also detected for total cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, and triglycerides (P interaction < 0.05 for all). Likewise, in the
randomized trial, TT subjects had a higher stroke incidence in the control group 
(adjusted HR 2.91 [95% CI 1.36-6.19]; P = 0.006 compared with CC), whereas
dietary intervention with MedDiet reduced stroke incidence in TT homozygotes
(adjusted HR 0.96 [95% CI 0.49-1.87]; P = 0.892 for TT compared with CC).
CONCLUSIONS: Our novel results suggest that MedDiet may not only reduce increased
fasting glucose and lipids in TT individuals, but also stroke incidence.

PMCID: PMC3816851
PMID: 23942586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Oct 1;169(5):569-76. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0105. Print 2013 
Nov.

Polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene in South Brazilian women with polycystic ovary
syndrome: a cross-sectional study.

Ramos RB(1), Wiltgen D, Spritzer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecological Endocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Hospital de
Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2350, 90035-003 Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 C/T
and rs11196236 C/T are associated with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in South 
Brazilian women.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Two hundred PCOS patients and 102 non-hirsute, ovulatory controls were
genotyped by real-time PCR. Haplotypes were constructed from the combination of
both polymorphisms. Frequencies were inferred using the PHASE 2.1.1 software.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The distribution of rs7903146 (PCOS, 54.4% CC; 28.5% CT;
17.1% TT; controls, 51.0% CC; 37.0% CT; 12.0% TT) and rs11196236 (PCOS, 4.3% CC; 
33.5% CT; 62.2% TT; controls, 3.2% CC; 35.5% CT; 61.3% TT) was similar between
the groups. rs7903146 and rs11196236 were not in linkage disequilibrium
(|D'|=0.34; r(2)=0.07). PCOS participants were younger, with higher age-adjusted 
BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure, triglycerides, insulin, homeostasis
model assessment index to estimate insulin resistance and total testosterone, and
lower HDL-C and sex hormone binding globulin vs controls. In PCOS, no differences
between genotypes and haplotypes were found for clinical and metabolic variables.
However, for each T (rs7903146) and T (rs11196236) allele added to the
haplotypes, a variation of 5.87 cm in waist (P trend=0.01), 10.7 mg/dl in total
cholesterol (P trend=0.03), and 10.3 mg/dl in LDL-C (P trend=0.01) was recorded. 
TCF7L2 variants are probably not implicated in PCOS development in South
Brazilian women.

PMID: 23935130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;30(4):467-72. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2013.04.019.

[Study of the association between SNP rs7903146(C/T) in TCF7L2 and metabolic
syndrome in Chinese Korean and Han populations from Yanbian].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YP(1), Wang WJ, Sheng TX, Cui ZW, Jin YH, Jin Y, Zhang Z, Jin XJ, Zhou WJ,
Yang KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Yanbian University College of
Basic Medicine, Yanji, Jilin 133000, P. R. China. yangkj@ybu.cdu.com.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between a rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism of
TCF7L2 gene and metabolic syndrome (MS), plasma lipoprotein, and plasma
adiponectin (PA) in Chinese Korean and Han populations from Yanbian region.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing were used to determine the 
genotype of rs7903146 in 310 Chinese Korean (190 in case group and 120 in control
group) and 344 Chinese Han (255 in case group and 89 in control group). ELIAS was
used to test serum insulin (INS) and PA.
RESULTS: The frequency of T allele was higher in ethnic Han compared with ethnic 
Koreans (0.022 vs. 0.008), lower than that of Europeans (0.279) and Africans
(0.257), but similar to those of Beijing Chinese and Japanese. For ethnic Korean 
Chinese, the frequencies of TT and CT genotypes as well as the T allele in
patients with EH were significantly higher than those of the control group (P<
0.01), which also showed an increasing trend for both MS and T2DM groups (P=0.09 
and P=0.07, respectively). By contrast, for Chinese Han, the frequencies of
genotypes and particular allele in patients with MS, T2DM and EH showed no
significant difference from those of the control group. For T2DM, EH, and control
groups, PA level of individuals with CT or TT genotypes was significantly higher 
compared with that of the CC genotype (P< 0.05). The TC and LDL-C levels were
significantly higher in T2DM, MS and EH groups compared with those of the control
group. The PA level was lower in MS group compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: The T allele of SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene may be a risk factor for
EH in Chinese Korean population from Yanbian region. The T allele also affects
the PA level; lower PA is a risk factor for MS. The rs7903146 polymorphism showed
a racial and ethnic difference.

PMID: 23926018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 24;33(30):12528-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0536-13.2013.

Transgenic overexpression of Sox17 promotes oligodendrocyte development and
attenuates demyelination.

Ming X(1), Chew LJ, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that Sox17 regulates cell cycle exit and
differentiation in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Here we investigated its
function in white matter (WM) development and adult injury with a newly generated
transgenic mouse overexpressing Sox17 in the oligodendrocyte lineage under the
CNPase promoter. Sox17 overexpression in CNP-Sox17 mice sequentially promoted
postnatal oligodendrogenesis, increasing NG2 progenitor cells from postnatal day 
(P) 15, then O4+ and CC1+ cells at P30 and P120, respectively. Total Olig2+
oligodendrocyte lineage cells first decreased between P8 and P22 through
Sox17-mediated increase in apoptotic cell death, and thereafter significantly
exceeded WT levels from P30 when cell death had ceased. CNP-Sox17 mice showed
increased Gli2 protein levels and Gli2+ cells in WM, indicating that Sox17
promotes the generation of oligodendrocyte lineage cells through Hedgehog
signaling. Sox17 overexpression prevented cell loss after lysolecithin-induced
demyelination by increasing Olig2+ and CC1+ cells in response to injury.
Furthermore, Sox17 overexpression abolished the injury-induced increase in
TCF7L2/TCF4+ cells, and protected oligodendrocytes from apoptosis by preventing
decreases in Gli2 and Bcl-2 expression that were observed in WT lesions. Our
study thus reveals a biphasic effect of Sox17 overexpression on cell survival and
oligodendrocyte formation in the developing WM, and that its potentiation of
oligodendrocyte survival in the adult confers resistance to injury and myelin
loss. This study demonstrates that overexpression of this transcription factor
might be a viable protective strategy to mitigate the consequences of
demyelination in the adult WM.

PMCID: PMC3721852
PMID: 23884956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;29(10):873-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2013.813469.
Epub 2013 Jul 15.

Association of the rs7903146 polymorphism in transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene with gestational diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis.

Kang S(1), Xie Z, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Medical College of Qingdao University , Qingdao, 
Shandong , P.R. China.

A meta-analysis was performed to assess the association between the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism rs7903146 (IVS3C<U+2009>><U+2009>T) and gestational 
diabetes mellitus (GDM). A comprehensive search was conducted to identify all
case-control or cohort design studies of the above-mentioned associations. The
fixed or random effect pooled measure was selected on the basis of homogeneity
test among studies. Heterogeneity among studies was evaluated using the I(2).
Meta-regression was used to explore the potential sources of between-study
heterogeneity. Publication bias was estimated using Egger's linear regression
test. A total of 10 studies including 3404 cases and 6473 controls were involved 
in this meta-analysis. Overall, after excluding articles that deviated from HWE
in controls, and further the key contributors to between-study heterogeneity,
significant associations between TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic polymorphism and risk
of gestational diabetes mellitus were observed in the dominant (OR 1.653, 95% CI 
1.416-1.930) and codominant (OR 1.525, 95% CI 1.350-1.723) models. The
meta-analysis suggests that TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic polymorphism was associated 
with increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 23855352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 1;8(7):e67694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067694. Print 2013.

GRG5/AES interacts with T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) and downregulates Wnt signaling in
human cells and zebrafish embryos.

Costa AM(1), Pereira-Castro I, Ricardo E, Spencer F, Fisher S, da Costa LT.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP-Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of 
Porto, Porto, Portugal. ltcosta@uevora.pt

Transcriptional control by TCF/LEF proteins is crucial in key developmental
processes such as embryo polarity, tissue architecture and cell fate
determination. TCFs associate with ß-catenin to activate transcription in the
presence of Wnt signaling, but in its absence act as repressors together with
Groucho-family proteins (GRGs). TCF4 is critical in vertebrate intestinal
epithelium, where TCF4-ß-catenin complexes are necessary for the maintenance of a
proliferative compartment, and their abnormal formation initiates tumorigenesis. 
However, the extent of TCF4-GRG complexes' roles in development and the
mechanisms by which they repress transcription are not completely understood.
Here we characterize the interaction between TCF4 and GRG5/AES, a Groucho family 
member whose functional relationship with TCFs has been controversial. We map the
core GRG interaction region in TCF4 to a 111-amino acid fragment and show that,
in contrast to other GRGs, GRG5/AES-binding specifically depends on a 4-amino
acid motif (LVPQ) present only in TCF3 and some TCF4 isoforms. We further
demonstrate that GRG5/AES represses Wnt-mediated transcription both in human
cells and zebrafish embryos. Importantly, we provide the first evidence of an
inherent repressive function of GRG5/AES in dorsal-ventral patterning during
early zebrafish embryogenesis. These results improve our understanding of TCF-GRG
interactions, have significant implications for models of transcriptional
repression by TCF-GRG complexes, and lay the groundwork for in depth direct
assessment of the potential role of Groucho-family proteins in both normal and
abnormal development.

PMCID: PMC3698143
PMID: 23840876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Jul;121(7):413-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1347249.
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Expression profiling of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in the pancreatic
islets, adipose tissue and liver of obese mice.

Morrison F(1), Locke J, Arif M, Murray A, Brown JE, Harries LW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by impaired beta cell function and insulin
resistance. T2D susceptibility genes identified by Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) are likely to have roles in both impaired insulin secretion from
the beta cell as well as insulin resistance. The aim of this study was to use
gene expression profiling to assess the effect of the diabetic milieu on the
expression of genes involved in both insulin secretion and insulin resistance.We 
measured the expression of 43 T2D susceptibility genes in the islets, adipose and
liver of leptin-deficient Ob/Ob mice compared with Ob/+ littermates. The same
panel of genes were also profiled in cultured rodent adipocytes, hepatocytes and 
beta cells in response to high glucose conditions, to distinguish expression
effects due to elevated glycemia from those on the causal pathway to diabetes or 
induced by other factors in the diabetic microenviroment.We found widespread
deregulation of these genes in tissues from Ob/Ob mice, with differential
regulation of 23 genes in adipose, 18 genes in liver and one gene (Tcf7l2) in
islets of diabetic animals (Ob/Ob) compared to control (Ob/+) animals. However,
these expression changes were in most cases not noted in glucose-treated
adipocyte, hepatocyte or beta cell lines, indicating that they may not be an
effect of hyperglycemia alone.This study indicates that expression changes are
apparent with diabetes in both the insulin producing beta cells, but also in
peripheral tissues involved in insulin resistance. This suggests that incidence
or progression of diabetic phenotypes in a mouse model of diabetes is driven by
both secretory and peripheral defects.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23839539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003572. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003572. Epub 2013 
Jun 27.

A six months exercise intervention influences the genome-wide DNA methylation
pattern in human adipose tissue.

Rönn T(1), Volkov P, Davegårdh C, Dayeh T, Hall E, Olsson AH, Nilsson E, Tornberg
A, Dekker Nitert M, Eriksson KF, Jones HA, Groop L, Ling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Epigenetics and Diabetes, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, CRC, Malmö, Sweden. tina.ronn@med.lu.se

Epigenetic mechanisms are implicated in gene regulation and the development of
different diseases. The epigenome differs between cell types and has until now
only been characterized for a few human tissues. Environmental factors
potentially alter the epigenome. Here we describe the genome-wide pattern of DNA 
methylation in human adipose tissue from 23 healthy men, with a previous low
level of physical activity, before and after a six months exercise intervention. 
We also investigate the differences in adipose tissue DNA methylation between 31 
individuals with or without a family history of type 2 diabetes. DNA methylation 
was analyzed using Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, an array containing
485,577 probes covering 99% RefSeq genes. Global DNA methylation changed and
17,975 individual CpG sites in 7,663 unique genes showed altered levels of DNA
methylation after the exercise intervention (q<0.05). Differential mRNA
expression was present in 1/3 of gene regions with altered DNA methylation,
including RALBP1, HDAC4 and NCOR2 (q<0.05). Using a luciferase assay, we could
show that increased DNA methylation in vitro of the RALBP1 promoter suppressed
the transcriptional activity (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03). Moreover, 18 obesity and 21 type 2
diabetes candidate genes had CpG sites with differences in adipose tissue DNA
methylation in response to exercise (q<0.05), including TCF7L2 (6 CpG sites) and 
KCNQ1 (10 CpG sites). A simultaneous change in mRNA expression was seen for 6 of 
those genes. To understand if genes that exhibit differential DNA methylation and
mRNA expression in human adipose tissue in vivo affect adipocyte metabolism, we
silenced Hdac4 and Ncor2 respectively in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, which resulted in
increased lipogenesis both in the basal and insulin stimulated state. In
conclusion, exercise induces genome-wide changes in DNA methylation in human
adipose tissue, potentially affecting adipocyte metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3694844
PMID: 23825961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014 Apr;14(2):142-50. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2013.20. Epub 2013
Jul 2.

Association of common gene variants in the WNT/ß-catenin pathway with colon
cancer recurrence.

Páez D(1), Gerger A(2), Zhang W(3), Yang D(4), Labonte MJ(5), Benhanim L(3), Kahn
M(3), Lenz F(3), Lenz C(3), Ning Y(3), Wakatsuki T(3), Loupakis F(3), Lenz HJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain. (2)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 
[2] Division of Clinical Oncology, Research Unit Genetic Epidemiology and
Pharmacogenetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. (4)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (5)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Department of Biology and Chemistry, Azusa
Pacific University, Azusa, CA, USA. (6)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] University of Southern California, Center
for Molecular Pathways and Drug Discovery, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has a central role in the development and progression of 
most colon cancers (CCs). Germline variants in Wnt/ß-catenin pathway genes may
result in altered gene function and/or activity, thereby causing inter-individual
differences in relation to tumor recurrence capacity and chemoresistance. We
investigated germline polymorphisms in a comprehensive panel of Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway genes to predict time to tumor recurrence (TTR) in patients with stage
III and high-risk stage II CC. A total of 234 patients treated with
5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy were included in this study. Whole-blood
samples were analyzed for putative functional germline polymorphisms in SFRP3,
SFRP4, DKK2, DKK3, Axin2, APC, TCF7L2, WNT5B, CXXC4, NOTCH2 and GLI1 genes by
PCR-based restriction fragment-length polymorphism or direct DNA sequencing.
Polymorphisms with statistical significance were validated in an independent
study cohort. The minor allele of WNT5B rs2010851 T>G was significantly
associated with a shorter TTR (10.7 vs 4.9 years; hazard ratio: 2.48; 95% CI,
0.96-6.38; P=0.04) in high-risk stage II CC patients. This result remained
significant in multivariate Cox's regression analysis. This study shows that the 
WNT5B germline variant rs2010851 was significantly identified as a
stage-dependent prognostic marker for CC patients after 5-fluorouracil-based
adjuvant therapy.

PMID: 23817222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Aging (Albany NY). 2013 May;5(5):373-85.

Centenarians as super-controls to assess the biological relevance of genetic risk
factors for common age-related diseases: a proof of principle on type 2 diabetes.

Garagnani P(1), Giuliani C, Pirazzini C, Olivieri F, Bacalini MG, Ostan R, Mari
D, Passarino G, Monti D, Bonfigli AR, Boemi M, Ceriello A, Genovese S, Sevini F, 
Luiselli D, Tieri P, Capri M, Salvioli S, Vijg J, Suh Y, Delledonne M, Testa R,
Franceschi C.

Author information: 
(1)DIMES - Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine,
University of Bologna, Bologna, 40126 Italy. paolo.garagnani2@unibo.it

Genetic association studies of age-related, chronic human diseases often suffer
from a lack of power to detect modest effects. Here we propose an alternative
approach of including healthy centenarians as a more homogeneous and extreme
control group. As a proof of principle we focused on type 2 diabetes (T2D) and
assessed /genotypic associations of 31 SNPs associated with T2D, diabetes
complications and metabolic diseases and SNPs of genes relevant for telomere
stability and age-related diseases. We hypothesized that the frequencies of risk 
variants are inversely correlated with decreasing health and longevity. We
performed association analyses comparing diabetic patients and non-diabetic
controls followed by association analyses with extreme phenotypic groups (T2D
patients with complications and centenarians). Results drew attention to
rs7903146 (TCF7L2 gene) that showed a constant increase in the frequencies of
risk genotype (TT) from centenarians to diabetic patients who developed
macro-complications and the strongest genotypic association was detected when
diabetic patients were compared to centenarians (p_value = 9.066*10<U+207B>7). We
conclude that robust and biologically relevant associations can be obtained when 
extreme phenotypes, even with a small sample size, are compared.

PMCID: PMC3701112
PMID: 23804578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Genome Res. 2013 Sep;23(9):1446-61. doi: 10.1101/gr.152942.112. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

CCAT2, a novel noncoding RNA mapping to 8q24, underlies metastatic progression
and chromosomal instability in colon cancer.

Ling H(1), Spizzo R, Atlasi Y, Nicoloso M, Shimizu M, Redis RS, Nishida N, Gafà
R, Song J, Guo Z, Ivan C, Barbarotto E, De Vries I, Zhang X, Ferracin M,
Churchman M, van Galen JF, Beverloo BH, Shariati M, Haderk F, Estecio MR,
Garcia-Manero G, Patijn GA, Gotley DC, Bhardwaj V, Shureiqi I, Sen S, Multani AS,
Welsh J, Yamamoto K, Taniguchi I, Song MA, Gallinger S, Casey G, Thibodeau SN, Le
Marchand L, Tiirikainen M, Mani SA, Zhang W, Davuluri RV, Mimori K, Mori M,
Sieuwerts AM, Martens JW, Tomlinson I, Negrini M, Berindan-Neagoe I, Foekens JA, 
Hamilton SR, Lanza G, Kopetz S, Fodde R, Calin GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The functional roles of SNPs within the 8q24 gene desert in the cancer phenotype 
are not yet well understood. Here, we report that CCAT2, a novel long noncoding
RNA transcript (lncRNA) encompassing the rs6983267 SNP, is highly overexpressed
in microsatellite-stable colorectal cancer and promotes tumor growth, metastasis,
and chromosomal instability. We demonstrate that MYC, miR-17-5p, and miR-20a are 
up-regulated by CCAT2 through TCF7L2-mediated transcriptional regulation. We
further identify the physical interaction between CCAT2 and TCF7L2 resulting in
an enhancement of WNT signaling activity. We show that CCAT2 is itself a WNT
downstream target, which suggests the existence of a feedback loop. Finally, we
demonstrate that the SNP status affects CCAT2 expression and the risk allele G
produces more CCAT2 transcript. Our results support a new mechanism of MYC and
WNT regulation by the novel lncRNA CCAT2 in colorectal cancer pathogenesis, and
provide an alternative explanation of the SNP-conferred cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3759721
PMID: 23796952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Food Chem. 2013 Nov 15;141(2):809-15. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.04.062. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

The in vitro and in vivo effects of yerba mate (Ilex paraguariensis) extract on
adipogenesis.

Arçari DP(1), Santos JC, Gambero A, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade Integrada de Farmacologia e Gastroenterologia, Universidade São
Francisco, Bragança Paulista, SP, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of yerba mate extract and its
principal bioactive compounds on adipogenesis. The anti-adipogenic effects of
yerba mate, chlorogenic acid, quercetin and rutin were evaluated in 3T3-L1 cells 
using a PCR array. The results obtained in vitro were validated in vivo in a
high-fat diet-induced model of obesity. The in vitro and in vivo results
demonstrated that yerba mate extract down-regulated the expression of genes that 
regulate adipogenesis, such as Creb-1and C/EBPa, and the extract up-regulated the
expression of genes related to the inhibition of adipogenesis, including Dlk1,
Gata2, Gata3, Klf2, Lrp5, Ppar<U+03B3>2, Sfrp1, Tcf7l2, Wnt10b, and Wnt3a. In summary,
it was demonstrated that yerba mate and its bioactive compounds regulate the
expression of genes related to in vitro adipogenesis. Furthermore, yerba mate
might regulate adipogenesis through the Wnt pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23790851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 29;169(3):291-7. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0286. Print 2013 
Sep.

Association of risk variants for type 2 diabetes and hyperglycemia with
gestational diabetes.

Huopio H(1), Cederberg H, Vangipurapu J, Hakkarainen H, Pääkkönen M, Kuulasmaa T,
Heinonen S, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the association of risk
variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D) and hyperglycemia with gestational diabetes
(GDM).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Five hundred and thirty-three Finnish women who were
diagnosed with GDM and 407 controls with normal glucose tolerance during the
pregnancy were genotyped for 69 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which have
been previously verified as susceptibility risk variants for T2D and
hyperglycemia. All participants underwent an oral glucose tolerance test at the
follow-up study after the index pregnancy.
RESULTS: Risk variants rs10830963 and rs1387153 of MTNR1B were significantly
associated with GDM (odds ratio (OR)=1.62 (95% CI 1.34-1.96), P=4.5 × 10<U+207B>7 and
1.38 (1.14-1.66), P=7.6 × 10<U+207B>4 respectively). Both SNPs of MTNR1B were also
significantly associated with elevated fasting glucose level and reduced insulin 
secretion at follow-up. Additionally, risk variants rs9939609 of FTO, rs2796441
of TLE1, rs560887 of G6PC2, rs780094 of GCKR, rs7903146 of TCF7L2 and rs11708067 
of ADCY5 showed nominally significant associations with GDM (OR range from 1.25
to 1.30).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that GDM and T2D share a similar genetic
background. Our findings also provide further evidence that risk variants of
MTNR1B are associated with GDM by increasing fasting plasma glucose and
decreasing insulin secretion.

PMID: 23761423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Exp Ther Med. 2013 May;5(5):1511-1515. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Ileal interposition surgery-induced improvement of hyperglycemia and insulin
resistance in Goto-Kakizaki rats by upregulation of TCF7L2 expression.

Sun X(1), Song M, Bai R, Cheng S, Xing Y, Yuan H, Wang P, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100050, P.R. China ;

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of ileal interposition (IT) 
on glucose and insulin resistance (IR) in type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM), and
the role of T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), formerly known as TCF4, in the
downregulation of hyperglycemia following IT. Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats subjected
to IT surgery (GK-IT group), GK rats subjected to sham surgery (GK-Sham group)
and Wistar (WS) rats subjected to sham surgery (WS-Sham group) were investigated 
in this study. Fasting plasma glucose, body weight, food intake per 1 kg body
weight, insulin and a homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR) were measured pre- and post-surgery. The rats were euthanized 28 days
post-surgery and the pancreas of each rat was dissected. The expression levels of
TCF7L2 mRNA and protein were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and western
blotting, respectively. Our results revealed that IT improved both fasting plasma
glucose levels and IR in GK rats by upregulating the expression of the TCF7L2
protein. IT provides a valuable therapeutic option for patients with T2DM.
Upregulation of TCF7L2 protein expression may be a possible mechanism underlying 
the improvement of T2DM following IT.

PMCID: PMC3671895
PMID: 23737909  [PubMed]


268. J Diabetes Res. 2013;2013:906590. doi: 10.1155/2013/906590. Epub 2013 Apr 11.

Animal models of GWAS-identified type 2 diabetes genes.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Bellomo EA, McGinty JA, French PM, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

More than 65 loci, encoding up to 500 different genes, have been implicated by
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) as conferring an increased risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (T2D). Whilst mouse models have in the past been
central to understanding the mechanisms through which more penetrant risk genes
for T2D, for example, those responsible for neonatal or maturity-onset diabetes
of the young, only a few of those identified by GWAS, notably TCF7L2 and
ZnT8/SLC30A8, have to date been examined in mouse models. We discuss here the
animal models available for the latter genes and provide perspectives for future,
higher throughput approaches towards efficiently mining the information provided 
by human genetics.

PMCID: PMC3654344
PMID: 23710470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Hum Reprod Update. 2013 Jul-Aug;19(4):376-90. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmt013. Epub
2013 May 19.

Genetic variants and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review.

Zhang C(1), Bao W, Rong Y, Yang H, Bowers K, Yeung E, Kiely M.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Branch, Division of Epidemiology, Statistics and Prevention
Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, 6100 Executive Blvd, Rockville, MD
20852, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have examined associations between genetic variants
and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). However, inferences from
these studies were often hindered by limited statistical power and conflicting
results. We aimed to systematically review and quantitatively summarize the
association of commonly studied single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with GDM
risk and to identify important gaps that remain for consideration in future
studies.
METHODS: Genetic association studies of GDM published through 1 October 2012 were
searched using the HuGE Navigator and PubMed databases. A SNP was included if the
SNP-GDM associations were assessed in three or more independent studies. Two
reviewers independently evaluated the eligibility for inclusion and extracted the
data. The allele-specific odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were pooled using random effects models accounting for heterogeneity.
RESULTS: Overall, 29 eligible articles capturing associations of 12 SNPs from 10 
genes were included for the systematic review. The minor alleles of rs7903146
(TCF7L2), rs12255372 (TCF7L2), rs1799884 (-30G/A, GCK), rs5219 (E23K, KCNJ11),
rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs10830963 (MTNR1B), rs1387153 (MTNR1B) 
and rs1801278 (Gly972Arg, IRS1) were significantly associated with a higher risk 
of GDM. Among them, genetic variants in TCF7L2 showed the strongest association
with GDM risk, with ORs (95% CIs) of 1.44 (1.29-1.60, P < 0.001) per T allele of 
rs7903146 and 1.46 (1.15-1.84, P = 0.002) per T allele of rs12255372.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we found significant associations of GDM 
risk with nine SNPs in seven genes, most of which have been related to the
regulation of insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3682671
PMID: 23690305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3369-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0684.
Epub 2013 May 14.

Identification and selective degradation of neopeptide-containing truncated
mutant proteins in the tumors with high microsatellite instability.

Kim WK(1), Park M, Park M, Kim YJ, Shin N, Kim HK, You KT, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Brain Korea 21 Projects for Medical Science,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Frameshift mutations in coding mononucleotide repeats (cMNR) are common 
in tumors with high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). These mutations generate 
mRNAs containing abnormal coding sequences and premature termination codons
(PTC). Normally, mRNAs containing PTCs are degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay (NMD). However, mRNAs containing PTCs located in the last exon are not
subject to degradation by NMD (NMD-irrelevant). This study aimed to discover
whether genes with frameshift mutations in the last exon generate truncated
mutant proteins.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We identified 66 genes containing cMNRs in the last exon by 
bioinformatic analysis. We found frequent insertion/deletion mutations in the
cMNRs of 29 genes in 10 MSI-H cancer cell lines and in the cMNRs of 3 genes in 19
MSI-H cancer tissues. We selected 7 genes (TTK, TCF7L2, MARCKS, ASTE1, INO80E,
CYHR1, and EBPL) for mutant mRNA expression analysis and 3 genes (TTK, TCF7L2,
and MARCKS) for mutant protein expression analysis.
RESULTS: The PTC-containing NMD-irrelevant mRNAs from mutated genes were not
degraded. However, only faint amounts of endogenous mutant TTK and TCF7L2 were
detected, and we failed to detect endogenous mutant MARCKS. By polysome analysis,
we showed that mRNAs from genomic mutant MARCKS constructs are normally
translated. After inhibiting 3 protein degradation pathways, we found that only
inhibition of the proteasomal pathway facilitated the rescue of endogenous mutant
TTK, TCF7L2, and MARCKS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that cancer cells scavenge potentially harmful
neopeptide-containing mutant proteins derived from NMD-irrelevant abnormal mRNAs 
via the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and these mutant proteins may be important
substrates for tumor-specific antigens.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23674496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Diabetes. 2013 Oct;62(10):3627-35. doi: 10.2337/db13-0510. Epub 2013 May 13.

Genetic modifiers of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes.

Blackman SM(1), Commander CW, Watson C, Arcara KM, Strug LJ, Stonebraker JR,
Wright FA, Rommens JM, Sun L, Pace RG, Norris SA, Durie PR, Drumm ML, Knowles MR,
Cutting GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Oct;62(10):3338-40.

Diabetes is a common age-dependent complication of cystic fibrosis (CF) that is
strongly influenced by modifier genes. We conducted a genome-wide association
study in 3,059 individuals with CF (644 with CF-related diabetes [CFRD]) and
identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within and 5' to the SLC26A9
gene that associated with CFRD (hazard ratio [HR] 1.38; P = 3.6 × 10(-8)).
Replication was demonstrated in 694 individuals (124 with CFRD) (HR, 1.47; P =
0.007), with combined analysis significant at P = 9.8 × 10(-10). SLC26A9 is an
epithelial chloride/bicarbonate channel that can interact with the CF
transmembrane regulator (CFTR), the protein mutated in CF. We also hypothesized
that common SNPs associated with type 2 diabetes also might affect risk for CFRD.
A previous association of CFRD with SNPs in TCF7L2 was replicated in this study
(P = 0.004; combined analysis P = 3.8 × 10(-6)), and type 2 diabetes SNPs at or
near CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, and IGF2BP2 were associated with CFRD (P < 0.004). These
five loci accounted for 8.3% of the phenotypic variance in CFRD onset and had a
combined population-attributable risk of 68%. Diabetes is a highly prevalent
complication of CF, for which susceptibility is determined in part by variants at
SLC26A9 (which mediates processes proximate to the CF disease-causing gene) and
at four susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes in the general population.

PMCID: PMC3781476
PMID: 23670970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Liver Int. 2013 Aug;33(7):1100-12. doi: 10.1111/liv.12188. Epub 2013 May 8.

Upregulation of T-cell factor-4 isoform-responsive target genes in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Tomimaru Y(1), Koga H, Yano H, de la Monte S, Wands JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway regulates genes involved in cell
proliferation, survival, migration and invasion through regulation by T-cell
factor (TCF)-4 transcription factor proteins. However, the role of TCF-4 isoforms
generated by alternative splicing events in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
unknown.
AIM: Here, we investigated TCF-4 isoforms (TCF-4J and K)-responsive target genes 
that are important in hepatic oncogenesis and tumour development.
METHODS: Gene expression microarray was performed on HCC cells overexpressing
TCF-4J and K isoforms. Expression level of selected target genes was evaluated
and correlations were made between their expression level and that of TCF-4
isoform in 47 pairs of human HCC tumours.
RESULTS: Comparison by gene expression microarray revealed that 447 genes were
upregulated and 343 downregulated more than 2.0-fold in TCF-4J compared with
TCF-4K expressing cells. We validated expression of 18 selected target genes
involved in Wnt/ß-catenin, insulin/IGF-1/IRS1 and Notch signalling pathways in 47
pairs of human HCCs and adjacent uninvolved liver tissues. It was observed that
13 genes (CLDN2, STK17B, SPP1, AXIN2, WISP2, MMP7, IRS1, ANXA1, CAMK2N1, ASPH,
GPR56, CD24 and JAG1) activated by TCF-4J isoform in HCC cells, were also
upregulated in HCC tumours compared with adjacent peritumour tissue; more
importantly, 10 genes exhibited a significant correlation with the TCF-4J
expression level in tumour.
CONCLUSION: TCF-4 isoforms (TCF-4J and K) activated different downstream target
genes in HCC. The biological consequence of TCF-4J isoform expression was
upregulation of genes associated with tripartite Wnt/ß-catenin,
insulin/IGF-1/IRS1 and Notch signal transduction pathway activation, which
contribute to the pathogenesis of HCC.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3706555
PMID: 23651211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Liver Int. 2013 Nov;33(10):1536-48. doi: 10.1111/liv.12189. Epub 2013 May 6.

Loss of exon 4 in a human T-cell factor-4 isoform promotes hepatic
tumourigenicity.

Tomimaru Y(1), Xu CQ, Nambotin SB, Yan T, Wands JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: T-cell factor (TCF) proteins represent key transcription factors that
activate Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. We have reported that a pair of TCF-4 isoforms
(TCF-4C and TCF-4D) exhibit differential TCF transcriptional activity in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, although their structure differs by only
the presence (TCF-4D) or absence (TCF-4C) of exon 4.
AIM: To demonstrate a regulatory role of exon 4 in HCC development.
METHODS: TCF-4C and TCF-4D expression profiles were examined in 27 pairs of human
HCC and adjacent liver tissues. The functional role of the TCF-4 isoforms was
evaluated in OUMS-29 (an immortalized hepatocyte-derived) and HAK-1A (a
well-differentiated HCC) cell lines using stable clones overexpressing the TCF-4 
isoforms.
RESULTS: TCF-4C was significantly upregulated in HCC tissues compared with
corresponding peritumour and normal liver tissues; in contrast, there was no
difference in TCF-4D expression. TCF-4C clones derived from both cell lines
exhibited increased TCF activity, Wnt-responsive target genes, cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs
compared with TCF-4D clones. Capability of cell migration and colony formation
was significantly higher in TCF-4C than TCF-4D clones. In a nude mice xenograft
model, the HAK-1A-derived TCF-4C clone rapidly developed tumours compared with
the TCF-4D clone. TCF-4C clone-derived tumours exhibited upregulation of
Wnt-responsive target genes compared with the slow developing and small
TCF-4D-derived tumours.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that the TCF-4C isoform lacking exon 4 is
associated with a malignant phenotype compared with the exon 4-harbouring TCF-4D 
isoform, indicating that exon 4 of TCF-4 plays a prominent role in HCC
development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3775864
PMID: 23648141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Vis Exp. 2013 Apr 19;(74). doi: 10.3791/50286.

Generation of high quality chromatin immunoprecipitation DNA template for
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq).

Deliard S(1), Zhao J, Xia Q, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, USA.

ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq) methods directly offer whole-genome coverage, where
combining chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and massively parallel sequencing 
can be utilized to identify the repertoire of mammalian DNA sequences bound by
transcription factors in vivo. "Next-generation" genome sequencing technologies
provide 1-2 orders of magnitude increase in the amount of sequence that can be
cost-effectively generated over older technologies thus allowing for ChIP-seq
methods to directly provide whole-genome coverage for effective profiling of
mammalian protein-DNA interactions. For successful ChIP-seq approaches, one must 
generate high quality ChIP DNA template to obtain the best sequencing outcomes.
The description is based around experience with the protein product of the gene
most strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes, namely the
transcription factor transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2). This factor has also
been implicated in various cancers. Outlined is how to generate high quality ChIP
DNA template derived from the colorectal carcinoma cell line, HCT116, in order to
build a high-resolution map through sequencing to determine the genes bound by
TCF7L2, giving further insight in to its key role in the pathogenesis of complex 
traits.

PMCID: PMC3665311
PMID: 23629434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061943. Print 2013.

Development of GMDR-GPU for gene-gene interaction analysis and its application to
WTCCC GWAS data for type 2 diabetes.

Zhu Z(1), Tong X, Zhu Z, Liang M, Cui W, Su K, Li MD, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a significant
number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with many complex
human traits, the susceptibility loci identified so far can explain only a small 
fraction of the genetic risk. Among other possible explanations, the lack of a
comprehensive examination of gene-gene interaction (G×G) is often considered a
source of the missing heritability. Previously, we reported a model-free
Generalized Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (GMDR) approach for detecting
G×G in both dichotomous and quantitative phenotypes. However, the computational
burden and less efficient implementation of the original programs make them
impossible to use for GWAS. In this study, we developed a graphics processing
unit (GPU)-based GMDR program (named GWAS-GPU), which is able not only to analyze
GWAS data but also to run much faster than the earlier version of the GMDR
program. As a demonstration of the program, we used the GMDR-GPU software to
analyze a publicly available GWAS dataset on type 2 diabetes (T2D) from the
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Through an exhaustive search of pair-wise
interactions and a selected search of three- to five-way interactions conditioned
on significant pair-wise results, we identified 24 core SNPs in six genes (FTO:
rs9939973, rs9940128, rs9922047, rs1121980, rs9939609, rs9930506; TSPAN8:
rs1495377; TCF7L2: rs4074720, rs7901695, rs4506565, rs4132670, rs10787472,
rs11196205, rs10885409, rs11196208; L3MBTL3: rs10485400, rs4897366; CELF4:
rs2852373, rs608489; RUNX1: rs445984, rs1040328, rs990074, rs2223046, rs2834970) 
that appear to be important for T2D. Of these core SNPs, 11 in FTO, TSPAN8, and
TCF7L2 have been reported to be associated with T2D, obesity, or both, providing 
an independent replication of previously reported SNPs. Importantly, we
identified three new susceptibility genes; i.e., L3MBTL3, CELF4, and RUNX1, for
T2D, a finding that warrants further investigation with independent samples.

PMCID: PMC3633958
PMID: 23626757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. BMC Genet. 2013 Apr 23;14:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-28.

Carriers of a novel frame-shift insertion in WNT16a possess elevated pancreatic
expression of TCF7L2.

Howard EW(1), Been LF, Lerner M, Brackett D, Lightfoot S, Bullen EC, Sanghera DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of TCF7L2 as a global type 2 diabetes (T2D) gene has
sparked investigations to explore the clinical utility of its variants for
guiding the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. However,
interpreting the resulting associations into function still remains unclear.
Canonical Wnt signaling regulates ß-catenin and its binding with TCF7L2, which in
turn is critical for the production of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). This
study examines the role of a novel frame-shift insertion discovered in a
conserved region of WNT16a, and it is proposed that this mutation affects T2D
susceptibility in conjunction with gene variants in TCF7L2.
RESULTS: Our results predicted that the insertion would convert the upstream open
reading frame in the Wnt16a mRNA to an alternative, in-frame translation
initiation site, resulting in the prevention of nonsense-mediated decay, leading 
to a consequent stabilization of the mutated WNT16a message. To examine the role 
of Wnt16a in the Wnt signaling pathway, DNA and serum samples from 2,034
individuals (48% with T2D) from the Sikh Diabetes Study were used in this
investigation. Prevalence of Wnt16a insertion did not differ among T2D cases
(33%) and controls (32%). However, there was a 3.2 fold increase in Wnt16a mRNA
levels in pancreatic tissues from the insertion carriers and a significant
increase (70%, p < 0.0001) in luciferase activity in the constructs carrying the 
insertion. The expression of TCF7L2 mRNA in pancreas was also elevated (~23-fold)
among the insertion carriers (p=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest synergistic effects of WNT16a insertion and the 
at-risk 'T' allele of TCF7L2 (rs7903146) for elevating the expression of TCF7L2
in human pancreas which may affect the regulation of downstream target genes
involved in the development of T2D through Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF7L2 signaling
pathway. However, further studies would be needed to mechanistically link the two
definitively.

PMCID: PMC3675375
PMID: 23617586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 15;8(4):e61867. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061867. Print 2013.

Acetylation of human TCF4 (TCF7L2) proteins attenuates inhibition by the HBP1
repressor and induces a conformational change in the TCF4::DNA complex.

Elfert S(1), Weise A, Bruser K, Biniossek ML, Jägle S, Senghaas N, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

The members of the TCF/LEF family of DNA-binding proteins are components of
diverse gene regulatory networks. As nuclear effectors of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
they act as assembly platforms for multimeric transcription complexes that either
repress or activate gene expression. Previously, it was shown that several
aspects of TCF/LEF protein function are regulated by post-translational
modification. The association of TCF/LEF family members with acetyltransferases
and deacetylases prompted us to investigate whether vertebrate TCF/LEF proteins
are subject to acetylation. Through co-expression with p300 and CBP and
subsequent analyses using mass spectrometry and immunodetection with
anti-acetyl-lysine antibodies we show that TCF4 can be acetylated at lysine K150 
by CBP. K150 acetylation is restricted to TCF4E splice variants and requires the 
simultaneous presence of ß-catenin and the unique TCF4E C-terminus. To examine
the functional consequences of K150 acetylation we substituted K150 with amino
acids representing the non-acetylated and acetylated states. Reporter gene assays
based on Wnt/ß-catenin-responsive promoter regions did not indicate a general
role of K150 acetylation in transactivation by TCF4E. However, in the presence of
CBP, non-acetylatable TCF4E with a K150R substitution was more susceptible to
inhibition by the HBP-1 repressor protein compared to wild-type TCF4E.
Acetylation of K150 using a bacterial expression system or amino acid
substitutions at K150 alter the electrophoretic properties of TCF4E::DNA
complexes. This result suggests that K150 acetylation leads to a conformational
change that may also represent the mechanism whereby acetylated TCF4E acquires
resistance against HBP1. In summary, TCF4 not only recruits acetyltransferases
but is also a substrate for these enzymes. The fact that acetylation affects only
a subset of TCF4 splice variants and is mediated preferentially by CBP suggests
that the conditional acetylation of TCF4E is a novel regulatory mechanism that
diversifies the transcriptional output of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in response to 
changing intracellular signaling milieus.

PMCID: PMC3626699
PMID: 23613959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17552-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.453985. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

T cell factor 4 is a pro-catabolic and apoptotic factor in human articular
chondrocytes by potentiating nuclear factor <U+03BA>B signaling.

Ma B(1), Zhong L, van Blitterswijk CA, Post JN, Karperien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, University of Twente, Enschede
7522NB, The Netherlands.

T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) transcription factors are
downstream effectors of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has been implicated in the
development and progression of osteoarthritis (OA). This study aimed to
investigate the role of TCF/LEF transcription factors in human articular
chondrocytes. Primary human osteoarthritic cartilage predominantly expressed TCF4
and to a lesser extent, LEF1 and TCF3 mRNA. Overexpression of TCF4, but not of
TCF3 or LEF1, induced MMP-1, -3, and -13 expression and generic MMP activity in
human chondrocytes. This was due to potentiating NF-<U+03BA>B signaling by a
protein-protein interaction between TCF4 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 activating established
NF-<U+03BA>B target genes such as MMPs and IL-6. LEF1 competed with TCF4 for binding to 
NF-<U+03BA>B p65. I<U+03BA>B-a was able to counteract the effect of TCF4 on NF-<U+03BA>B target gene
expression. Finally, we showed that TCF4 mRNA expression was elevated in OA
cartilage compared with healthy cartilage and induced chondrocyte apoptosis at
least partly through activating caspase 3/7. Our findings suggest that increased 
TCF4 expression may contribute to cartilage degeneration in OA by augmenting
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

PMCID: PMC3682554
PMID: 23603903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 9;8(4):e60122. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060122. Print 2013.

Focused examination of the intestinal epithelium reveals transcriptional
signatures consistent with disturbances in enterocyte maturation and
differentiation during the course of SIV infection.

Mohan M(1), Kaushal D, Aye PP, Alvarez X, Veazey RS, Lackner AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, Louisiana, United States of America.

The Gastrointestinal (GI) tract plays a pivotal role in AIDS pathogenesis as it
is the primary site for viral transmission, replication and CD4(+) T cell
destruction. Accordingly, GI disease (enteropathy) has become a well-known
complication and a driver of AIDS progression. To better understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying GI disease we analyzed global gene expression profiles
sequentially in the intestinal epithelium of the same animals before SIV
infection and at 21 and 90 days post infection (DPI). More importantly we
obtained sequential excisional intestinal biopsies and examined distinct mucosal 
components (epithelium. intraepithelial lymphocytes, lamina propria lymphocytes, 
fibrovascular stroma) separately. Here we report data pertaining to the
epithelium. Overall genes associated with epithelial cell
renewal/proliferation/differentiation, permeability and adhesion were
significantly down regulated (<1.5-7 fold) at 21 and 90DPI. Genes regulating
focal adhesions (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6), gap junctions (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3), ErbB (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3) and Wnt signaling
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>4) were markedly down at 21DPI and the number of genes in each of these
groups that were down regulated doubled between 21 and 90DPI. Notable genes
included FAK, ITGA6, PDGF, TGFß3, Ezrin, FZD6, WNT10A, and TCF7L2. In addition,
at 90DPI genes regulating ECM-receptor interactions (laminins and ITGB1),
epithelial cell gene expression (PDX1, KLF6), polarity/tight junction formation
(PARD3B&6B) and histone demethylase (JMJD3) were also down regulated. In
contrast, expression of NOTCH3, notch target genes (HES4, HES7) and EZH2 (histone
methyltransferase) were significantly increased at 90DPI. The altered expression 
of genes linked to Wnt signaling together with decreased expression of PDX1,
PARD3B, PARD6B and SDK1 suggests marked perturbations in intestinal epithelial
function and homeostasis leading to breakdown of the mucosal barrier. More
importantly, the divergent expression patterns of EZH2 and JMJD3 suggests that an
epigenetic mechanism involving histone modifications may contribute to the
massive decrease in gene expression at 90DPI leading to defects in enterocyte
maturation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3621888
PMID: 23593167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2013 Apr;46(4):382-93. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Association of rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a
meta-analysis.

Wang J(1), Zhang J, Li L, Wang Y, Wang Q, Zhai Y, You H, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Center of Preventive
Medicine Research and Assessment, Henan University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Zhengzhou, China.

Our objective was to evaluate the association of rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in the world population. We carried out a
survey of the literature about the effect of rs12255372 on genetic susceptibility
to T2DM by consulting PubMed, the Cochrane Library, and Embase from 2006 to 2012,
and then performed a meta-analysis of all the studies in order to evaluate the
association between rs12255372 and T2DM. A total of 33 articles including 42
studies (with 34,076 cases and 36,192 controls) were confirmed to be eligible and
were included in the final meta-analysis: 6 studies conducted on Europeans, 14 on
Caucasians, 17 on Asians, 2 on Africans, and 3 on Americans. Overall, the effect 
size was as follows: for the variant allele T (OR = 1.387, 95%CI = 1.351-1.424), 
for the TT genotype (OR = 1.933, 95%CI = 1.815-2.057), for the GT genotype (OR = 
1.363, 95%CI = 1.315-1.413), for the dominant model (OR = 1.425, 95%CI =
1.344-1.510), and for the recessive model (OR = 1.659, 95%CI = 1.563-1.761). In
summary, by pooling all available qualified data from genetic studies on
rs12255372 and T2DM, we have confirmed that rs12255372 is significantly
associated with susceptibility to T2DM in the global population.

PMCID: PMC3854403
PMID: 23579632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Obes. 2013;2013:396416. doi: 10.1155/2013/396416. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Genetics of obesity and type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

McCormack S(1), Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Obesity and type 2 diabetes are highly prevalent and lead to significant
morbidity and mortality. In the United States, the impact of these conditions may
be worse on historically underserved minorities, particularly African Americans. 
Genetic ancestry and differences in physiology are unlikely to be the sole or
primary determinants of these disparities. In addition, research in this area has
the ethically problematic possibility of conflating race with biology. Despite
these important considerations and the challenges of conducting this work,
population-based approaches for investigating the etiology of obesity and T2D may
yield useful information about the pathophysiology of disease, and have
implications that extend to all affected individuals. The purpose of this paper
is to describe what is understood about the genetic variation that underlies
obesity and T2D in African Americans and other individuals of more recent African
descent and to highlight several examples that illustrate how ensuring adequate
minority representation in genetic research improves its quality. For a variety
of reasons a number of unique insights have been possible as a result of these
efforts.

PMCID: PMC3614120
PMID: 23577239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060212. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with T2DM in the population of
Hyderabad, India.

Uma Jyothi K(1), Jayaraj M, Subburaj KS, Prasad KJ, Kumuda I, Lakshmi V, Reddy
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Anthropology Group, Biological Anthropology Unit, Indian Statistical
Institute, Hyderabad, India.

We attempt to evaluate the nature of association of TCF7L2 gene variants with
T2DM, for the first time in the population of Hyderabad, which is considered to
be diabetic capital of India. It is a case-control study of the three SNPs of
TCF7L2, rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs11196205, genotyped on Sequenom Massarray
platform, in a sample of 758 patients and 621 controls. The risk allele frequency
of the three SNPs was found to be significantly higher in the T2DM cases than
controls, implicating susceptibility for diabetes (p<0.01). The greatest risk of 
developing the disease was conferred by rs7903146. Further, the logistic
regression of genotypes of each SNP under log additive model, and the haplotypes 
constituted by at least one of the three risk alleles also show significantly
greater risk of developing T2DM when compared to the wild type haplotype.
Further, BMI and WHR emerge as significant covariates with confounding effects.
The strong association of the TCF7L2 SNPs with T2DM is consistent with the
findings among other Indian and Non-Indian populations, suggesting universal
phenomena of its association across ethnic groups globally, both within and
outside the Indian subcontinent, albeit the functional relevance of these SNPs
needs yet to be established.

PMCID: PMC3618330
PMID: 23577093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Gene. 2013 Jun 15;522(2):214-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.089. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Impacts of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms on the susceptibility of hepatogenous
diabetes and hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients.

Ling Q(1), Dong F, Geng L, Liu Z, Xie H, Xu X, Zheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatogenous diabetes (HD) occurs as a complication of cirrhosis.
Whether genetic factors, rather than only liver damage, play roles in the
development of HD is unknown. TCF7L2 gene has been reported to be associated with
type 2 diabetes and also cancer risks. We aim to evaluate the impact of TCF7L2
gene on the susceptibility of HD and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in a Chinese 
Han population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 367 adult liver transplant candidates with liver
cirrhosis were included. Fifteen tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were 
selected from HapMap CHB database with a minor allele frequency of >0.2 and r(2) 
of >0.8. Another three SNPs were also chosen because of their close association
with type 2 diabetes in East Asian.
RESULTS: Patients with HD presented significantly poorer liver function, higher
incidence of cirrhotic complications and higher insulin resistance compared with 
non-HD patients. Three SNPs were differentially distributed between HD patients
and non-HD patients. In multivariate logistic analysis, TCF7L2 rs290487 and
rs6585194 polymorphisms were independently associated with HD after adjustment of
clinical factors. The TCF7L2 rs290487 C/C variant homozygote showed much higher
insulin resistance and significantly increased HD risk comparing with T/T and T/C
genotypes, while the genetic variant of rs6585194 was protectively against HD.
Three SNPs (rs290481, rs290487 and rs290489) located near the 3' end of TCF7L2
gene were associated with HCC risk with marginal significance. Patients carrying 
G-C-A haplotype had a significantly higher HCC risk than those with A-T-G.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 polymorphisms were associated with HD and maybe cancer risk
as well. Further studies with large samples are needed to verify these results.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23558246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059053. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Association of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) polymorphisms in TCF7L2
with type 2 diabetes in 9,619 Han Chinese population.

Wang J(1), Li L, Zhang J, Xie J, Luo X, Yu D, Zhao J, Feng T, Pang C, Yin L, Hu
F, Zhang J, Wang Y, Wang Q, Zhai Y, You H, Zhu T, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.

AIMS: We aimed to replicate the association of the rs290487 (IVS3C/T) and
rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) polymorphisms of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in Han Chinese people in Henan province, China.
METHODS: In all, 1,842 patients with T2DM and 7,777 normal glucose-tolerant
controls underwent genotyping for the T2DM-associated variants rs7903146
(IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T). W performed a meta-analysis of the association 
of the risk alleles of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) in TCF7L2 and
T2DM in Han Chinese by combining previous studies with the present study.
RESULTS: We found that T2DM was associated with the CC genotype (1.364,
1.137-1.636, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001), the recessive model (1.457, 1.156-1.838, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) of
rs290487 (IVS3C/T) and haplotype CC (1.116, 1.034-1.204, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004) in Han
Chinese. Moreover, our meta-analyses supported the association of the T allele
(IVS3C/T) of rs7903146 (1.36, 1.24-1.48; p <U+200A>=<U+200A>6.404×10(-12)) and T2DM but not the
C allele of rs290487 (IVS3C/T) (0.99, 0.85-1.15, p <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.890) in Han Chinese. We
found no interactions between behavioral risk factors (smoking, alcohol drinking,
and physical activity) and rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T)
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: The CC genotype and the recessive model of the variant rs290487
(IVS3C/T) and CC haplotype of rs7903146 (IVS3C/T) and rs290487 (IVS3C/T) in
TCF7L2 may be associated with T2DM in Han Chinese people in Henan province,
China.

PMCID: PMC3607568
PMID: 23536853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 1;27(7):734-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.209569.112. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Amplitude modulation of androgen signaling by c-MYC.

Ni M(1), Chen Y, Fei T, Li D, Lim E, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Androgen-stimulated growth of the molecular apocrine breast cancer subtype is
mediated by an androgen receptor (AR)-regulated transcriptional program. However,
the molecular details of this AR-centered regulatory network and the roles of
other transcription factors that cooperate with AR in the network remain elusive.
Here we report a positive feed-forward loop that enhances breast cancer growth
involving AR, AR coregulators, and downstream target genes. In the absence of an 
androgen signal, TCF7L2 interacts with FOXA1 at AR-binding sites and represses
the basal expression of AR target genes, including MYC. Direct AR regulation of
MYC cooperates with AR-mediated activation of HER2/HER3 signaling. HER2/HER3
signaling increases the transcriptional activity of MYC through phosphorylation
of MAD1, leading to increased levels of MYC/MAX heterodimers. MYC in turn
reinforces the transcriptional activation of androgen-responsive genes. These
results reveal a novel regulatory network in molecular apocrine breast cancers
regulated by androgen and AR in which MYC plays a central role as both a key
target and a cooperating transcription factor to drive oncogenic growth.

PMCID: PMC3639415
PMID: 23530127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059495. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

The association between gene polymorphism of TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in
Chinese Han population: a meta-analysis.

Dou H(1), Ma E, Yin L, Jin Y, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Tianjin, China. douhaoying11@126.com

In recent years, it has been widely accepted that transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in multiple ethnic
groups, especially its single nucleotide polymorphisms of rs7903146C/T,
rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C. However, the results previously obtained in
Chinese Han population are often inconsistent. For clearing this issue, herein we
performed meta-analysis based on the reports that can be found to assess the
association. In the meta-analysis, Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval
(95% CI) were calculated with random-effect model or fixed-effect model based on 
the heterogeneity analysis. The quality of included studies was evaluated by
using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. The sensitivity analysis was used to confirm
the reliability and stability of the meta-analysis. In total, 20 case-control
studies with 9122 cases of T2DM and 8017 controls were included. Among these
case-control studies, we selected 13 ones on rs7903146 C/T, 5 ones on rs12255372 
G/T, 8 ones on rs290487 T/C. The results indicated that rs7903146C/T polymorphism
was significantly associated with T2DM (T vs. C, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.73, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.39-2.16). 
There was no evidence that rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C polymorphisms increased 
T2DM risk (T vs. G, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.77, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.88-3.56; C vs. T, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.08, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.93-1.25). Subgroup analysis of different regions proved the relationship
between rs7903146C/T polymorphism and T2DM risk in both the northern and the
southern China. The association of rs290487 with T2DM was affected by body mass
index, whereas the association of rs7903146 and rs290487 with T2DM was influenced
neither by age nor by sex. In conclusion, this study indicated that the
rs7903146C/T polymorphism of the TCF7L2 gene had a significant effect on T2DM
risk in Chinese Han population, with rs12255372G/T and rs290487T/C polymorphisms 
showing no significant effect.

PMCID: PMC3602305
PMID: 23527206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058881. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Replication of type 2 diabetes candidate genes variations in three geographically
unrelated Indian population groups.

Ali S(1), Chopra R, Manvati S, Singh YP, Kaul N, Behura A, Mahajan A, Sehajpal P,
Gupta S, Dhar MK, Chainy GB, Bhanwer AS, Sharma S, Bamezai RN.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre of Applied Human Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a syndrome of multiple metabolic disorders and is
genetically heterogeneous. India comprises one of the largest global populations 
with highest number of reported type 2 diabetes cases. However, limited
information about T2D associated loci is available for Indian populations. It is,
therefore, pertinent to evaluate the previously associated candidates as well as 
identify novel genetic variations in Indian populations to understand the extent 
of genetic heterogeneity. We chose to do a cost effective high-throughput
mass-array genotyping and studied the candidate gene variations associated with
T2D in literature. In this case-control candidate genes association study, 91
SNPs from 55 candidate genes have been analyzed in three geographically
independent population groups from India. We report the genetic variants in five 
candidate genes: TCF7L2, HHEX, ENPP1, IDE and FTO, are significantly associated
(after Bonferroni correction, p<5.5E-04) with T2D susceptibility in combined
population. Interestingly, SNP rs7903146 of the TCF7L2 gene passed the genome
wide significance threshold (combined P value<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.05E-08) in the studied
populations. We also observed the association of rs7903146 with blood glucose
(fasting and postprandial) levels, supporting the role of TCF7L2 gene in blood
glucose homeostasis. Further, we noted that the moderate risk provided by the
independently associated loci in combined population with Odds Ratio (OR)<1.38
increased to OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.44, (95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.67-3.59) when the risk providing genotypes of 
TCF7L2, HHEX, ENPP1 and FTO genes were combined, suggesting the importance of
gene-gene interactions evaluation in complex disorders like T2D.

PMCID: PMC3602599
PMID: 23527042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1117-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.010. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Repression of adipogenesis through promotion of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by TIS7
up-regulated in adipocytes under hypoxia.

Nakamura Y(1), Hinoi E, Iezaki T, Takada S, Hashizume S, Takahata Y, Tsuruta E,
Takahashi S, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

Although tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate induced sequence-7 (TIS7) has been
identified as a co-activator/repressor of gene transcription in different
eukaryotic cells, little attention has been paid to the functionality of TIS7 in 
adipocytes. Here, we evaluated the possible role of TIS7 in mechanisms underlying
the regulation of adipogenesis. TIS7 expression was preferentially up-regulated
in white adipose tissues (WAT) of obesity model mice as well as in pre-adipocytic
3T3-L1 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions. TIS7 promoter activity was
selectively enhanced by activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) among different 
transcription factors tested, while induction of TIS7 by hypoxic stress was
markedly prevented by knockdown of ATF6 by shRNA in 3T3-L1 cells. Overexpression 
of TIS7 markedly inhibited Oil Red O staining and expression of particular
adipogenic genes in 3T3-L1 cells. TIS7 synergistically promoted gene
transactivation mediated by Wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration
site family (Wnt)/ß-catenin, while blockade of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by a
dominant negative form of T-cell factor-4 (DN-TCF4) markedly prevented the
inhibition of adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells with TIS7 overexpression. TIS7
predominantly interacted with ß-catenin in the nucleus of WAT in the genetically 
obese ob/ob mice as well as in 3T3-L1 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions.
Both knockdown of TIS7 by shRNA and introduction of DN-TCF4 similarly reversed
the hypoxia-induced inhibition of adipogenic gene expression in 3T3-L1 cells.
These findings suggest that TIS7 could play a pivotal role in adipogenesis
through interacting with ß-catenin to promote the canonical Wnt signaling in
pre-adipocytes under hypoxic stress such as obesity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23517917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059555. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in Wnt signaling pathway genes
with breast cancer in Saudi patients.

Alanazi MS(1), Parine NR, Shaik JP, Alabdulkarim HA, Ajaj SA, Khan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Breast cancer is a complex heterogeneous disease involving genetic and epigenetic
alterations in genes encoding proteins that are components of various signaling
pathways. Candidate gene approach have identified association of genetic variants
in the Wnt signaling pathway genes and increased susceptibility to several
diseases including breast cancer. Due to the rarity of somatic mutations in key
genes of Wnt pathway, we investigated the association of genetic variants in
these genes with predisposition to breast cancers. We performed a case-control
study to identify risk variants by examining 15 SNPs located in 8 genes
associated with Wnt signaling. Genotypic analysis of individual locus showed
statistically significant association of five SNPs located in ß-catenin, AXIN2,
DKK3, SFRP3 and TCF7L2 with breast cancers. Increased risk was observed only with
the SNP in ß-catenin while the other four SNPs conferred protection against
breast cancers. Majority of these associations persisted after stratification of 
the cases based on estrogen receptor status and age of on-set of breast cancer.
The rs7775 SNP in exon 6 of SFRP3 gene that codes for either arginine or glycine 
exhibited very strong association with breast cancer, even after Bonferroni's
correction. Apart from these five variants, rs3923086 in AXIN2 and rs3763511 in
DKK4 that did not show any association in the overall population were
significantly associated with early on-set and estrogen receptor negative breast 
cancers, respectively. This is the first study to utilize pathway based approach 
to identify association of risk variants in the Wnt signaling pathway genes with 
breast cancers. Confirmation of our findings in larger populations of different
ethnicities would provide evidence for the role of Wnt pathway as well as
screening markers for early detection of breast carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3597615
PMID: 23516639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:374858. doi: 10.1155/2013/374858. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Association between TCF7L2 Genotype and Glycemic Control in Diabetic Patients
Treated with Gliclazide.

Javorský M(1), Babjaková E, Klimcáková L, Schroner Z, Zidzik J, Stolfová M,
Salagovic J, Tkác I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 4, Faculty of Medicine, L. Pasteur University 
Hospital, P. J. afárik University in Koice, 041 90 Koice, Slovakia.

Previous studies showed associations between variants in TCF7L2 gene and the
therapeutic response to sulfonylureas. All sulfonylureas stimulate insulin
secretion by the closure of ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel. The aim of
the present study was to compare TCF7L2 genotype specific effect of gliclazide
binding to KATP channel A-site (Group 1) with sulfonylureas binding to AB-site
(Group 2). A total of 101 patients were treated with sulfonylureas for 6 months
as an add-on therapy to the previous metformin treatment. TCF7L2 rs7903146 C/T
genotype was identified by real-time PCR with subsequent melting curve analysis. 
Analyses using the dominant genetic model showed significantly higher effect of
gliclazide in the CC genotype group in comparison with combined CT + TT genotype 
group (1.32 ± 0.15% versus 0.73 ± 0.11%, P (adj) = 0.005). No significant
difference in <U+0394>HbA1c between the patients with CC genotype and the T-allele
carriers was observed in Group 2. In the multivariate analysis, only the TCF7L2
genotype (P = 0.006) and the baseline HbA1c (P < 0.001) were significant
predictors of <U+0394>HbA1c. After introducing an interaction term between the TCF7L2
genotype and the sulfonylurea type into multivariate model, the interaction
became a significant predictor (P = 0.023) of <U+0394>HbA1c. The results indicate
significantly higher difference in <U+0394>HbA1c among the TCF7L2 genotypes in patients 
treated with gliclazide than in patients treated with glimepiride, glibenclamide,
or glipizide.

PMCID: PMC3590634
PMID: 23509454  [PubMed]


291. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jun;52(6):564-79. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22054. Epub
2013 Mar 18.

Next-generation-sequencing-based risk stratification and identification of new
genes involved in structural and sequence variations in near haploid
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chen C(1), Bartenhagen C, Gombert M, Okpanyi V, Binder V, Röttgers S, Bradtke J, 
Teigler-Schlegel A, Harbott J, Ginzel S, Thiele R, Fischer U, Dugas M, Hu J,
Borkhardt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Near haploidy (23-29 chromosomes) is a numerical cytogenetic aberration in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) associated with particularly poor
outcome. In contrast, high hyperdiploidy (51-67 chromosomes) has a favorable
prognosis. Correct classification and appropriate risk stratification of near
haploidy is frequently hampered by the presence of apparently high hyperdiploid
clones that arise by endoreduplication of the original near haploid clone. We
evaluated next-generation-sequencing (NGS) to distinguish between "high
hyperdiploid" leukemic clones of near haploid and true high hyperdiploid origin. 
Five high hyperdiploid ALL cases and the "high hyperdiploid" cell line
MHH-CALL-2, derived from a near haploid clone, were tested for uniparental
isodisomy. NGS showed that all disomic chromosomes of MHH-CALL-2, but none of the
patients, were of uniparental origin, thus reliably discriminating these
subtypes. Whole-exome- and whole-genome-sequencing of MHH-CALL-2 revealed
homozygous non-synonymous coding mutations predicted to be deleterious for the
protein function of 63 genes, among them known cancer-associated genes, such as
FANCA, NF1, TCF7L2, CARD11, EP400, histone demethylases, and transferases (KDM6B,
KDM1A, PRDM11). Only eight of these were also, but heterozygously, mutated in the
high hyperdiploid patients. Structural variations in MHH-CALL-2 include a
homozygous deletion (MTAP/CDKN2A/CDKN2B/ANRIL), a homozygous inversion (NCKAP5), 
and an unbalanced translocation (FAM189A1). Together, the sequence variations
provide MHH-CALL-2 with capabilities typically acquired during cancer
development, e.g., loss of cell cycle control, enhanced proliferation, lack of
DNA repair, cell death evasion, and disturbance of epigenetic gene regulation.
Poorer prognosis of near haploid ALL most likely results from full penetrance of 
a large array of detrimental homozygous mutations.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23508829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genet Med. 2013 Aug;15(8):600-11. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.8. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Use of genomic panels to determine risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the
general population: a targeted evidence-based review.

Palomaki GE(1), Melillo S, Marrone M, Douglas MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Women & Infants Hospital,
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
gpalomaki@ipmms.org

This evidence review addresses whether type 2 diabetes genomic risk panels
improve health outcomes (e.g., reduce rates of developing type 2 diabetes) in
low- or high-risk adults; two clinical scenarios promulgated by commercial
companies offering such testing. Evidence for the analytic validity of available 
genomic profiles was inadequate. Clinical validity ranged from inadequate to
convincing for 30 variants identified on five type 2 diabetes genomic panels and 
by genome-wide association studies. Eight common variants were identified for
general population use; evidence credibility based on published criteria was
strong for two variants, moderate for two variants, and weak for four variants.
TCF7L2 had the largest per-allele odds ratio of 1.39 (95% confidence interval
1.33-1.46). Models combining the best four, best eight, and all 30 variants used 
summary effect sizes, reported genotype frequencies, and assumed independent
effects. Areas under the curve were 0.547, 0.551, and 0.570, respectively. In
high-risk populations, per-allele odds ratios for TCF7L2 alone were similar to
those of the general population. TCF7L2, in combination with other variants,
yielded minimal improvement in risk reclassification. Evidence on TCF7L2 clinical
validity was adequate. Three studies addressed the clinical utility of
intervention effectiveness, stratified by TCF7L2 genotype; none found significant
interactions. Clinical utility evidence was inadequate. In addition to analytic
validity and clinical utility knowledge gaps, additional gaps were identified
regarding how to inform, produce, and evaluate models combining multiple
variants.

PMCID: PMC4684162
PMID: 23492876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Genet Med. 2013 Aug;15(8):612-7. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.9. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Recommendations from the EGAPP Working Group: does genomic profiling to assess
type 2 diabetes risk improve health outcomes?

Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice and Prevention (EGAPP) Working
Group; Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice and Prevention (EGAPP)
Working Group.

Collaborators: Calonge N, Berg JS, Campos-Outcalt D, Djulbegovic B, Ganiats TG,
Janssens C, Klein RD, Offit K, Pauker SG, Piper M, Richards CS, Strickland OL,
Tunis S, Williams MS, Zallen D.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS: The Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice
and Prevention (EGAPP) Working Group (EWG) found insufficient evidence to
recommend testing for predictive variants in 28 variants (listed in Table 1) to
assess risk for type 2 diabetes in the general population, on the basis of
studies in populations of northern European descent. The EWG found that the
magnitude of net health benefit from the use of any of these tests alone or in
combination is close to zero. The EWG discourages clinical use unless further
evidence supports improved clinical outcomes.The EWG found insufficient evidence 
to recommend testing for the TCF7L2 gene to assess risk for type 2 diabetes in
high-risk individuals. The EWG found that the magnitude of net health benefit
from the use of this test is close to zero. The EWG discourages clinical use
unless further evidence supports improved clinical outcomes.On the basis of the
available evidence for both the scenarios, the overall certainty of net health
benefit is deemed "low."
RATIONALE: It has been suggested that genomic profiling in the general population
or in high-risk populations for type 2 diabetes might lead to management changes 
(e.g., earlier initiation or higher rates of medical interventions, or targeted
recommendations for behavioral change) that improve type 2 diabetes outcomes or
prevent type 2 diabetes. The EWG found no direct evidence to support this
possibility; therefore, this review sought indirect evidence aimed at documenting
the extent to which genomic profiling alters type 2 diabetes risk estimation,
alone and in combination with traditional risk factors, and the extent to which
risk classification improves health outcomes.
ANALYTIC VALIDITY: Assay-related evidence on available genomic profiling tests
was deemed inadequate. However, on the basis of existing technologies that have
been or may be used, the analytic sensitivity and specificity of tests for
individual gene variants might be at least satisfactory.
CLINICAL VALIDITY: Twenty-eight candidate markers were evaluated in the general
population. Evidence on clinical validity was rated inadequate for 24 of these
associations (86%) and adequate for 4 (14%). Inadequate grades were based on
limited evidence, poor replication, existence of possible biases, or combinations
of these factors. Type 2 diabetes genomic profiling provided areas under the
receiver operator characteristics curve of 55%-57%, with 4, 8, and 28 genes. Only
TCF7L2 had convincing evidence of an association with type 2 diabetes with an
odds ratio of 1.39 (95% confidence interval: 1.33-1.46).TCF7L2 was evaluated for 
high-risk populations, and the overall odds ratio was 1.66 (95% confidence
interval: 1.22-2.27) for association with progression to type 2 diabetes.
CLINICAL UTILITY: No studies were available to provide direct evidence on the
balance of benefits and harms for genetic profiling for type 2 diabetes alone or 
in addition to traditional risk factors in the general population.Evidence for
high-risk populations and TCF7L2 was inadequate on the basis of two identified
studies. These studies found close to zero additional benefit with the addition
of genomic markers to traditional risk factors (diet, body mass index, and
glucose tolerance).
CONTEXTUAL ISSUES: Prevention of type 2 diabetes is a public health priority.
Improvements in the outcomes associated with genomic profiling could have
important impacts. Traditional risk factors (e.g., body mass index, weight, fat
mass, and exercise) have an advantage in clinical screening and risk assessment
strategies because they measure the actual targets for therapy (e.g., fasting
plasma glucose and medical interventions). To be useful in predicting disease
risk, genomic testing should improve the predictive value of these traditional
risk factors. Some issues important for clinical utility remain unknown, such as 
the level of risk that changes intervention, whether long-term disease outcomes
will improve, how individuals being tested will understand/respond to test
results and interact with the health-care system, and whether testing will
motivate behavior change or amplify potential harms.

PMID: 23492873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):1036-46. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2815-7. Epub 2013
Mar 6.

Identification of CpG-SNPs associated with type 2 diabetes and differential DNA
methylation in human pancreatic islets.

Dayeh TA(1), Olsson AH, Volkov P, Almgren P, Rönn T, Ling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Epigenetics and Diabetes, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Clinical Research Centre, Scania University Hospital, Jan
Waldenströmsgata 35, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):947-8.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To date, the molecular function of most of the reported type 2
diabetes-associated loci remains unknown. The introduction or removal of
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) dinucleotides, which are possible sites of DNA
methylation, has been suggested as a potential mechanism through which
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can affect gene function via epigenetics. 
The aim of this study was to examine if any of 40 SNPs previously associated with
type 2 diabetes introduce or remove a CpG site and if these CpG-SNPs are
associated with differential DNA methylation in pancreatic islets of 84 human
donors.
METHODS: DNA methylation was analysed using pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We found that 19 of 40 (48%) type 2 diabetes-associated SNPs introduce
or remove a CpG site. Successful DNA methylation data were generated for 16 of
these 19 CpG-SNP loci, representing the candidate genes TCF7L2, KCNQ1, PPARG,
HHEX, CDKN2A, SLC30A8, DUSP9, CDKAL1, ADCY5, SRR, WFS1, IRS1, DUSP8, HMGA2,
TSPAN8 and CHCHD9. All analysed CpG-SNPs were associated with differential DNA
methylation of the CpG-SNP site in human islets. Moreover, six CpG-SNPs,
representing TCF7L2, KCNQ1, CDKN2A, ADCY5, WFS1 and HMGA2, were also associated
with DNA methylation of surrounding CpG sites. Some of the type 2 diabetes
CpG-SNP sites that exhibit differential DNA methylation were further associated
with gene expression, alternative splicing events determined by splice index, and
hormone secretion in the human islets. The 19 type 2 diabetes-associated CpG-SNPs
are in strong linkage disequilibrium (r² > 0.8) with a total of 295 SNPs,
including 91 CpG-SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the introduction or removal 
of a CpG site may be a molecular mechanism through which some of the type 2
diabetes SNPs affect gene function via differential DNA methylation and
consequently contributes to the phenotype of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3622750
PMID: 23462794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Gene. 2013 May 15;520(2):166-77. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 Feb
28.

ACE I/D and MTHFR C677T polymorphisms are significantly associated with type 2
diabetes in Arab ethnicity: a meta-analysis.

Al-Rubeaan K(1), Siddiqui K, Saeb AT, Nazir N, Al-Naqeb D, Al-Qasim S.

Author information: 
(1)Strategic Center for Diabetes Research, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
krubean@ksu.edu.sa

In this meta-analysis study, SNPs were investigated for their association with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in both Arab and Caucasian ethnicities. A total of 55 SNPs 
were analyzed, of which 11 fulfilled the selection criteria, and were used for
analysis. It was found that TCF7L2 rs7903146 was significantly associated with a 
pooled OR of 1.155 (95%C.I.=1.059-1.259), p<0.0001 and I(2)=78.30% among the Arab
population, whereas among Caucasians, the pooled OR was 1.45
(95%C.I.=1.386-1.516), p<0.0001 and I(2)=77.20%. KCNJ11 rs5219 was significantly 
associated in both the populations with a pooled OR of 1.176(1.092-1.268),
p<0.0001 and I(2)=32.40% in Caucasians and a pooled OR of 1.28(1.111-1.475),
p=0.001 among Arabs. The ACE I/D polymorphism was found to be significantly
associated with a pooled OR of 1.992 (95%C.I.=1.774-2.236), p<0.0001 and
I(2)=83.20% among the Arab population, whereas among Caucasians, the pooled OR
was 1.078 (95%C.I.=0.993-1.17), p=0.073 and I(2)=0%. Similarly, MTHFR C677T
polymorphism was also found to be significantly associated among Arabs with a
pooled OR of 1.924 (95%C.I.=1.606-2.304), p<0.0001 and I(2)=27.20%, whereas among
Caucasians, the pooled OR was 0.986 (95%C.I.=0.868-1.122), p=0.835 and I(2)=0%.
Meanwhile PPARG-2 Pro12Ala, CDKN2A/2B rs10811661, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, HHEX
rs7923837, CDKAL1 rs7754840, EXT2 rs1113132 and SLC30A8 rs13266634 were found to 
have no significant association with T2D among Arabs. In conclusion, it seems
from this study that both Arabs and Caucasians have different SNPs associated
with T2D. Moreover, this study sheds light on the profound necessity for further 
investigations addressing the question of the genetic components of T2D in Arabs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23458876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Perinatol. 2014 Jan;31(1):69-76. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1334451. Epub 2013 Mar 
1.

Maternal genotype and gestational diabetes.

Stuebe AM(1), Wise A(2), Nguyen T(3), Herring A(2), North KE(4), Siega-Riz AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (2)Department of Biostatistics,
Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (3)Division of Genetics and Endocrinology,
Children's Hospital of Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, Carolina 
Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether genetic variants associated with glucose
homeostasis are associated with gestational diabetes (GDM).
STUDY DESIGN: We genotyped 899 self-identified Caucasian women and 386
self-identified African-American women in the Pregnancy, Infection and Nutrition 
(PIN) Studies cohorts for 38 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with type II diabetes (T2DM) and/or glucose homeostasis in European populations.
RESULTS: GDM was diagnosed in 56 of 899 (6.2%) Caucasian and 24 of 386 (6.2%)
African-American women. Among Caucasian women, GDM was associated with carriage
of TCF7L2 rs7901695, MTNR1B rs10830963 and GCKR rs780094 alleles that are
associated with T2DM and fasting glucose in nonpregnant populations. Among
African-American participants, we found an increased risk among TSPAN8 rs7961581 
C allele homozygotes and reduced risk among carriers of the JAZF1 rs864745 T
allele.
CONCLUSION: We found several SNPs that are associated with GDM risk in the PIN
cohorts. Maternal genotyping may identify women at risk for impaired gestational 
glucose tolerance.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMCID: PMC3884679
PMID: 23456907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2014 Apr;80(4):532-7. doi: 10.1111/cen.12187. Epub 2013
Apr 8.

Assessing the contribution of 38 genetic loci to the risk of type 2 diabetes in
the Saudi Arabian Population.

Al-Daghri NM(1), Alkharfy KM, Alokail MS, Alenad AM, Al-Attas OS, Mohammed AK,
Sabico S, Albagha OM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers Research Program, Biochemistry Department, College of Science, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Center of Excellence in Biotechnology
Research Centre, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Prince Mutaib Chair 
for Biomarkers of Osteoporosis, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Previous genome-wide association studies have identified multiple
type 2 diabetes (T2D) genetic risk loci in many populations. However, the
contribution of these loci to T2D in the Middle Eastern populations with high T2D
prevalence is unknown.
METHODS: Here, we investigated the association of 38 T2D risk loci in the Saudi
Arabian population (1166 patients with T2D and 1235 healthy controls), which has 
one of the world's highest prevalence of T2D.
RESULTS: Eight common genetic variants showed a significant association with T2D 
in our study population. The effect sizes of these loci were comparable to those 
previously identified in other populations with the exception of HNF4A, which
showed a trend for larger effect size in our study population (OR = 1·27)
compared to that reported in South Asian populations (OR = 1·09; I(2) = 65·9).
Analysis of risk allele scores (RASs) defined by the 8 loci showed that subjects 
in the top RAS quintile (n = 480) had 2·5-fold increase in disease risk compared 
to those in the bottom quintile (n = 480; P = 9·5 × 10(-12)). RASs were also
associated with fasting glucose level (ß = 0·12; P = 2·2 × 10(-9)), but not with 
BMI (P = 0·19). Analysis of a subgroup of subjects with BMI=30 resulted in two
additional loci (SLC30A8; P = 0·03, HMG20A; P = 0·02) showing significant
association with T2D.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown for the first time that variants at WFS1, JAZF1,
SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HMG20A, HNF4A and DUSP9 are associated with T2D
in the Saudi population. Our findings also suggest substantial overlap of T2D
risk loci across many ethnic groups regardless of disease prevalence.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23448427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes. 2013 Jul;62(7):2613-7. doi: 10.2337/db12-1093. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

TCF7L2 variation and proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

Luo J(1), Zhao L, Chen AY, Zhang X, Zhu J, Zhao J, Ouyang H, Luo H, Song Y, Lee
J, Patel SH, Shaw PX, Sadda S, Zhuo Y, Rosenfeld MG, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is the most severe vision-threatening
complication of diabetes. For investigation of genetic association between TCF7L2
and PDR in Caucasian type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its functional
consequences, 383 T2DM patients with PDR (T2DM-PDR) and 756 T2DM patients without
diabetic retinopathy (T2DM-no DR) were genotyped with rs7903146 in TCF7L2. We
found that risk allele (T) frequency of rs7903146 was significantly higher in
T2DM-PDR patients (allelic P = 2.52E-04). In lymphoblastoid cells induced to
undergo endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by treatment of tunicamycin, higher
fold change of TCF7L2 and VEGFA mRNA levels were observed in rs7903146-TT cells
than in rs7903146-CC cells (P = 0.02 for TCF7L2; P = 0.004 for VEGFA), suggesting
that ER stress plays a role in PDR pathogenesis. Silencing TCF7L2 resulted in
decreased mRNA levels of both TCF7L2 and VEGFA (P < 0.001). Retinas of
oxygen-induced retinopathy mice (a model for PDR) had higher TCF7L2 and VEGFA
mRNA levels than those of controls (P = 2.9E-04 for TCF7L2; P = 1.9E-07 for
VEGFA). Together, data from our study show that TCF7L2-rs7903146 is associated
with PDR in Caucasian T2DM and suggest that TCF7L2 promotes pathological retinal 
neovascularization via ER stress-dependent upregulation of VEGFA.

PMCID: PMC3712060
PMID: 23434931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):706-8. doi: 10.2337/db12-1418.

TCF7L2 and glucose metabolism: time to look beyond the pancreas.

Nobrega MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
nobrega@uchicago.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):789-800.

PMCID: PMC3581232
PMID: 23431017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):197-209. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.01.009.

LRP6 enhances glucose metabolism by promoting TCF7L2-dependent insulin receptor
expression and IGF receptor stabilization in humans.

Singh R(1), De Aguiar RB, Naik S, Mani S, Ostadsharif K, Wencker D, Sotoudeh M,
Malekzadeh R, Sherwin RS, Mani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Common genetic variations in Wnt signaling genes have been associated with
metabolic syndrome and diabetes by mechanisms that are poorly understood. A rare 
nonconservative mutation in Wnt coreceptor LRP6 (LRP6(R611C)) has been shown to
underlie autosomal dominant early onset coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes,
and metabolic syndrome. We examined the interplay between Wnt and insulin
signaling pathways in skeletal muscle and skin fibroblasts of healthy nondiabetic
LRP6(R611C) mutation carriers. LRP6 mutation carriers exhibited hyperinsulinemia 
and reduced insulin sensitivity compared to noncarrier relatives in response to
oral glucose ingestion, which correlated with a significant decline in tissue
expression of the insulin receptor and insulin signaling activity. Further
investigations showed that the LRP6(R611C) mutation diminishes TCF7L2-dependent
transcription of the IR while it increases the stability of IGFR and enhances
mTORC1 activity. These findings identify the Wnt/LRP6/TCF7L2 axis as a regulator 
of glucose metabolism and a potential therapeutic target for insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3589523
PMID: 23395167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):157-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.01.011.

TCF7L2 and diabetes: a tale of two tissues, and of two species.

McCarthy MI(1), Rorsman P, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LE, UK.
mark.mccarthy@drl.ox.ac.uk

Comment on
    Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1595-607.

Human genetics is revealing ever more variants that influence propensity to
common diseases, but progress in translating these discoveries into the
biological mechanisms responsible for predisposition continues to lag behind. A
recent paper in Cell (Boj et al., 2012) using rodent models to examine how
diabetes-associated variants near TCF7L2 perturb metabolic regulation provides
surprising results.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395164  [PubMed]


302. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Apr;96(4):2583-95. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-5814. Epub 2013 Jan
30.

Gene coexpression network analysis identifies genes and biological processes
shared among anterior pituitary and brain areas that affect estrous behavior in
dairy cows.

Kommadath A(1), Te Pas MF, Smits MA.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen UR Livestock Research, PO Box 
65, 8200 AB, Lelystad, The Netherlands.

The expression of estrous (sexually receptive) behavior (EB), a key fertility
trait in dairy cows, has been declining over the past few decades both in
intensity and duration. Improved knowledge of the genomic factors underlying EB, 
which is currently lacking, may lead to novel applications to enhance fertility. 
Our objective was to identify genes and biological processes shared among the
bovine anterior pituitary (AP) and four brain areas that act together to regulate
EB by investigating networks of coexpressed genes between these tissues. We used 
a systems biology approach called weighted gene coexpression network analysis for
defining gene coexpression networks using gene expression data from the following
tissues collected from 14 cows at estrus: AP, dorsal hypothalamus (DH), ventral
hypothalamus (VH), amygdala (AM), and hippocampus (HC). Consensus modules of
coexpressed genes were identified between the networks for the AM-DH, HC-DH,
VH-DH, AP-DH, and AM-HC tissue pairs. The correlation between the module's
eigengene (weighted average gene expression profile) and levels of EB exhibited
by the experimental cows were tested. Estrous behavior-correlated modules were
found enriched for gene ontology terms like glial cell development and regulation
of neural projection development as well as for Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes pathway terms related to brain degenerative diseases. General cellular
processes like oxidative phosphorylation and ribosome and biosynthetic processes 
were found enriched in several correlated modules, indicating increased
transcription and protein synthesis. Stimulation of ribosomal RNA synthesis is
known from rodent studies to be a primary event in the activation of neuronal
cells and pathways involved in female reproductive behavior and this precedes the
estrogen-driven expansion of dendrites and synapses. Similar processes also
operate in cows to affect EB. Hub genes within EB-correlated modules (e.g. NEFL, 
NDRG2, GAP43, THY1, and TCF7L2, among others) are strong candidates among genes
regulating EB expression. The study improved our understanding of the genomic
regulation of EB in dairy cows by providing new insights into genes and
biological processes shared among the bovine AP and brain areas acting together
to regulate EB. The new knowledge could lead to the development of novel
management strategies to monitor and improve reproductive performance in dairy
cows (for example, biomarkers for estrus detection).

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Carcinogenesis. 2013 May;34(5):962-73. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt027. Epub 2013 Jan 
27.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling enhances hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in hepatocellular carcinoma via crosstalk with hif-1a signaling.

Zhang Q(1), Bai X, Chen W, Ma T, Hu Q, Liang C, Xie S, Chen C, Hu L, Xu S, Liang 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical process for tumor invasion 
and metastasis. Hypoxia may induce EMT, and upregulated ß-catenin expression has 
been found in various tumors. In this study, we investigate the role of ß-catenin
in hypoxia-induced EMT in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Induction of EMT in HCC
cell lines by hypoxia was confirmed by altered morphology, expression change of
EMT-associated markers and enhanced invasion capacity. We showed that
hypoxia-induced EMT could be enhanced by addition of recombinant Wnt3a while it
was repressed by ß-catenin small interfering RNA. An interaction between
ß-catenin and hypoxia-induced factor-1a (hif-1a) was found, and an underlying
competition for ß-catenin between hif-1a and T-cell factor-4 was implied.
Notably, increased hif-1a activity was accompanied with more significant EMT
features. We also showed that the pro-EMT effect of ß-catenin in hypoxia was
deprived in the absence of hif-1a. Moreover, ß-catenin was found to be
responsible for the maintenance of viability and proliferation for tumor cells
undergoing hypoxia. We further showed a correlation between hif-1a and ß-catenin 
expression, and corresponding expression of EMT-associated markers in human HCC
tissues. Our results suggest that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling enhances
hypoxia-induced EMT in HCC by increasing the EMT-associated activity of hif-1a
and preventing tumor cell death.

PMID: 23358852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. FEBS Lett. 2013 Mar 1;587(5):522-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.034. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

Synthesis of novel inhibitors blocking Wnt signaling downstream of ß-catenin.

Halbedl S(1), Kratzer MC, Rahm K, Crosta N, Masters KS, Zippert J, Bräse S, Gradl
D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Cell- and Developmental Biology, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Large scale screening of libraries consisting of natural and small molecules led 
to the identification of many small molecule inhibitors repressing Wnt/ß-Catenin 
signaling. However, targeted synthesis of novel Wnt pathway inhibitors has been
rarely described. We developed a modular and expedient way to create the aromatic
ring system with an aliphatic ring in between. Our synthesis opens up the
possibility, in principle, to substitute all positions at the ring system with
any desired substituent. Here, we tested five different haloquinone analogs
carrying methoxy- and hydroxy-groups at different positions. Bona fide Wnt
activity assays in cell culture and in Xenopus embryos revealed that two of these
compounds act as potent inhibitors of aberrant activated Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053944. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Association study of 25 type 2 diabetes related Loci with measures of obesity in 
Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Sovio U, Rafiq S, Kranthi Kumar MV, Janipalli CS, Evans D, 
Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor A, Kinra S, Sullivan R, Bowen L, Timpson N, Smith GD,
Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S, Chandak GR; Indian
Migration Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Obesity is an established risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) and they are
metabolically related through the mechanism of insulin resistance. In order to
explore how common genetic variants associated with T2D correlate with body mass 
index (BMI), we examined the influence of 25 T2D associated loci on obesity risk.
We used 5056 individuals (2528 sib-pairs) recruited in Indian Migration Study and
conducted within sib-pair analysis for six obesity phenotypes. We found
associations of variants in CXCR4 (rs932206) and HHEX (rs5015480) with higher
body mass index (BMI) (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.002), respectively and
weight (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.001), respectively. CXCR4 variant was
also strongly associated with body fat (ß=0.10, p=0.0004). In addition, we
demonstrated associations of CXCR4 and HHEX with overweight/obesity (OR=1.6,
p=0.003) and (OR=1.4, p=0.002), respectively, in 1333 sib-pairs (2666
individuals). We observed marginal evidence of associations between variants at
six loci (TCF7L2, NGN3, FOXA2, LOC646279, FLJ39370 and THADA) and waist hip ratio
(WHR), BMI and/or overweight which needs to be validated in larger set of
samples. All the above findings were independent of daily energy consumption and 
physical activity level. The risk score estimates based on eight significant loci
(including nominal associations) showed associations with WHR and body fat which 
were independent of BMI. In summary, we establish the role of T2D associated loci
in influencing the measures of obesity in Indian population, suggesting common
underlying pathophysiology across populations.

PMCID: PMC3547960
PMID: 23349771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.01.016. Epub 2013 Jan 
21.

Reply to: "New onset diabetes after transplantation: a type 1.5 diabetes or
latent autoimmune diabetes of adults?".

Ling Q, Xu X, Dong F, Zheng S.

Comment on
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60.
    J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7.

PMID: 23348239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.12.029. Epub 2013 Jan
20.

New onset diabetes after transplantation: a type 1.5 diabetes or latent
autoimmune diabetes of adults?

Eshraghian A.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1.

Comment on
    J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7.

PMID: 23339955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 15;73(6):2003-13. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3159. Epub
2013 Jan 14.

Genetic amplification of the NOTCH modulator LNX2 upregulates the WNT/ß-catenin
pathway in colorectal cancer.

Camps J(1), Pitt JJ, Emons G, Hummon AB, Case CM, Grade M, Jones TL, Nguyen QT,
Ghadimi BM, Beissbarth T, Difilippantonio MJ, Caplen NJ, Ried T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20893, USA. campsj@mail.nih.gov

Chromosomal copy number alterations (aneuploidy) define the genomic landscape of 
most cancer cells, but identification of the oncogenic drivers behind these
imbalances remains an unfinished task. In this study, we conducted a systematic
analysis of colorectal carcinomas that integrated genomic copy number changes and
gene expression profiles. This analysis revealed 44 highly overexpressed genes
mapping to localized amplicons on chromosome 13, gains of which occur often in
colorectal cancers (CRC). RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated silencing identified
eight candidates whose loss-of-function reduced cell viability 20% or more in CRC
cell lines. The functional space of the genes NUPL1, LNX2, POLR1D, POMP, SLC7A1, 
DIS3, KLF5, and GPR180 was established by global expression profiling after RNAi 
exposure. One candidate, LNX2, not previously known as an oncogene, was involved 
in regulating NOTCH signaling. Silencing LNX2 reduced NOTCH levels but also
downregulated the transcription factor TCF7L2 and markedly reduced WNT signaling.
LNX2 overexpression and chromosome 13 amplification therefore constitutively
activates the WNT pathway, offering evidence of an aberrant NOTCH-WNT axis in
CRC.

PMCID: PMC4729305
PMID: 23319804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Islets. 2012 Nov-Dec;4(6):359-65. doi: 10.4161/isl.23345. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

New insight into the mechanisms underlying the function of the incretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 in pancreatic ß-cells: the involvement of the Wnt
signaling pathway effector ß-catenin.

Xiong X(1), Shao W, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON Canada.

During the past two decades, the exploration of function of two incretin
hormones, namely glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory peptide
(GIP), has led to the development of two categories of novel therapeutic agents
for diabetes and its complications, known as GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonists and
DPP-IV inhibitors. Mechanisms underlying the function of GLP-1, however, still
need to be further explored. GLP-1 not only functions as an incretin hormone in
stimulating insulin secretion in response to nutritional, hormonal and neuronal
stimulations, but also acts as an "insulin-like" factor in ß-cell and
extra-pancreatic organs. In addition to these insulinotropic and insulinomimetic 
effects, GLP-1 was shown to exert its protective effect in ß-cell by repressing
the expression of TxNIP, a mediator of glucolipotoxicity. A number of recent
studies have shown that the Wnt signaling pathway effector, the bipartite
transcription factor ß-catenin/TCF, controls not only the production of GLP-1,
but also the function of GLP-1. Furthermore, previously assumed "degradation"
products of GLP-1(7-36)amide, including GLP-1(9-36)amide and GLP-1(28-36)amide,
have been shown to exert beneficial effect in pancreas and extra-pancreatic
tissues or cell lineages. Here we summarized our current knowledge on the
metabolic, proliferative and protective effects of GLP-1(7-36)amide and its
cleavage fragments, mainly focusing on pancreatic ß-cells and the involvement of 
the Wnt signaling pathway effector ß-catenin.

PMCID: PMC3605164
PMID: 23314611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jan 12;14:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-8.

Meta-analysis of associations between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and risk of type 2
diabetes mellitus in the Chinese population.

Wang J(1), Hu F, Feng T, Zhao J, Yin L, Li L, Wang Y, Wang Q, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, 450000, People's Republic of China. dongsheng_hu@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Associations between transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) have been evaluated extensively
in multiple ethnic groups. TCF7L2 has emerged as the strongest T2DM
susceptibility gene in Europeans, but the findings have been inconsistent in the 
Chinese population. The purpose of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the
associations between TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and T2DM risk 
in the Chinese population.
METHODS: We performed searches in the PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and Chinese
databases (CNKI, CQVIP and Wanfang databases) for literature published from
January 2007 to February 2012. We reviewed all relevant articles on TCF7L2
polymorphisms and susceptibility to T2DM in the Chinese population written in
English and Chinese. Two reviewers extracted data independently using a
standardized protocol, and any discrepancies were adjudicated by a third
reviewer. Fixed-effects and random-effects meta-analyses were performed to pool
the odds ratios (ORs). Publication bias and heterogeneity were examined.
RESULTS: A total of 21 articles were confirmed to be eligible for and included in
this meta-analysis: 7 (with 3942 cases and 3502 controls) concerning rs11196218
(IVS-/+4G>A), 8 (with 3377 cases and 2975 controls) concerning rs290487
(IVS3-/+C>T), and 14 (with 7902 cases and 7436 controls) concerning rs7903146
(IVS3-/+C>T). Overall, the results showed a significant association between
rs7903146 and T2DM risk. The pooled ORs were 1.54 for the comparison of T and C
alleles (95% CI [confidence interval]: 1.37-1.74, p = 1.47 × 10-12, I2 = 25.20%) 
and 1.56 for TC heterozygotes and CC homozygotes (95% CI : 1.38-1.76, p = 8.25 × 
10-9, I2 = 21.00%). The rs11196218(IVS4G>A) and rs290487 (IVS3C>T) SNPs were not 
associated with T2DM risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs7903146 SNP of the TCF7L2 gene is associated with increased
susceptibility to T2DM in the Chinese population as a whole as well as northern
Chinese and southern Chinese as subgroups.

PMCID: PMC3575230
PMID: 23311683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 3:S16. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S3-S16. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

Genome-wide meta-analysis of genetic susceptible genes for Type 2 Diabetes.

Hale PJ(1), López-Yunez AM, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Many genetic studies, including single gene studies and Genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), aim to identify risk alleles for genetic diseases
such as Type II Diabetes (T2D). However, in T2D studies, there is a significant
amount of the hereditary risk that cannot be simply explained by individual risk 
genes. There is a need for developing systems biology approaches to integrate
comprehensive genetic information and provide new insight on T2D biology.
METHODS: We performed comprehensive integrative analysis of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNP's) individually curated from T2D GWAS results and mapped them 
to T2D candidate risk genes. Using protein-protein interaction data, we
constructed a T2D-specific molecular interaction network consisting of T2D
genetic risk genes and their interacting gene partners. We then studied the
relationship between these T2D genes and curated gene sets.
RESULTS: We determined that T2D candidate risk genes are concentrated in certain 
parts of the genome, specifically in chromosome 20. Using the T2D genetic
network, we identified highly-interconnected network "hub" genes. By
incorporating T2D GWAS results, T2D pathways, and T2D genes' functional category 
information, we further ranked T2D risk genes, T2D-related pathways, and
T2D-related functional categories. We found that highly-interconnected T2D
disease network "hub" genes most highly associated to T2D genetic risks to be
PI3KR1, ESR1, and ENPP1. The well-characterized TCF7L2, contractor to our
expectation, was not among the highest-ranked T2D gene list. Many interacted
pathways play a role in T2D genetic risks, which includes insulin signalling
pathway, type II diabetes pathway, maturity onset diabetes of the young,
adipocytokine signalling pathway, and pathways in cancer. We also observed
significant crosstalk among T2D gene subnetworks which include insulin secretion,
regulation of insulin secretion, response to peptide hormone stimulus, response
to insulin stimulus, peptide secretion, glucose homeostasis, and hormone
transport. Overview maps involving T2D genes, gene sets, pathways, and their
interactions are all reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Large-scale systems biology meta-analyses of GWAS results can
improve interpretations of genetic variations and genetic risk factors. T2D
genetic risks can be attributable to the summative genetic effects of many genes 
involved in a broad range of signalling pathways and functional networks. The
framework developed for T2D studies may serve as a guide for studying other
complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3524015
PMID: 23281828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2012 Nov;56(8):479-84.

Association of the rs7903146 single nucleotide polymorphism at the Transcription 
Factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus with type 2 diabetes in Brazilian subjects.

Barra GB(1), Dutra LA, Watanabe SC, Costa PG, Cruz PS, Azevedo MF, Amato AA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto e Laboratório Sabin de Análises Clínicas, Unidade de Biologia
Molecular, Brasília, DF, Brazil. gbarra@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of the T allele of the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 of TCF7L2 with the occurrence of T2D in a
sample of subjects followed up at the Brasilia University Hospital.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was genotyped by
allele-specific PCR in 113 patients with known T2D and in 139 non-diabetic
controls in Brasilia, Brazil.
RESULTS: We found that the T allele of the SNP rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was
significantly associated with T2D risk (odds ratio of 3.92 for genotype TT in the
recessive genetic model, p = 0.004 and 1.5 for T allele, p = 0.032).
CONCLUSION: These results reinforce previous findings on the consistent
association of this genetic factor and the risk of T2D in populations of diverse 
ethnic backgrounds.

PMID: 23295285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Feb;97(2):261-7. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.047936. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Within-person variation in the postprandial lipemic response of healthy adults.

Ryan MF(1), O'Grada CM, Morris C, Segurado R, Walsh MC, Gibney ER, Brennan L,
Roche HM, Gibney MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food and Health, University College Dublin Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland. miriam.ryan@ucd.ie

Erratum in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2014 Oct;100(4):1214. Grada, Colm O [corrected to O'Grada, Colm
M].

BACKGROUND: The response to dietary fat plays a key role in metabolic health.
Although this can vary widely between individuals, variation within an individual
and the associated contribution of phenotypic and genotypic factors to this
variation are less defined.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives were to quantify within-person variation in
triacylglycerol response by means of a novel variation score (S(v)) and to
explore the phenotypic and genotypic factors associated with this score.
DESIGN: Two consecutive 5-h oral-lipid-tolerance tests (OLTTs) were conducted in 
51 healthy adults aged 18-60 y with a BMI (in kg/m²) of 18.5 to 49.8. Detailed
body composition, physical function, biochemistry, and genotype data were
gathered.
RESULTS: The postprandial triacylglycerol response profile did not differ (P =
0.64) across OLTTs for the group; nor did average concentrations of functional
markers apolipoprotein C2 (P = 0.73) and apolipoprotein C3 (P = 0.74). S(v) was
low in most (82%) of the adults and was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with 
age, fasting triacylglycerol, triacylglycerol AUC, and fasting nonessential fatty
acids. Significant associations were also observed between S(v) and single
nucleotide polymorphisms in 7 genes (APOA1, IL1a, IL1ß, TLR4, TCF7L2, CCK1Rec,
and STAT3) after correction for phenotypic differences.
CONCLUSIONS: This work showed that the within-person variability in postprandial 
lipemic response is low in most healthy adults. It also showed that variability
in this response is associated with a defined set of phenotypic and genotypic
characteristics.

PMID: 23283501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1595-607. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.053.

Diabetes risk gene and Wnt effector Tcf7l2/TCF4 controls hepatic response to
perinatal and adult metabolic demand.

Boj SF(1), van Es JH, Huch M, Li VS, José A, Hatzis P, Mokry M, Haegebarth A, van
den Born M, Chambon P, Voshol P, Dor Y, Cuppen E, Fillat C, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):157-9.

Most studies on TCF7L2 SNP variants in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
focus on a role of the encoded transcription factor TCF4 in ß cells. Here, a
mouse genetics approach shows that removal of TCF4 from ß cells does not affect
their function, whereas manipulating TCF4 levels in the liver has major effects
on metabolism. In Tcf7l2(-/-) mice, the immediate postnatal surge in liver
metabolism does not occur. Consequently, pups die due to hypoglycemia. By
combining chromatin immunoprecipitation with gene expression profiling, we
identify a TCF4-controlled metabolic gene program that is acutely activated in
the postnatal liver. In concordance, adult liver-specific Tcf7l2 knockout
mice show reduced hepatic glucose production during fasting and display improved 
glucose homeostasis when maintained on high-fat diet. Furthermore, liver-specific
TCF4 overexpression increases hepatic glucose production. These observations
imply that TCF4 directly activates metabolic genes and that inhibition of Wnt
signaling may be beneficial in metabolic disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23260145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hum Biol. 2012 Aug;84(4):423-35. doi: 10.3378/027.084.0405.

Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes: a global meta-analysis studying the
genetic differences in Tunisian populations.

Berhouma R(1), Kouidhi S, Ammar M, Abid H, Baroudi T, Ennafaa H,
Benammar-Elgaaied A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Immunology and Human Pathologies, University of Tunis 
El Manar, Tunisia. berhoumar@gmail.com

The present study is the first meta-analysis to evaluate type 2 diabetes (T2D)-
associated polymorphisms in cohorts originated from several Tunisian regions. In 
fact, we evaluated the effect of seven polymorphisms in the following genes-PPARg
(Pro12Ala), TNFa (-308A/G), ENPP1(K121Q), TCF7L2(rs7903146°C/T), MTHFR(C677T),
ACE(I/D), and CAPN10(3R/2R)-on T2D risk, through a meta-analysis combining data
of previous studies performed on Tunisian populations originating from the north,
center, or south of the country. R statistics version 2.12.1 software was used to
estimate the heterogeneity between studies. Pooled odds ratios were computed by
the fixed-effects method of Mantel-Haenszel if no heterogeneity between studies
exists. Despite the similarities founded in a number of loci, the Woolf test
reported that the contributions of ENPP1 and ACE loci in T2D risk are dependent
on the geographic origin of concerned groups, and this heterogeneity could be
attributed not only to the variable contribution of the variant in T2D risk but
also to diversities of genetic background between tested groups. Interestingly,
observed heterogeneity highlighted founding concerning Y chromosome and the
mitochondrial DNA about the genetic structure of Tunisian population and proves
once again that Tunisians, like the north-Africans, are a mosaic of
subpopulations, with significant differences in genetic structure. In homogeneous
groups, we replicated the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms of
TCF7L2, MTHFR, CAPN 10, TNFa, and ACE genes with a T2D risk in the Tunisian
population with OR ranging from 1.43 to 6.72. However, we reported an absence of 
the association of PPARg with T2D in the Tunisian population.

PMID: 23249316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Jan;97(1):179-87. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.045583. Epub 2012
Dec 12.

Consumption of whole grain reduces risk of deteriorating glucose tolerance,
including progression to prediabetes.

Wirström T(1), Hilding A, Gu HF, Östenson CG, Björklund A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. tina@wirstrom.net

BACKGROUND: High whole-grain intake has been reportedly associated with reduced
risk of developing type 2 diabetes (T2D), which is an effect possibly subject to 
genetic effect modification. Confirmation in prospective studies and
investigations on the impact on prediabetes is needed.
OBJECTIVES: In a prospective population-based study, we investigated whether a
higher intake of whole grain protects against the development of prediabetes and 
T2D and tested for modulation by polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene.
DESIGN: We examined the 8-10-y incidence of prediabetes (impaired glucose
tolerance, impaired fasting glucose, or the combination of both) and T2D in
relation to the intake of whole grain. Baseline data were available for 3180
women and 2297 men aged 35-56 y.
RESULTS: A higher intake of whole grain (>59.1 compared with <30.6 g/d) was
associated with a 34% lower risk to deteriorate in glucose tolerance (to
prediabetes or T2D; women and men combined). The association remained after
adjustments for age, family history of diabetes, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
education, and blood pressure (OR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.63, 0.96). Risk reduction was 
significant in men (OR: 0.65; 95% CI: 0.49, 0.85) but not in women. Associations 
were significant for prediabetes per se (all, OR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.56, 0.94; men, 
OR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.40, 0.80). The intake of whole grain correlated inversely
with insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). The impact of whole-grain intake was
undetectable in men who harbored diabetogenic polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: A higher intake of whole grain is associated with decreased risk of 
deteriorating glucose tolerance including progression from normal glucose
tolerance to prediabetes by mechanisms likely tied to effects on insulin
sensitivity. Effect modifications by TCF7L2 genetic polymorphisms are supported.

PMID: 23235198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):965-76. doi: 10.2337/db12-0266. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Transferability and fine mapping of type 2 diabetes loci in African Americans:
the Candidate Gene Association Resource Plus Study.

Ng MC(1), Saxena R, Li J, Palmer ND, Dimitrov L, Xu J, Rasmussen-Torvik LJ, Zmuda
JM, Siscovick DS, Patel SR, Crook ED, Sims M, Chen YD, Bertoni AG, Li M, Grant
SF, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Psaty BM, Pankow JS, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Rotter
JI, Wilson JG, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. mng@wakehealth.edu

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) disproportionally affects African Americans (AfA) but, to
date, genetic variants identified from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are
primarily from European and Asian populations. We examined the single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) and locus transferability of 40 reported T2D loci in six AfA
GWAS consisting of 2,806 T2D case subjects with or without end-stage renal
disease and 4,265 control subjects from the Candidate Gene Association Resource
Plus Study. Our results revealed that seven index SNPs at the TCF7L2, KLF14,
KCNQ1, ADCY5, CDKAL1, JAZF1, and GCKR loci were significantly associated with T2D
(P < 0.05). The strongest association was observed at TCF7L2 rs7903146 (odds
ratio [OR] 1.30; P = 6.86 × 10<U+207B>8). Locus-wide analysis demonstrated significant
associations (P(emp) < 0.05) at regional best SNPs in the TCF7L2, KLF14, and
HMGA2 loci as well as suggestive signals in KCNQ1 after correction for the
effective number of SNPs at each locus. Of these loci, the regional best SNPs
were in differential linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the index and adjacent
SNPs. Our findings suggest that some loci discovered in prior reports affect T2D 
susceptibility in AfA with similar effect sizes. The reduced and differential LD 
pattern in AfA compared with European and Asian populations may facilitate fine
mapping of causal variants at loci shared across populations.

PMCID: PMC3581206
PMID: 23193183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 15;176(12):1121-9. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws191. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants with advanced prostate
cancer risk in the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium.

Machiela MJ(1), Lindström S, Allen NE, Haiman CA, Albanes D, Barricarte A, Berndt
SI, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Chanock S, Gaziano JM, Gapstur SM, Giovannucci E,
Henderson BE, Jacobs EJ, Kolonel LN, Krogh V, Ma J, Stampfer MJ, Stevens VL,
Stram DO, Tjønneland A, Travis R, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Le Marchand L, Kraft P.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Observational studies have found an inverse association between type 2 diabetes
(T2D) and prostate cancer (PCa), and genome-wide association studies have found
common variants near 3 loci associated with both diseases. The authors examined
whether a genetic background that favors T2D is associated with risk of advanced 
PCa. Data from the National Cancer Institute's Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort 
Consortium, a genome-wide association study of 2,782 advanced PCa cases and 4,458
controls, were used to evaluate whether individual single nucleotide
polymorphisms or aggregations of these 36 T2D susceptibility loci are associated 
with PCa. Ten T2D markers near 9 loci (NOTCH2, ADCY5, JAZF1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, MTNR1B, FTO, and HNF1B) were nominally associated with PCa (P < 0.05); the
association for single nucleotide polymorphism rs757210 at the HNF1B locus was
significant when multiple comparisons were accounted for (adjusted P = 0.001).
Genetic risk scores weighted by the T2D log odds ratio and multilocus kernel
tests also indicated a significant relation between T2D variants and PCa risk. A 
mediation analysis of 9,065 PCa cases and 9,526 controls failed to produce
evidence that diabetes mediates the association of the HNF1B locus with PCa risk.
These data suggest a shared genetic component between T2D and PCa and add to the 
evidence for an interrelation between these diseases.

PMCID: PMC3571230
PMID: 23193118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mutagenesis. 2013 Jan;28(1):25-37. doi: 10.1093/mutage/ges048. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes risk: a comprehensive and updated
meta-analysis involving 121,174 subjects.

Peng S(1), Zhu Y, Lü B, Xu F, Li X, Lai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310058, PR China.

Recently, many new loci associated with type 2 diabetes have been uncovered by
genetic association studies and genome-wide association studies. As more reports 
are made, particularly with respect to varying ethnicities, there is a need to
determine more precisely the effect sizes in each major racial group. In
addition, some reports have claimed ethnic-specific associations with alternative
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and to that end there has been a degree
of confusion. We conducted a meta-analysis using an additive genetic model. Eight
polymorphisms in 155 studies with 121174 subjects (53385 cases and 67789
controls) were addressed in this meta-analysis. Significant associations were
found between type 2 diabetes and rs7903146, rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695,
rs7895340 and rs4506565, with summary odds ratios (ORs) (95% confidence interval)
of 1.39 (1.34-1.45), 1.33 (1.27-1.40), 1.20 (1.14-1.26), 1.32 (1.25-1.39), 1.21
(1.13-1.29) and 1.39 (1.29-1.49), respectively. In addition, no significant
associations were found between the two polymorphisms (rs290487 and rs11196218)
and type 2 diabetes. The summary ORs for the six statistically significant
associations (P < 0.05) were further evaluated by estimating the false-positive
report probability, with results indicating that all of the six significant
associations were considered noteworthy, and may plausibly be true associations. 
Significant associations were found between the six polymorphisms (rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695, rs7895340 and rs4506565) in the TCF7L2 gene
and type 2 diabetes risk, and the other two polymorphisms (rs11196218 and
rs290487) were not found to be significantly associated with type 2 diabetes.
Subgroups analyses show that significant associations are not found between the
six SNPs (rs7903146, rs12255372, rs11196205, rs7901695, rs7895340, and rs4506565)
and the type 2 diabetes in some ethnic populations.

PMID: 23188737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Brain Struct Funct. 2013 Nov;218(6):1531-49. doi: 10.1007/s00429-012-0474-6. Epub
2012 Nov 15.

Postnatal isoform switch and protein localization of LEF1 and TCF7L2
transcription factors in cortical, thalamic, and mesencephalic regions of the
adult mouse brain.

Nagalski A(1), Irimia M, Szewczyk L, Ferran JL, Misztal K, Kuznicki J, Wisniewska
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, 4 Ks. Trojdena Street, 02-109, Warsaw, Poland.

ß-Catenin signaling, leading to the activation of lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor 1/T cell factor (LEF1/TCF) transcription factors, plays a well-established
role in transcription regulation during development and tissue homeostasis. In
the adult organism, the activity of this pathway has been found in stem cell
niches and postmitotic thalamic neurons. Recently, studies show that mutations in
components of ß-catenin signaling networks have been associated with several
psychiatric disorders, indicating the involvement of ß-catenin and LEF1/TCF
proteins in the proper functioning of the brain. Here, we report a comprehensive 
analysis of LEF1/TCF protein localization and the expression profile of their
isoforms in cortical, thalamic, and midbrain regions in mice. We detected LEF1
and TCF7L2 proteins in neurons of the thalamus and dorsal midbrain, i.e.,
subcortical regions specialized in the integration of diverse sources of sensory 
information. These neurons also exhibited nuclear localization of ß-catenin,
suggesting the involvement of ß-catenin/LEF1/TCF7L2 in the regulation of gene
expression in these regions. Analysis of alternative splicing and promoter usage 
identified brain-specific TCF7L2 isoforms and revealed a developmentally
coordinated transition in the composition of LEF1 and TCF7L2 isoforms. In the
case of TCF7L2, the typical brain isoforms lack the so-called C clamp; in
addition, the dominant-negative isoforms are predominant in the embryonic
thalamus but disappear postnatally. The present study provides a necessary
framework to understand the role of LEF1/TCF factors in thalamic and midbrain
development until adulthood and predicts that the regulatory role of these
proteins in the adult brain is significantly different from their role in the
embryonic brain or other non-neural tissues.

PMCID: PMC3825142
PMID: 23152144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 1;176(11):995-1001. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws176. Epub 2012
Nov 9.

Evaluation of genome-wide association study-identified type 2 diabetes loci in
African Americans.

Long J(1), Edwards T, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Zheng W, Shu XO, Blot WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Departmentof Medicine, School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37203-1738, USA.
jirong.long@vanderbilt.edu

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is up to twice as prevalent among African Americans as
Caucasians. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
multiple common genetic risk variants for T2D; however, none of these studies
were conducted exclusively among subjects of African ancestry. Investigating
these known loci in other populations would be an expedient way to evaluate the
generalizability of the current findings. The authors evaluated 29 known T2D loci
in a large southeastern US cohort study including 4,288 African Americans (1,554 
cases and 2,734 controls) enrolled during 2002-2009. Seven of the 29 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) examined were found to be associated with T2D
risk at P = 0.05, including rs6769511 (IGF2BP2), 2 SNPs in the WFS1 gene
(rs4689388 and rs1801214), rs7903146 (TCF7L2), and 3 SNPs in the KCNQ1 gene
(rs231362, rs2237892, and rs2237897). Notably, the association for rs7903146
reached the GWAS significance level (P = 3.6 × 10(-8)), with an odds ratio per T 
allele of 1.32 (95% confidence interval: 1.20, 1.46). Regional analyses using
GWAS data from Vanderbilt University's BioVU DNA biobank showed significant
associations (P < 0.05) with 9 loci, though no association was observed for the
index SNPs reported in European- or Asian-ancestry populations. These results
extend some of the recent GWAS findings to African Americans and may guide future
efforts to identify causal variants for T2D.

PMCID: PMC3571243
PMID: 23144361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 2013 Jan 25;513(2):244-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.086. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants are strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in Tunisian Arab subjects.

Turki A(1), Al-Zaben GS, Mtiraoui N, Marmmuoch H, Mahjoub T, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

Genome-wide association studies validated transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) 
gene as confirmed type 2 diabetes (T2DM) susceptibility locus, and an ethnic
contribution of TCF7L2 variants to T2DM risk was indicated. The aim of this study
was to replicate in a Tunisian Arab population identified associations of common 
TCF7L2 variants with T2DM. We tested the association of TCF7L2 variants:
rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326, and rs12255372, with T2DM in 900 Tunisian
patients and 875 control subjects. TCF7L2 genotyping was done by allelic
discrimination/real-time PCR method. Minor allele frequencies of rs4506565
(P=2.4×10(-8)), rs7903146 (P=1.2×10(-6)), rs12243326 (P=8.4×10(-8)) and
rs12255372 (P=1.1×10(-5)) were significantly higher in cases. The four tested
TCF7L2 variants were in linkage disequilibrium, and 4-locus (rs4506565,
rs7903146, rs12243326, rs12255372) haplotype analysis demonstrated that haplotype
1111 was negatively associated (Pc<0.001), while haplotypes 2222 (Pc=0.008) and
2211 (Pc=0.020) were positively associated with T2DM risk, after controlling for 
a number of covariates. The strong contribution of TCF7L2 gene variants to T2DM
among Tunisians is in line with similar findings in other ethnic groups,
confirming TCF7L2 as a common T2DM candidate gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23142382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 15;176(12):1101-9. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws190. Epub 2012
Nov 6.

Diabetes and obesity-related genes and the risk of neural tube defects in the
national birth defects prevention study.

Lupo PJ(1), Canfield MA, Chapa C, Lu W, Agopian AJ, Mitchell LE, Shaw GM, Waller 
DK, Olshan AF, Finnell RH, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center, Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and
Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Texas, Houston,
TX, USA.

Few studies have evaluated genetic susceptibility related to diabetes and obesity
as a risk factor for neural tube defects (NTDs). The authors investigated 23
single nucleotide polymorphisms among 9 genes (ADRB3, ENPP1, FTO, LEP, PPARG,
PPARGC1A, SLC2A2, TCF7L2, and UCP2) associated with type 2 diabetes or obesity.
Samples were obtained from 737 NTD case-parent triads included in the National
Birth Defects Prevention Study during 1999-2007. Log-linear models were used to
evaluate maternal and offspring genetic effects. After application of the false
discovery rate, there were 5 significant maternal genetic effects. The less
common alleles at the 4 FTO single nucleotide polymorphisms showed a reduction of
NTD risk (for rs1421085, relative risk (RR) = 0.73 (95% confidence interval (CI):
0.62, 0.87); for rs8050136, RR = 0.79 (95% CI: 0.67, 0.93); for rs9939609, RR =
0.79 (95% CI: 0.67, 0.94); and for rs17187449, RR = 0.80 (95% CI: 0.68, 0.95)).
Additionally, maternal LEP rs2071045 (RR = 1.31, 95% CI: 1.08, 1.60) and
offspring UCP2 rs660339 (RR = 1.32, 95% CI: 1.06, 1.64) were associated with NTD 
risk. Furthermore, the maternal genotype for TCF7L2 rs3814573 suggested an
increased NTD risk among obese women. These findings indicate that maternal
genetic variants associated with glucose homeostasis may modify the risk of
having an NTD-affected pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3571234
PMID: 23132673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Dec;98(3):e23-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.09.044. Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants are strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in Lebanese subjects.

Nemr R(1), Turki A, Echtay A, Al-Zaben GS, Daher HS, Irani-Hakime NA, Keleshian
SH, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Medical Center Rizk Hospital, Beirut, 
Lebanon.

We tested the association of TCF7L2 variants with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in 691
Lebanese people and 919 controls. rs7901695, rs4506565, rs7903146, rs12243326,
rs7895340, and rs12255372 minor allele frequencies were higher in T2DM. Haplotype
analysis
(rs7901695-rs4506565-rs7903146-rs12243326-rs7895340-rs11196205-rs12255372)
identified positively- (2122112, 2222222) and negatively- (1111111)
T2DM-associated haplotypes. TCF7L2 is a common T2DM candidate gene in Lebanese
people.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23107111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1294-301. doi: 10.1038/ng.2435. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

Bayesian refinement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common diseases.

Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium(1), Maller JB, McVean G, Byrnes J,
Vukcevic D, Palin K, Su Z, Howson JM, Auton A, Myers S, Morris A, Pirinen M,
Brown MA, Burton PR, Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Hall AS, Hattersley AT,
Hill AV, Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Craddock
N, Hurles M, Ouwehand W, Parkes M, Rahman N, Duncanson A, Todd JA, Kwiatkowski
DP, Samani NJ, Gough SC, McCarthy MI, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

Collaborators: Aerts J, Ahmad T, Arbury H, Attwood A, Auton A, Ball SG, Balmforth
AJ, Barnes C, Barrett JC, Barroso I, Barton A, Bennett AJ, Bhaskar S, Blaszczyk
K, Bowes J, Brand OJ, Braund PS, Bredin F, Breen G, Brown MJ, Bruce IN, Bull J,
Burren OS, Burton J, Byrnes J, Caesar S, Cardin N, Clee CM, Coffey AJ, Connell
JM, Conrad DF, Cooper JD, Dominiczak AF, Downes K, Drummond HE, Dudakia D, Dunham
A, Ebbs B, Eccles D, Edkins S, Edwards C, Elliot A, Emery P, Evans DM, Evans G,
Eyre S, Farmer A, Ferrier IN, Flynn E, Forbes A, Forty L, Franklyn JA, Frayling
TM, Freathy RM, Giannoulatou E, Gibbs P, Gilbert P, Gordon-Smith K, Gray E, Green
E, Groves CJ, Grozeva D, Gwilliam R, Hall A, Hammond N, Hardy M, Harrison P,
Hassanali N, Hebaishi H, Hines S, Hinks A, Hitman GA, Hocking L, Holmes C, Howard
E, Howard P, Howson JM, Hughes D, Hunt S, Isaacs JD, Jain M, Jewell DP, Johnson
T, Jolley JD, Jones IR, Jones LA, Kirov G, Langford CF, Lango-Allen H, Lathrop
GM, Lee J, Lee KL, Lees C, Lewis K, Lindgren CM, Maisuria-Armer M, Maller J,
Mansfield J, Marchini JL, Martin P, Massey DC, McArdle WL, McGuffin P, McLay KE, 
McVean G, Mentzer A, Mimmack ML, Morgan AE, Morris AP, Mowat C, Munroe PB, Myers 
S, Newman W, Nimmo ER, O'Donovan MC, Onipinla A, Ovington NR, Owen MJ, Palin K,
Palotie A, Parnell K, Pearson R, Pernet D, Perry JR, Phillips A, Plagnol V,
Prescott NJ, Prokopenko I, Quail MA, Rafelt S, Rayner NW, Reid DM, Renwick A,
Ring SM, Robertson N, Robson S, Russell E, St Clair D, Sambrook JG, Sanderson JD,
Sawcer SJ, Schuilenburg H, Scott CE, Scott R, Seal S, Shaw-Hawkins S, Shields BM,
Simmonds MJ, Smyth DJ, Somaskantharajah E, Spanova K, Steer S, Stephens J,
Stevens HE, Stirrups K, Stone MA, Strachan DP, Su Z, Symmons DP, Thompson JR,
Thomson W, Tobin MD, Travers ME, Turnbull C, Vukcevic D, Wain LV, Walker M,
Walker NM, Wallace C, Warren-Perry M, Watkins NA, Webster J, Weedon MN, Wilson
AG, Woodburn M, Wordsworth BP, Yau C, Young AH, Zeggini E, Brown MA, Burton PR,
Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, Hill AV,
Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Hurles ME,
Duncanson A, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Rahman N, Todd JA, Samani NJ, Kwiatkowski DP,
McCarthy MI, Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

To further investigate susceptibility loci identified by genome-wide association 
studies, we genotyped 5,500 SNPs across 14 associated regions in 8,000 samples
from a control group and 3 diseases: type 2 diabetes (T2D), coronary artery
disease (CAD) and Graves' disease. We defined, using Bayes theorem, credible sets
of SNPs that were 95% likely, based on posterior probability, to contain the
causal disease-associated SNPs. In 3 of the 14 regions, TCF7L2 (T2D), CTLA4
(Graves' disease) and CDKN2A-CDKN2B (T2D), much of the posterior probability
rested on a single SNP, and, in 4 other regions (CDKN2A-CDKN2B (CAD) and CDKAL1, 
FTO and HHEX (T2D)), the 95% sets were small, thereby excluding most SNPs as
potentially causal. Very few SNPs in our credible sets had annotated functions,
illustrating the limitations in understanding the mechanisms underlying
susceptibility to common diseases. Our results also show the value of more
detailed mapping to target sequences for functional studies.

PMCID: PMC3791416
PMID: 23104008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2657-8. doi: 10.2337/db12-0891.

Understanding the elusive mechanism of action of TCF7L2 in metabolism.

Grant SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Applied Genomics, The Childrens
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. grants@chop.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2807-13.

PMCID: PMC3478546
PMID: 23093653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2807-13. doi: 10.2337/db12-0239. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Adipose tissue TCF7L2 splicing is regulated by weight loss and associates with
glucose and fatty acid metabolism.

Kaminska D(1), Kuulasmaa T, Venesmaa S, Käkelä P, Vaittinen M, Pulkkinen L,
Pääkkönen M, Gylling H, Laakso M, Pihlajamäki J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2657-8.

We investigated the effects of obesity surgery-induced weight loss on
transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) alternative splicing in adipose
tissue and liver. Furthermore, we determined the association of TCF7L2 splicing
with the levels of plasma glucose and serum free fatty acids (FFAs) in three
independent studies (n = 216). Expression of the short mRNA variant, lacking
exons 12, 13, and 13a, decreased after weight loss in subcutaneous fat (n = 46)
and liver (n = 11) and was more common in subcutaneous fat of subjects with type 
2 diabetes than in subjects with normal glucose tolerance in obese individuals (n
= 54) and a population-based sample (n = 49). Additionally, there was a positive 
correlation between this variant and the level of fasting glucose in nondiabetic 
individuals (n = 113). This association between TCF7L2 splicing and plasma
glucose was independent of the TCF7L2 genotype. Finally, this variant was
associated with high levels of serum FFAs during hyperinsulinemia, suggesting
impaired insulin action in adipose tissue, whereas no association with insulin
secretion or insulin-stimulated whole-body glucose uptake was observed. Our study
shows that the short TCF7L2 mRNA variant in subcutaneous fat is regulated by
weight loss and is associated with hyperglycemia and impaired insulin action in
adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC3478533
PMID: 23086040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(2):593-602. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2299-7.
Epub 2012 Oct 21.

Associations between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and risk of breast cancer among
Hispanic and non-Hispanic white women: the Breast Cancer Health Disparities
Study.

Connor AE(1), Baumgartner RN, Baumgartner KB, Kerber RA, Pinkston C, John EM,
Torres-Mejia G, Hines L, Giuliano A, Wolff RK, Slattery ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Population Health, School of Public Health &
Information Sciences, University of Louisville, 485 E. Gray St., Louisville, KY
40202, USA. aeconn02@louisville.edu

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is part of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway and plays a critical role in cell development and growth
regulation. TCF7L2 variants rs12255372 and rs7903146 have been associated with
risk of Type 2 diabetes. Few epidemiological studies have examined the
association between TCF7L2 and breast cancer risk. We investigated the
associations between 25 TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and breast 
cancer in Hispanic and non-Hispanic white (NHW) women from the 4-Corner's Breast 
Cancer Study, the San Francisco Bay Area Breast Cancer Study, and the Mexico
Breast Cancer Study. A total of 4,703 Hispanic (2,093 cases, 2,610 controls) and 
3,031 NHW (1,431 cases, 1,600 controls) women were included. Odds ratios (OR) and
95 % confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using logistic regression to
estimate the association between the TCF7L2 SNPs and breast cancer risk. We also 
examined effect modification by self-reported ethnicity, genetic admixture, and
diabetes history. After adjusting for multiple comparisons, four TCF7L2 SNPs were
significantly associated with breast cancer overall: rs7903146 (OR(TT) 1.24; 95 %
CI 1.03-1.49), rs3750805 (OR(AT/TT) 1.15; 95 % CI 1.03-1.28), rs7900150 (OR(AA)
1.23; 95 % 1.07-1.42), and rs1225404 (OR(CC) 0.82; 95 % 0.70-0.94). Among women
with a history of diabetes, the TT genotype of rs3750804 increased breast cancer 
risk (OR, 2.46; 95 % CI 1.28-4.73). However, there was no association among women
without a diabetes history (OR, 1.06; 95 % CI 0.85-1.32). We did not find
significant interactions by ethnicity or by genetic admixture. Findings support
an association between TCF7L2 and breast cancer and history of diabetes modifies 
this association for specific variants.

PMCID: PMC3662467
PMID: 23085767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 5;373(1-2):29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.10.009.
Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Genetics of the polycystic ovary syndrome.

Kosova G(1), Urbanek M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, United States.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a highly complex endocrine disorder,
characterized by hyperandrogenemia, menstrual irregularities and polycystic
ovaries. A strong genetic component to the etiology of PCOS is evident. However, 
due to the genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of PCOS and the lack of
insufficiently large cohorts, studies to identify specific contributing genes to 
date have yielded only few conclusive results. In this review we discuss the
current status of the genetic analysis of PCOS including the results of numerous 
association studies with candidate genes involved in TGF-ß and insulin signaling,
type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity susceptibility. Furthermore, we address
current challenges in genetic studies of PCOS, and the promise of new approaches,
including genome-wide association studies and next-generation sequencing.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3609918
PMID: 23079471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Islets. 2012 Sep-Oct;4(5):323-32. doi: 10.4161/isl.22282. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

From genotype to human ß cell phenotype and beyond.

Marchetti P(1), Syed F, Suleiman M, Bugliani M, Marselli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
piero.marchetti@med.unipi.it

Polygenic type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a multi-factorial disease due to the
interplay between genes and the environment. Over the years, several genes/loci
have been associated with this type of diabetes, with the majority of them being 
related to ß cell dysfunction. In this review, the available information on how
polymorphisms in T2DM-associated genes/loci do directly affect the properties of 
human islet cells are presented and discussed, including some clinical
implications and the role of epigenetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3524138
PMID: 23073174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Nov;4(11):1415-27. doi: 10.1039/c2ib20072d.

SAMNet: a network-based approach to integrate multi-dimensional high throughput
datasets.

Gosline SJ(1), Spencer SJ, Ursu O, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The rapid development of high throughput biotechnologies has led to an onslaught 
of data describing genetic perturbations and changes in mRNA and protein levels
in the cell. Because each assay provides a one-dimensional snapshot of active
signaling pathways, it has become desirable to perform multiple assays (e.g. mRNA
expression and phospho-proteomics) to measure a single condition. However, as
experiments expand to accommodate various cellular conditions, proper analysis
and interpretation of these data have become more challenging. Here we introduce 
a novel approach called SAMNet, for Simultaneous Analysis of Multiple Networks,
that is able to interpret diverse assays over multiple perturbations. The
algorithm uses a constrained optimization approach to integrate mRNA expression
data with upstream genes, selecting edges in the protein-protein interaction
network that best explain the changes across all perturbations. The result is a
putative set of protein interactions that succinctly summarizes the results from 
all experiments, highlighting the network elements unique to each perturbation.
We evaluated SAMNet in both yeast and human datasets. The yeast dataset measured 
the cellular response to seven different transition metals, and the human dataset
measured cellular changes in four different lung cancer models of
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), a crucial process in tumor metastasis.
SAMNet was able to identify canonical yeast metal-processing genes unique to each
commodity in the yeast dataset, as well as human genes such as ß-catenin and
TCF7L2/TCF4 that are required for EMT signaling but escaped detection in the mRNA
and phospho-proteomic data. Moreover, SAMNet also highlighted drugs likely to
modulate EMT, identifying a series of less canonical genes known to be affected
by the BCR-ABL inhibitor imatinib (Gleevec), suggesting a possible influence of
this drug on EMT.

PMCID: PMC3501250
PMID: 23060147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Oct 10;5:561. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-561.

Association between the IVS4G>T mutation in the TCF7L2 gene and susceptibility to
diabetes in cystic fibrosis patients.

Furgeri DT(1), Marson FA, Ribeiro AF, Bertuzzo CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Clinical complications appear to be a decisive factor for the
prognosis of patients. Diabetes is an important complication of cystic
fibrosis(CF). In our study we evaluated the association between the IVS4G>T
mutation in the TCF7L2 gene with the presence of diabetes in patients with CF.
FINDINGS: We evaluated 145 patients with CF in relation to the genotype of the
IVS4G>T mutation. For this, the PCR method associated with specific enzyme
digestion was used. The genotypes G/G, G/T and T/T were observed to have
frequencies of 54 (37.2%), 78 (53.8%) and 13 (9%), respectively. There was no
association between genotype and the occurrence of diabetes among patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In our sample, no association was found between the IVS4G>T mutation
in the TCF7L2 gene and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3519805
PMID: 23050589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):271-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.09.025. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Association between donor and recipient TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and the risk of
new-onset diabetes mellitus after liver transplantation in a Han Chinese
population.

Ling Q(1), Xie H, Lu D, Wei X, Gao F, Zhou L, Xu X, Zheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1060-1.
    J Hepatol. 2013 May;58(5):1059-60.

BACKGROUNDS & AIMS: New-onset diabetes mellitus (NODM) is a frequent and serious 
complication arising after liver transplantation (LT). Transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms have been reported to strongly associate with
type 2 diabetes. In addition, the donor liver plays a vital role in regulating
blood glucose levels. In this study, we aim at evaluating the association between
donor and recipient TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with NODM after LT.
METHODS: A total of 125 patients undergoing primary LT, without a history of
diabetes were included. Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs290487,
rs7903146, rs11196205, and rs12255372), closely associated with type 2 diabetes
in the Eastern Asia population, were genotyped and analyzed.
RESULTS: Both donor and recipient rs290487 polymorphisms (CC vs. TT genotype)
were found to be significantly associated with NODM. In multivariate analysis,
donor rs290487 genetic variation (OR = 2.172 per each C allele, p = 0.015), blood
tacrolimus levels at 1 month post-LT >10 ng/ml (OR = 3.264, p = 0.017), and
recipient age >55 years (OR = 2.638, p = 0.043) were identified as independent
risk factors of NODM. Furthermore, donor rs290487 CC genotype could predict a
high probability (>40%) of the onset of NODM. Predictive model containing donor
rs290487 polymorphism showed a significantly higher prognostic ability on NODM
than the model with only clinical parameters (p = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: Donor TCF7L2 rs290487 polymorphism is associated with an increased
risk of NODM after LT and has a potential clinical value for the prediction of
NODM.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23041303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 Nov;96(5):1129-36. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.038125. Epub 2012
Oct 3.

TCF7L2 genetic variants modulate the effect of dietary fat intake on changes in
body composition during a weight-loss intervention.

Mattei J(1), Qi Q, Hu FB, Sacks FM, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 gene variants have been associated with increased risk of type
2 diabetes and higher adiposity. Observational studies and short-term trials have
suggested that macronutrients may modify these effects. However, to our
knowledge, this has yet to be verified in long-term interventions.
OBJECTIVE: In a long-term intervention setting, we investigated the effects of
TCF7L2 polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 and dietary total fat on changes in
body composition and subsequent glycemic control.
DESIGN: Data were analyzed for 591 participants in the Preventing Overweight
Using Novel Dietary Strategies (Pounds Lost) trial, which is a 2-y weight-loss
randomized clinical trial of diets that differed in macronutrient proportions.
Adjusted means for changes in body composition at 6 and 24 mo were obtained for
gene main effects and interactions with a low-fat diet (20% from energy) compared
with a high-fat diet (40% from energy). Interactions with protein and
carbohydrate intakes were also tested. Predicted changes in glycemic control from
changes in adiposity were determined by genotype and diet type.
RESULTS: Significant interactions were observed for rs12255372 TT (risk genotype)
and fat intake for changes in BMI, total fat mass, and trunk fat mass (all P/q < 
0.05) at 6 mo, with nonsignificant larger decreases for TT carriers on a low-fat 
diet. No significant associations were observed at 24 mo or for other
macronutrients. Changes in body composition for TT carriers predicted reductions 
in plasma glucose and insulin only on the low-fat diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with the TCF7L2 rs12255372 risk genotype may reduce body
adiposity by consuming a diet lower in total fat. These reductions may induce
better glycemic control for such individuals predisposed to type 2 diabetes. The 
Pounds Lost trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00072995.

PMCID: PMC3471200
PMID: 23034957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. APMIS. 2013 Feb;121(2):120-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02947.x. Epub 2012
Jul 21.

The expression and significance of WWOX and ß-catenin in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Li YP(1), Wu CC, Chen WT, Huang YC, Chai CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

WW domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) is a novel tumor suppressor gene, and 
its expression is reduced in various cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC). WWOX has been reported to be downregulated in HCC cell lines as well as in
primary HCC tissues. It has been suggested that WWOX is implicated in
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, which is frequently affected in HCC. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the expression of WWOX, ß-catenin and T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) in
HCC. Our result showed that downregulation of WWOX in HCC was correlated with
cytoplasmic accumulation of ß-catenin. In addition, strong nuclear TCF4
expression was associated with tumor grade and stage in HCC. In conclusion, our
result implied that downregulation of WWOX might lead to accumulation of
cytoplasmic ß-catenin and the subsequent activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway in HCC.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 23030478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045882. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Meta-analysis of the relationship between common type 2 diabetes risk gene
variants with gestational diabetes mellitus.

Mao H(1), Li Q, Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Qidong People's Hospital, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: A number of case-control studies were conducted to investigate the
association of common type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk gene polymorphisms with
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). However, these studies have yielded
contradictory results. We therefore performed a meta-analysis to derive a more
precise estimation of the association between these polymorphisms and GDM, hence 
achieve a better understanding to the relationship between T2D and GDM.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, ISI web of science and the Chinese National Knowledge
Infrastructure databases were systematically searched to identify relevant
studies. Data were abstracted independently by two reviewers. A meta-analysis was
performed to examine the association between 9 polymorphisms from 8 genes and
susceptibility to GDM. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs)
were calculated. Heterogeneity among articles and their publication bias were
also tested.
RESULTS: We identified 22 eligible studies including a total of 10,336 GDM cases 
and 17,445 controls. We found 8 genetic polymorphisms were significantly
associated with GDM in a random-effects meta-analysis. These polymorphisms were
in or near the following genes: TCF7L2 (rs7903146), MTNR1B (rs10830963), IGF2BP2 
(rs4402960), KCNJ11 (rs5219), CDKAL1 (rs7754840), KCNQ1 (rs2237892 and rs2237895)
and GCK (rs4607517); while no association was found for PPARG with GDM risk.
Similar results were also observed under dominant genetic model for these
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis found 8 genetic variants associated with GDM. The
relative contribution and relevance of the identified genes in the pathogenesis
of GDM should be the focus of future studies.

PMCID: PMC3454322
PMID: 23029294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002986. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

TCF7L2 modulates glucose homeostasis by regulating CREB- and FoxO1-dependent
transcriptional pathway in the liver.

Oh KJ(1), Park J, Kim SS, Oh H, Choi CS, Koo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology and Samsung Biomedical Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Peripheral insulin resistance contributes to the development of type 2 diabetes. 
TCF7L2 has been tightly associated with this disease, although the exact
mechanism was largely elusive. Here we propose a novel role of TCF7L2 in hepatic 
glucose metabolism in mammals. Expression of medium and short isoforms of TCF7L2 
was greatly diminished in livers of diet-induced and genetic mouse models of
insulin resistance, prompting us to delineate the functional role of these
isoforms in hepatic glucose metabolism. Knockdown of hepatic TCF7L2 promoted
increased blood glucose levels and glucose intolerance with increased
gluconeogenic gene expression in wild-type mice, in accordance with the PCR array
data showing that only the gluconeogenic pathway is specifically up-regulated
upon depletion of hepatic TCF7L2. Conversely, overexpression of a nuclear isoform
of TCF7L2 in high-fat diet-fed mice ameliorated hyperglycemia with improved
glucose tolerance, suggesting a role of this factor in hepatic glucose
metabolism. Indeed, we observed a binding of TCF7L2 to promoters of gluconeogenic
genes; and expression of TCF7L2 inhibited adjacent promoter occupancies of CREB, 
CRTC2, and FoxO1, critical transcriptional modules in hepatic gluconeogenesis, to
disrupt target gene transcription. Finally, haploinsufficiency of TCF7L2 in mice 
displayed higher glucose levels and impaired glucose tolerance, which were
rescued by hepatic expression of a nuclear isoform of TCF7L2 at the physiological
level. Collectively, these data suggest a crucial role of TCF7L2 in hepatic
glucose metabolism; reduced hepatic expression of nuclear isoforms of this factor
might be a critical instigator of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3459990
PMID: 23028378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Diagn Ther. 2012 Oct;16(5):285-302. doi: 10.1007/s40291-012-0002-7.

Individualized therapy for type 2 diabetes: clinical implications of
pharmacogenetic data.

Mannino GC(1), Sesti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Graecia of
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is characterized by insulin resistance,
abnormally elevated hepatic glucose production, and reduced glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Treatment with antihyperglycemic agents is initially
successful in type 2 diabetes, but it is often associated with a high secondary
failure rate, and the addition of insulin is eventually necessary for many
patients, in order to restore acceptable glycemic control and to reduce the risk 
of development and progression of disease complications. Notably, even patients
who appear to have similar requirements of antidiabetic regimens show great
variability in drug disposition, glycemic response, tolerability, and incidence
of adverse effects during treatment. Pharmacogenomics is a promising area of
investigation and involves the search for genetic polymorphisms that may explain 
the interindividual variability in antidiabetic therapy response. The initial
positive results portend that genomic efforts will be able to shed important
light on variability in pharmacologic traits. In this review, we summarize the
current understanding of genetic polymorphisms that may affect the responses of
subjects with T2DM to antidiabetic treatment. These genes belong to three major
classes: genes involved in drug metabolism and transporters that influence
pharmacokinetics (including the cytochrome P450 [CYP] superfamily, the organic
anion transporting polypeptide [OATP] family, and the polyspecific organic cation
transporter [OCT] family); genes encoding drug targets and receptors (including
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma [PPARG], the adenosine
triphosphate [ATP]-sensitive potassium channel [K(ATP)], and incretin receptors);
and genes involved in the causal pathway of T2DM that are able to modify the
effects of drugs (including adipokines, transcription factor 7-like 2 (T cell
specific, HMG-box) [TCF7L2], insulin receptor substrate 1 [IRS1], nitric oxide
synthase 1 (neuronal) adaptor protein [NOS1AP], and solute carrier family 30
(zinc transporter), member 8 [SLC30A8]). In addition to these three major
classes, we also review the available evidence on novel genes (CDK5 regulatory
subunit associated protein 1-like 1 [CDKAL1], insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA
binding protein 2 [IGF2BP2], potassium voltage-gated channel, KQT-like subfamily,
member 1 [KCNQ1], paired box 4 [PAX4] and neuronal differentiation 1 [NEUROD1]
transcription factors, ataxia telangiectasia mutated [ATM], and serine racemase
[SRR]) that have recently been proposed as possible modulators of therapeutic
response in subjects with T2DM.

PMID: 23018631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012 Jan-Mar;6(1):54-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2012.05.014.
Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes mellitus and other specific types of diabetes; its
role in treatment modalities.

Kota SK(1), Meher LK, Jammula S, Kota SK, Modi KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Medwin Hospital, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh,
India. hidocsunil@ibibo.com

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is among the most challenging health issues of
the 21st century and is associated with an alarming rise in the incidence. The
pathophysiological processes that lead to development of T2DM are still unclear, 
however impairment in insulin secretion and/or action is clearly indicated. Type 
2 diabetes is a polygenic disorder with multiple genes located on different
chromosomes contributing to its susceptibility. Analysis of the genetic factors
is further complicated by the fact that numerous environmental factors interact
with genes to produce the disorder. Only a minority of cases of type 2 diabetes
are caused by single gene defects and one example is maturity onset diabetes of
the young (MODY). Previous studies indicated that variants in genes encoding the 
pancreatic ß-cell K+ATP channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and SUR1 (ABCC8) are
associated with neonatal diabetes. Six different types of maturity onset diabetes
of young (MODY) have been identified based on characteristic gene defect. The
common Pro12Ala polymorphism in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
(PPAR-<U+03B3>) gene was confirmed in several studies to be associated with type 2
diabetes as well. More recently, studies reported variants within a novel gene,
TCF7L2, as a putative susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes across many ethnic 
backgrounds around the world. MODY patients respond better to sulphonylureas and 
metformin, while neonatal diabetes patients with genetic mutations can be changed
from insulin to oral drugs. We hereby provide a comprehensive review on the role 
of genetics in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Copyright © 2012 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23014256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012 Jan-Mar;6(1):48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2012.05.002.
Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Relationship of transcription factor 7 like 2 gene rs7903146 variation with type 
2 diabetes and obesity related parameters.

Kahveci C(1), Koldemir M, Cagatay P, Bayer H, Yildiz S, Bagriacik N, Duman BS.

Author information: 
(1)Marmara University, Faculty of Science and Arts, Department of Biology,
Istanbul, Turkey.

AIMS: The allele frequencies of transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
rs7903146 polymorphism in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and non-T2DM controls
were determined.
METHODS: TCF7L2 rs7903146 genotypes were determined with qPCR.
RESULTS: The TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 genotype frequencies for homozygous wild type 
(C/C), heterozygous (C/T) and homozygous polymorphic (T/T) for T2DM patients were
determined, respectively, as 71.4%, 14.3%, 14.3% and 72.5%, 11.8%, 15.7% for
controls. The weight, length and lean body mass were higher in C/T+T/T compared
to C/C carriers. Glucose, insulin, insulin resistance and homeostatic model
assessment (HOMA) were nonsignificantly higher in rs7903146C/T+T/T in comparison 
to C/C. TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 genotypes were not found to interact with drugs.
The absence of any difference between genotype frequencies among study groups
indicates that no association persists with TCF7L2 gene rs7903146 polymorphism
and T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of rs7903146 variation over some obesity variables
suggest that this variation may effect T2DM development via obesity.

Copyright © 2012 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23014255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Diabetologia. 2013 Jan;56(1):121-5. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2730-y. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

In vitro scan for enhancers at the TCF7L2 locus.

Savic D(1), Park SY, Bailey KA, Bell GI, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, 920 E. 58th St, CLSC
319A, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent functional characterisations of genome-wide association
study (GWAS) loci suggest that cis-regulatory variation may be a common paradigm 
for complex disease susceptibility. Several studies point to a similar mechanism 
at the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) GWAS locus for type 2 diabetes. To 
address this possibility, we carried out an in vitro scan of this
diabetes-associated locus to fine-map cis-regulatory sequences within this
genomic interval.
METHODS: A systematic cell-based enhancer strategy was employed to interrogate
all sequences within the 92 kb type-2-diabetes-association interval for
cis-regulatory activity in a panel of cell lines (HCT-116, Neuro-2a, C2C12, U2OS,
MIN6 and HepG2). We further evaluated chromatin state at a subset of these
regions in HCT-116 and U2OS cells and examined allelic-specific enhancer
properties at the type-2-diabetes-associated single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs7903146.
RESULTS: In total, we assigned cis-regulatory activity to approximately 30%
(9/28) of constructs tested. Notably, a subset of enhancers was active across
multiple cell lines and overlapped with key epigenetic markers suggestive of
cis-regulatory sequences. We further replicated the allelic-specific properties
for SNP rs7903146 in pancreatic beta cells and additionally demonstrate identical
allelic-specific enhancer effects in other cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a detailed map of cis-regulatory elements
within the TCF7L2 GWAS locus and support the hypothesis of cis-regulatory
variation leading to type 2 diabetes predisposition. The detection of
allelic-specific effects for SNP rs7903146 in multiple cell lines further alludes
to the likelihood of a peripheral defect in disease aetiology.

PMCID: PMC3525810
PMID: 23011354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Gene. 2013 Jan 1;512(1):76-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.034. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Han
Chinese population: a meta-analysis.

Zhang BC(1), Li WM, Zhu MY, Xu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been reported to be 
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but the available data on this
relationship are inconsistent in Han Chinese populations. A meta-analysis was
performed to quantitatively analyze the association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms 
with T2DM using previous case-control studies in Chinese Han populations. Several
electronic databases were searched for relevant articles up to May 2012. After
data collection and gene loci selection, a meta-analysis was performed to assess 
heterogeneity, combine results and evaluate variations. Publication bias was
examined by the Egger's linear regression test. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) 
test and by omitting one study at a time were employed for the sensitivity
analysis. Eighteen studies from sixteen eligible papers were included in the
meta-analysis. Ten eligible studies were analyzed for rs7903146, and eight were
analyzed for rs290487. We found that the rs7903146 T allele was associated with
an increased risk for T2DM under a dominant model, a co-dominant model and an
allele contrast model, with an OR of 1.54 (1.32, 1.79), an OR of 1.53 (1.31,
1.79) and an OR of 1.52 (1.31, 1.76), respectively. The rs290487 C allele showed 
no significant overall association with T2DM, yielding ORs of 1.08 (0.88, 1.32)
under a dominant model, with strong evidence of heterogeneity. Similar results
were also obtained in other genetic models. Sensitivity analysis confirmed the
reliability and stability of this meta-analysis. The accumulated evidence
suggested that the rs7903146 T allele was associated with an increased risk for
T2DM, but the rs290487 C allele is not associated with T2DM in the Chinese Han
population. More well-designed large studies are required for the validation of
this association.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):651-8. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0323-2.

From mice to humans.

McMurray F(1), Moir L, Cox RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Harwell, Mammalian Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell
Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, OX11 0RD, UK.

The genomes of many species have now been completely sequenced including human
and mouse. Great progress has been made in understanding the complex genetics
that underlie diabetes and obesity in human populations. One of the current
challenges is the functional identification and characterization of the genes
within loci that are being mapped. There are many approaches to this problem and 
this review outlines the valuable role that the mouse can play. We outline the
mouse resources that are available to the research community, including knockouts
with conditional potential for every gene, and the efforts of the International
Mouse Phenotyping Consortium to attach phenotype information to these genes. We
also briefly consider the potential of TALEN technology to tailor-make new mouse 
models of specific mutations discovered in humans. Finally, we consider the
recent progress in characterizing the GWAS genes FTO, TCF7L2, CDKAL1, and SLC30A8
in engineered mouse models.

PMCID: PMC3488608
PMID: 22996130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):686-96. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0326-z.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes in East Asian populations.

Cho YS(1), Lee JY, Park KS, Nho CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Hallym University, Gangwon-do, Chuncheon,
200-702, Republic of Korea. yooncho33@hallym.ac.kr

Because type 2 diabetes (T2D) is highly familial, there has been a concentrated
effort to uncover the genetic basis of T2D worldwide over the last decade. In
East Asians, T2D is experiencing a rapidly rising prevalence that is
characterized by a relatively lower body mass index, as compared with that in
Europeans. To date, at least 15 convincing T2D loci have been identified from
large-scale genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses in East Asians.
Many of these are likely responsible for pancreatic ß cell function, as indicated
in studies from Europeans. Many T2D loci have been replicated across the ethnic
groups. There are, however, substantial interethnic differences in frequency and 
effect size of these risk alleles. Despite accumulating genetic information on
T2D, there are still limitations in our ability to explain the rapidly rising
prevalence and lean phenotype of disease observed in East Asians, suggesting that
more extensive work using diverse research strategies is needed in the future.

PMID: 22993124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Probab Stat. 2012;2012. pii: 419832. Epub 2012 Mar 31.

A Multinomial Ordinal Probit Model with Singular Value Decomposition Method for a
Multinomial Trait.

Kwon S(1), Goodarzi MO, Taylor KD, Cui J, Chen YD, Rotter JI, Hsueh W, Guo X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly
Boulevard, Paciffc Theatres Building, 4th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

We developed a multinomial ordinal probit model with singular value decomposition
for testing a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs simultaneously
for association with multidisease status when sample size is much smaller than
the number of SNPs. The validity and performance of the method was evaluated via 
simulation. We applied the method to our real study sample recruited through the 
Mexican-American Coronary Artery Disease study. We found 3 genes SORCS1, AMPD1,
and PPARa to be associated with the development of both IGT and IFG, while 5
genes AMPD2, PRKAA2, C5, TCF7L2, and ITR with the IGT mechanism only and 6 genes 
CAPN10, IL4, NOS3, CD14, GCG, and SORT1 with the IFG mechanism only. These data
suggest that IGT and IFG may indicate different physiological mechanism to
prediabetes, via different genetic determinants.

PMCID: PMC3440186
PMID: 22984364  [PubMed]


346. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Nov 1;303(9):E1166-76. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00249.2012. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 is upregulated by insulin and represses
hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Ip W(1), Shao W, Chiang YT, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) are strongly associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes. TCF7L2 and
ß-catenin (ß-cat) form the bipartite transcription factor cat/TCF in stimulating 
Wnt target gene expression. cat/TCF may also mediate the effect of other
signaling cascades, including that of cAMP and insulin in cell-type specific
manners. As carriers of TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes risk SNPs demonstrated increased
hepatic glucose production, we aimed to determine whether TCF7L2 expression is
regulated by nutrient availability and whether TCF7L2 and Wnt regulate hepatic
gluconeogenesis. We examined hepatic Wnt activity in the TOPGAL transgenic mouse,
assessed hepatic TCF7L2 expression in mice upon feeding, determined the effect of
insulin on TCF7L2 expression and ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation, and investigated
the effect of Wnt activation and TCF7L2 knockdown on gluconeogenic gene
expression and glucose production in hepatocytes. Wnt activity was observed in
pericentral hepatocytes in the TOPGAL mouse, whereas TCF7L2 expression was
detected in human and mouse hepatocytes. Insulin and feeding stimulated hepatic
TCF7L2 expression in vitro and in vivo, respectively. In addition, insulin
activated ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation. Wnt activation by intraperitoneal lithium
injection repressed hepatic gluconeogenic gene expression in vivo, whereas
lithium or Wnt-3a reduced gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose production in
hepatic cells in vitro. Small interfering RNA-mediated TCF7L2 knockdown increased
glucose production and gluconeogenic gene expression in cultured hepatocytes.
These observations suggest that Wnt signaling and TCF7L2 are negative regulators 
of hepatic gluconeogenesis, and TCF7L2 is among the downstream effectors of
insulin in hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC3492858
PMID: 22967502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):789-800. doi: 10.2337/db12-0365. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 controls gut and brain proglucagon gene
expression and glucose homeostasis.

Shao W(1), Wang D, Chiang YT, Ip W, Zhu L, Xu F, Columbus J, Belsham DD, Irwin
DM, Zhang H, Wen X, Wang Q, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):706-8.

The type 2 diabetes risk gene TCF7L2 is the effector of the Wnt signaling
pathway. We found previously that in gut endocrine L-cell lines, TCF7L2 controls 
transcription of the proglucagon gene (gcg), which encodes the incretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). Whereas peripheral GLP-1 stimulates insulin
secretion, brain GLP-1 controls energy homeostasis through yet-to-be defined
mechanisms. We aim to determine the metabolic effect of a functional knockdown of
TCF7L2 by generating transgenic mice that express dominant-negative TCF7L2
(TCF7L2DN) specifically in gcg-expressing cells. The gcg-TCF7L2DN transgenic mice
showed reduced gcg expression in their gut and brain, but not in pancreas.
Defects in glucose homeostasis were observed in these mice, associated with
attenuated plasma insulin levels in response to glucose challenge. The defect in 
glucose disposal was exacerbated with high-fat diet. Brain Wnt activity and
feeding-mediated hypothalamic AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) repression in
these mice were impaired. Peripheral injection of the cAMP-promoting agent
forskolin increased brain ß-cat Ser675 phosphorylation and brain gcg expression
and restored feeding-mediated hypothalamic AMPK repression. We conclude that
TCF7L2 and Wnt signaling control gut and brain gcg expression and glucose
homeostasis and speculate that positive cross-talk between Wnt and GLP-1/cAMP
signaling is an underlying mechanism for brain GLP-1 in exerting its metabolic
functions.

PMCID: PMC3581223
PMID: 22966074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Apr;31(3):228-36. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2876. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

The Wnt/ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4 pathway up-regulates high-mobility group A1
expression in colon cancer.

Bush BM(1), Brock AT, Deng JA, Nelson RA, Sumter TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Physics, and Geology, Winthrop University, Rock Hill,
SC 29733, USA.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) encodes proteins that act as mediators in viral
integration, modification of chromatin structure, neoplastic transformation and
metastatic progression. Because HMGA1 is overexpressed in most cancers and has
transcriptional relationships with several Wnt-responsive genes, we explored the 
involvement of HMGA1 in Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling. In adenomatous polyposis 
coli (APC(Min/+)) mice, we observed significant up-regulation of HMGA1 mRNA and
protein in intestinal tumours when compared with normal intestinal mucosa.
Conversely, restoration of Wnt signalling by the zinc induction of wild-type APC 
resulted in HMGA1 down-regulation in HT-29 cells. Because APC mutations are
associated with mobilization of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional complex and
subsequent activation of downstream oncogenic targets, we analyzed the
5'-flanking sequence of HMGA1 for putative TCF-4 binding elements. We identified 
two regions that specifically bind the ß-catenin/TCF-4 complex in vitro and in
vivo, identifying HMGA1 as an immediate target of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling 
pathway in colon cancer. Collectively, these findings strongly implicate
Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling in regulating HMGA1 to further expand the
extensive regulatory network affected by Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3616152
PMID: 22961697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r52.

Cell type-specific binding patterns reveal that TCF7L2 can be tethered to the
genome by association with GATA3.

Frietze S(1), Wang R, Yao L, Tak YG, Ye Z, Gaddis M, Witt H, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TCF7L2 transcription factor is linked to a variety of human
diseases, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. One mechanism by which TCF7L2
could influence expression of genes involved in diverse diseases is by binding to
distinct regulatory regions in different tissues. To test this hypothesis, we
performed ChIP-seq for TCF7L2 in six human cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified 116,000 non-redundant TCF7L2 binding sites, with only
1,864 sites common to the six cell lines. Using ChIP-seq, we showed that many
genomic regions that are marked by both H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are also bound by
TCF7L2, suggesting that TCF7L2 plays a critical role in enhancer activity.
Bioinformatic analysis of the cell type-specific TCF7L2 binding sites revealed
enrichment for multiple transcription factors, including HNF4alpha and FOXA2
motifs in HepG2 cells and the GATA3 motif in MCF7 cells. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that TCF7L2 co-localizes with HNF4alpha and FOXA2 in HepG2 cells and
with GATA3 in MCF7 cells. Interestingly, in MCF7 cells the TCF7L2 motif is
enriched in most TCF7L2 sites but is not enriched in the sites bound by both
GATA3 and TCF7L2. This analysis suggested that GATA3 might tether TCF7L2 to the
genome at these sites. To test this hypothesis, we depleted GATA3 in MCF7 cells
and showed that TCF7L2 binding was lost at a subset of sites. RNA-seq analysis
suggested that TCF7L2 represses transcription when tethered to the genome via
GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate a novel relationship between GATA3 and
TCF7L2, and reveal important insights into TCF7L2-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3491396
PMID: 22951069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Diabetologia. 2012 Dec;55(12):3296-307. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2693-z. Epub 2012
Sep 4.

TCF7L2 promotes beta cell regeneration in human and mouse pancreas.

Shu L(1), Zien K, Gutjahr G, Oberholzer J, Pattou F, Kerr-Conte J, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Interactions Bremen, University of Bremen, Leobener
Strasse NW2, Bremen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Diabetes is characterised by loss and dysfunction of the beta
cell. A major goal of diabetes therapy is to promote the formation of new beta
cells. Polymorphisms of T cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with type 
2 diabetes, negatively regulating beta cell survival and function. Here, we
provide evidence for a role of TCF7L2 in beta cell proliferation and
regeneration.
METHODS: Pancreatic sections from three mouse models (high-fat diet, exendin-4
and streptozotocin-treated mice) and from healthy individuals and patients with
type 2 diabetes were used to investigate the association of beta cell
regeneration and TCF7L2 levels. To analyse a direct effect of TCF7L2 on duct cell
to beta cell conversion, TCF7L2 was overexpressed in isolated exocrine cells.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 levels correlated with beta cell compensation during high-fat
diet feeding. TCF7L2 was increased together with pancreatic duct cell
proliferation and differentiation. Small islet-like cell clusters (ICCs) that
contained TCF7L2 originated in the vicinity of the ductal epithelium. In human
isolated exocrine tissue, TCF7L2 overexpression induced proliferation of
pancreatic duct cells and ICC formation next to duct cells, an effect dependent
on the JAK2/STAT3 pathway.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The present study demonstrates that TCF7L2
overexpression fosters beta cell regeneration. Our findings imply correlation of 
TCF7L2 levels and new beta cell formation.

PMID: 22945304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Genet. 2012 Aug;91(2):251-5.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variations associated with earlier
age-onset of type 2 diabetes in Thai patients.

Tangjittipokin W(1), Chongjarean N, Plengvidhya N, Homsanit M, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

PMID: 22942101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Nov 15;21(22):5010-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds339. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Pancreatic beta-cell function and type 2 diabetes risk: quantify the causal
effect using a Mendelian randomization approach based on meta-analyses.

Song Y(1), Yeung E, Liu A, Vanderweele TJ, Chen L, Lu C, Liu C, Schisterman EF,
Ning Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing,
China.

The objective of the study is to quantify the causal effect of ß-cell function on
type 2 diabetes by minimizing residual confounding and reverse causation. We
employed a Mendelian randomization (MR) approach using TCF7L2 variant rs7903146
as an instrument for lifelong levels of ß-cell function. We first conducted two
sets of meta-analyses to quantify the association of the TCF7L2 variant with the 
risk of type 2 diabetes among 55 436 cases and 106 020 controls from 66 studies
by calculating pooled odds ratio (OR) and to quantify the associations with
multiple direct or indirect measures of ß-cell function among 35 052 non-diabetic
individuals from 31 studies by calculating pooled mean difference. We further
applied the method of MR to obtain the causal estimates for the effect of ß-cell 
function on type 2 diabetes risk based on findings from the meta-analyses. The OR
[95% confidence interval (CI)] was 0.87 (0.81-0.93) for each five unit increment 
in homeostasis model assessment of insulin secretion (HOMA-%B) (P = 3.0 ×
10(-5)). In addition, for measures based on intravenous glucose tolerance test,
ORs (95% CI) associated with type 2 diabetes risk were 0.24 (0.08-0.74) (P =
0.01) and 0.14 (0.04-0.48) (P = 0.002) for per 1 standard deviation increment in 
insulin sensitivity index and disposition index, respectively. Findings from the 
present study lend support to a causal role of pancreatic ß-cell function itself 
in the etiology of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3607483
PMID: 22936689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Front Physiol. 2012 Jul 12;3:273. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00273. eCollection
2012.

The role of the Wnt signaling pathway in incretin hormone production and
function.

Chiang YT(1), Ip W, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.

Glucose metabolism is tightly controlled by multiple hormones and
neurotransmitters in response to nutritional, environmental, and emotional
changes. In addition to insulin and glucagon produced by pancreatic islets, two
incretin hormones, namely glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide (GIP, also known as glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide), also
play important roles in blood glucose homeostasis. The incretin hormones mainly
exert their regulatory effects via their corresponding receptors, which are
expressed in pancreatic islets as well as many other extra-pancreatic organs.
Recent studies have shown that the genes which encode these two incretin hormones
can be regulated by the effectors of the Wnt signaling pathway, including TCF7L2,
a transcription factor identified recently by extensive genome wide association
studies as an important type 2 diabetes risk gene. Interestingly, TCF7L2 and
ß-catenin (ß-cat), another effector of Wnt signaling pathway, may also mediate
the function of the incretin hormones as well as the expression of their
receptors in pancreatic ß-cells. In this review, we have introduced the incretin 
hormones and the Wnt signaling pathway, summarized recent findings in the field, 
and provided our perspectives.

PMCID: PMC3429047
PMID: 22934027  [PubMed]


354. Glia. 2012 Dec;60(12):1944-53. doi: 10.1002/glia.22410. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Histone deacetylase activity is required for human oligodendrocyte progenitor
differentiation.

Conway GD(1), O'Bara MA, Vedia BH, Pol SU, Sim FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

The molecular mechanisms controlling human oligodendrocyte development are poorly
characterized. Microarray analysis of human oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs) and immature oligodendrocytes revealed that specific-class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) target genes were actively repressed during oligodendrocyte
commitment. Although epigenetic regulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation has
been established in rodent development, the role of HDACs in human OPCs remains
undefined. We used HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) trichostatin A (TSA) and sodium
butyrate to determine the importance of HDAC activity in human primary OPC
differentiation. Treatment with either drug resulted in significant
dose-dependent inhibition of O4(+) oligodendrocyte cell differentiation,
reduction of oligodendrocyte morphological maturation, and downregulation of
myelin basic protein mRNA. High dose TSA treatment was also associated with
reduction in OPC proliferation. HDACi treatment prevented downregulation of SOX2,
ID4, and TCF7L2 mRNAs but did not regulate HES5, suggesting that targets of HDAC 
repression may differ between species. These results predict that HDACi treatment
would impair proliferation and differentiation by parenchymal oligodendrocyte
progenitors, and thereby degrade their potential for endogenous repair in human
demyelinating disease. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22927334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Diabetes. 2012 Dec;61(12):3314-21. doi: 10.2337/db11-0550. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Contribution of common genetic variation to the risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Mexican Mestizo population.

Gamboa-Meléndez MA(1), Huerta-Chagoya A, Moreno-Macías H, Vázquez-Cárdenas P,
Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Rodríguez-Guillén R, Riba L, Rodríguez-Torres M,
Guerra-García MT, Guillén-Pineda LE, Choudhry S, Del Bosque-Plata L,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Pérez-Ortiz G, Escobedo-Aguirre F, Parra A, Lerman-Garber 
I, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México e Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

Several studies have identified nearly 40 different type 2 diabetes
susceptibility loci, mainly in European populations, but few of them have been
evaluated in the Mexican population. The aim of this study was to examine the
extent to which 24 common genetic variants previously associated with type 2
diabetes are associated in Mexican Mestizos. Twenty-four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near genes (KCNJ11, PPARG, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKN2A/2B, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, ARHGEF11, JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, FTO, TSPAN8/LGR5,
KCNQ1, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, NXPH1, RORA, UBQLNL, and RALGPS2) were genotyped
in Mexican Mestizos. A case-control association study comprising 1,027 type 2
diabetic individuals and 990 control individuals was conducted. To account for
population stratification, a panel of 104 ancestry-informative markers was
analyzed. Association to type 2 diabetes was found for rs13266634 (SLC30A8),
rs7923837 (HHEX), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs12779790
(CDC123/CAMK1D), and rs2237892 (KCNQ1). In addition, rs7754840 (CDKAL1) was
associated in the nonobese type 2 diabetic subgroup, and for rs7903146 (TCF7L2), 
association was observed for early-onset type 2 diabetes. Lack of association for
the rest of the variants may have resulted from insufficient power to detect
smaller allele effects.

PMCID: PMC3501881
PMID: 22923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043390. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Effects of rs7903146 variation in the Tcf7l2 gene in the lipid metabolism of
three different populations.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Perez-Caballero AI, Garcia-Rios A, Yubero-Serrano EM,
Camargo A, Gomez-Luna MJ, Marin C, Gomez-Luna P, Dembinska-Kiec A,
Rodriguez-Cantalejo F, Tinahones FJ, Roche HM, Perez-Jimenez F, Lopez-Miranda J, 
Delgado-Lista J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC/Hospital Universitario Reina
Sofía/Universidad de Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 rs7903146 is an important genetic factor predicting type 2
diabetes (T2DM) which has also been linked to higher cardiovascular risk. To
date, there is little information about the additional impact of this single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) beyond glucose metabolism.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied whether rs7903146 influenced
postprandial lipid metabolism in three different populations (healthy young men, 
metabolic syndrome (MetS) patients and elderly persons). Eighty-eight healthy
males were submitted to a single saturated fatty acid-rich test meal.
Additionally, 110 middle-aged MetS patients and 20 healthy elderly persons (= 65 
years) were submitted to three different dietary models followed by test meals.
Minor allele homozygotes for rs7903146 showed a worse postprandial lipemia
profile in young males, as seen by a lower HDL-cholesterol and Apo A1
concentration during the postprandial lipemia and a trend towards higher
triglycerides (TG), than the other genotypes. In healthy elderly persons,
carriers of the minor allele showed higher total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol,
Apo B and TG in the fasting state, and a higher postprandial area under the curve
for total cholesterol, Apo B, small-triglyceride rich lipoprotein (TRL)
cholesterol and small-(TRL) triglycerides. These results were accompanied by
differential changes in adipokines. We did not observe any influence of rs7903146
on the postprandium of MetS patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Healthy young males and elderly persons who are
carriers of the mutant allele for rs7903146 have an impaired postprandial lipid
metabolism that may be mediated by an alteration in adipokine regulation, and may
be related to the higher cardiovascular risk observed in these persons.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00429195.

PMCID: PMC3423356
PMID: 22916254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2677-81. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2660-8. Epub 2012 
Aug 22.

TCF7L2 rs7903146 impairs islet function and morphology in non-diabetic
individuals.

Le Bacquer O(1), Kerr-Conte J, Gargani S, Delalleau N, Huyvaert M, Gmyr V,
Froguel P, Neve B, Pattou F.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a
Wnt-signalling-associated transcription factor. Genetic studies have clearly
demonstrated that DNA polymorphisms within TCF7L2 confer the strongest known
association with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the impact of the
TCF7L2 type-2-diabetes-associated rs7903146 T allele on biological function and
morphology of human pancreatic islets is unknown.
METHODS: Paraffin sections of pancreases from 187 brain-deceased donors (HbA(1c) 
<6.5% [48 mmol/mol]) were used to genotype the TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 and
evaluate its impact on islet morphology and alpha and beta cell subpopulations
following immunostaining for glucagon and C-peptide. Following islet isolation,
we investigated the correlation between TCF7L2 genotype and in vitro islet
functional variables from our in-house pancreatic database.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 rs7903146 (T/T) was associated with reduced basal and
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in isolated human islets, and reduced islet 
density in whole pancreas. Morphological analysis demonstrated islet size was
increased in T/T carriers. Furthermore, rs7903146 was associated with an
increased glucagon/C-peptide ratio, especially in bigger islets.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 risk allele is associated
with impaired insulin secretion, reduction of total islet number and quantitative
as well as qualitative morphological changes in human islets. Understanding how
the TCF7L2 genotype modulates its activity and how TCF7L2 impacts the islet
morphology may aid the design of new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 22911383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E2016-21. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3441.
Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Differential gene expression in granulosa cells from polycystic ovary syndrome
patients with and without insulin resistance: identification of susceptibility
gene sets through network analysis.

Kaur S(1), Archer KJ, Devi MG, Kriplani A, Strauss JF 3rd, Singh R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi 110007, India.

CONTEXT: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a heterogeneous, genetically
complex, endocrine disorder of uncertain etiology in women.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to compare the gene expression profiles in stimulated
granulosa cells of PCOS women with and without insulin resistance vs. matched
controls.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This study included 12 normal ovulatory women
(controls), 12 women with PCOS without evidence for insulin resistance (PCOS
non-IR), and 16 women with insulin resistance (PCOS-IR) undergoing in vitro
fertilization. Granulosa cell gene expression profiling was accomplished using
Affymetrix Human Genome-U133 arrays. Differentially expressed genes were
classified according to gene ontology using ingenuity pathway analysis tools.
Microarray results for selected genes were confirmed by real-time quantitative
PCR.
RESULTS: A total of 211 genes were differentially expressed in PCOS non-IR and
PCOS-IR granulosa cells (fold change=1.5; P=0.001) vs. matched controls. Diabetes
mellitus and inflammation genes were significantly increased in PCOS-IR patients.
Real-time quantitative PCR confirmed higher expression of NCF2 (2.13-fold),
TCF7L2 (1.92-fold), and SERPINA1 (5.35-fold). Increased expression of
inflammation genes ITGAX (3.68-fold) and TAB2 (1.86-fold) was confirmed in PCOS
non-IR. Different cardiometabolic disease genes were differentially expressed in 
the two groups. Decreased expression of CAV1 (-3.58-fold) in PCOS non-IR and
SPARC (-1.88-fold) in PCOS-IR was confirmed. Differential expression of genes
involved in TGF-ß signaling (IGF2R, increased; and HAS2, decreased), and
oxidative stress (TXNIP, increased) was confirmed in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Microarray analysis demonstrated differential expression of genes
linked to diabetes mellitus, inflammation, cardiovascular diseases, and
infertility in the granulosa cells of PCOS women with and without insulin
resistance. Because these dysregulated genes are also involved in oxidative
stress, lipid metabolism, and insulin signaling, we hypothesize that these genes 
may be involved in follicular growth arrest and metabolic disorders associated
with the different phenotypes of PCOS.

PMCID: PMC3674289
PMID: 22904171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Nature. 2012 Aug 30;488(7413):660-4. doi: 10.1038/nature11282.

Recurrent R-spondin fusions in colon cancer.

Seshagiri S(1), Stawiski EW, Durinck S, Modrusan Z, Storm EE, Conboy CB,
Chaudhuri S, Guan Y, Janakiraman V, Jaiswal BS, Guillory J, Ha C, Dijkgraaf GJ,
Stinson J, Gnad F, Huntley MA, Degenhardt JD, Haverty PM, Bourgon R, Wang W,
Koeppen H, Gentleman R, Starr TK, Zhang Z, Largaespada DA, Wu TD, de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. sekar@gene.com

Identifying and understanding changes in cancer genomes is essential for the
development of targeted therapeutics. Here we analyse systematically more than 70
pairs of primary human colon tumours by applying next-generation sequencing to
characterize their exomes, transcriptomes and copy-number alterations. We have
identified 36,303 protein-altering somatic changes that include several new
recurrent mutations in the Wnt pathway gene TCF7L2, chromatin-remodelling genes
such as TET2 and TET3 and receptor tyrosine kinases including ERBB3. Our analysis
for significantly mutated cancer genes identified 23 candidates, including the
cell cycle checkpoint kinase ATM. Copy-number and RNA-seq data analysis
identified amplifications and corresponding overexpression of IGF2 in a subset of
colon tumours. Furthermore, using RNA-seq data we identified multiple fusion
transcripts including recurrent gene fusions involving R-spondin family members
RSPO2 and RSPO3 that together occur in 10% of colon tumours. The RSPO fusions
were mutually exclusive with APC mutations, indicating that they probably have a 
role in the activation of Wnt signalling and tumorigenesis. Consistent with this 
we show that the RSPO fusion proteins were capable of potentiating Wnt
signalling. The R-spondin gene fusions and several other gene mutations
identified in this study provide new potential opportunities for therapeutic
intervention in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3690621
PMID: 22895193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cell Biosci. 2012 Aug 14;2(1):28. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-2-28.

The involvement of the wnt signaling pathway and TCF7L2 in diabetes mellitus: The
current understanding, dispute, and perspective.

Ip W(1), Chiang YT, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
tianru.jin@utoronto.ca.

The Wnt signaling pathway was initially discovered for its role in tumorigenesis 
and the development of Drosophila and other eukaryotic organisms. The key
effector of this pathway, the bipartite transcription factor ß-cat/TCF, is formed
by free ß-catenin (ß-cat) and a TCF protein, including TCF7L2. Extensive recent
investigations have highlighted the role of the Wnt signaling pathway in
metabolic homeostasis and its implication in diabetes and other metabolic
diseases. Genome-wide association studies have shown that several key components 
of the Wnt signaling pathway are implicated in metabolic homeostasis and the
development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Despite controversial observations
regarding the role of Wnt signaling in the development and function of pancreatic
islets, the discovery of the association between certain single nucleotide
polymorphisms of TCF7L2 and T2D susceptibility has fueled great efforts to
explore the role of Wnt signaling in the function of pancreatic ß-cells and
glucose homeostasis. Here we have introduced our basic understanding of the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway, summarized our current knowledge on its
implication in metabolic homeostasis and T2D, discussed the work on TCF7L2 as a
T2D susceptibility gene, and presented the controversial role of Wnt signaling
and TCF7L2 in pancreatic islets as well as their potential metabolic function in 
other organs. We then expanded our view into the crosstalk among Wnt, insulin and
FOXO signaling cascades, which further illustrates the complexity of the Wnt
signaling pathway in metabolic homeostasis. Finally, we have presented our
perspectives.

PMCID: PMC3468386
PMID: 22892353  [PubMed]


361. Genet Mol Biol. 2012 Apr;35(2):413-7. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572012005000029. Epub 
2012 May 17.

Association of the TCF7L2 rs12255372 (G/T) variant with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
in an Iranian population.

Alami FM(1), Ahmadi M, Bazrafshan H, Tabarraei A, Khosravi A, Tabatabaiefar MA,
Samaei NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.

In various populations worldwide, common variants of the TCF7L2 (Transcription
factor 7-like 2) gene are associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM). The aim was to investigate the association between rs12255372 (G/T)
polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene and T2DM in an Iranian population. 236 unrelated 
patients with T2DM, and 255 normoglycemic controls without diabetes were studied.
The PCR-RFLP method was used for genotyping rs12255372 (G/T) polymorphism, and
the SPSS version 18.0 for Windows for statistical analysis. The minor T allele of
TCF7L2 rs12255372 was found to significantly increase the risk of T2DM, with an
allelic odds ratio (OR) of 1.458 (95% CI 1.108-1.918, p = 0.007). A significant
difference in TT genotype was observed between T2DM patients and normoglycemic
controls (OR 2.038, 95% CI 1.147-3.623; p = 0.014). On assuming dominant and
recessive models, ORs of 1.52 [95% CI (1.05-2.21) p = 0.026)] and 1.74 [95% CI
(1.01-3.00) p = 0.043] were obtained, respectively, thereby implying that the
co-dominant model would best fit the susceptible gene effect. This study further 
confirms the TCF7L2 gene as enhancing susceptibility to the development of T2DM.

PMCID: PMC3389527
PMID: 22888288  [PubMed]


362. Rev Bras Reumatol. 2012 Aug;52(4):523-8.

Lack of association between the CC genotype of the rs7903146 polymorphism in the 
TCF7L2 gene and rheumatoid arthritis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Mota LM(1), Rabelo Fde S, Lima FA, Lima RA, Carvalho JF, Barra GB, Amato AA.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Reumatologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, DF, Brazil. liciamhmota@yahoo.com.br

INTRODUCTION: TCF7L2 is a transcription factor involved in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling and which has a variant known to be consistently associated with type 2
diabetes risk and some studies have also indicated its association with risk of
certain types of cancer.
OBJECTIVE: Since this pathway may be involved in the pathophysiology of other
chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, we aimed to
investigate the effect of TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 on rheumatoid arthritis
severity in a Brazilian population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This polymorphism was genotyped in 208 patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and in 104 healthy controls. We also analyzed the
association of this polymorphism to smoking history, functional status
classification and radiological indicators of disease severity.
RESULTS: The distribution of CC, CT and TT genotypes of SNP rs7903146 of the
TCF7L2 gene was not different between patients and controls, and no association
between the genotype and indicators of disease severity or smoking history was
found. When data were evaluated using the dominant model, in which carriers of
the CT and TT genotypes were grouped, an increase in the T allele was observed in
patients positive for rheumatoid factor and erosions, although this was not
significant. The frequency of T allele was also increased in patients with
functional class II compared to class I (P = 0.032).
CONCLUSION: It is possible that the small number of patients included in this
study may have restrained additional findings. Further studies are therefore
needed to investigate the role of TCF7L2 gene variants in the risk of rheumatoid 
arthritis and its severity.

PMID: 22885420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Physiol Genomics. 2012 Oct 2;44(19):903-14. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00030.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Using gene-network landscape to dissect genotype effects of TCF7L2 genetic
variant on diabetes and cardiovascular risk.

Vaquero AR(1), Ferreira NE, Omae SV, Rodrigues MV, Teixeira SK, Krieger JE,
Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute, University
of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the TCF7L2 gene, rs7903146, is,
to date, the most significant genetic marker associated with Type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) risk. Nonetheless, its functional role in disease pathology is
poorly understood. The aim of the present study was to investigate, in vascular
smooth muscle cells from 92 patients undergoing aortocoronary bypass surgery, the
contribution of this SNP in T2DM using expression levels and expression
correlation comparison approaches, which were visually represented as gene
interaction networks. Initially, the expression levels of 41 genes (seven TCF7L2 
splice forms and 40 other T2DM relevant genes) were compared between rs7903146
wild-type (CC) and T2DM-risk (CT + TT) genotype groups. Next, we compared the
expression correlation patterns of these 41 genes between groups to observe if
the relationships between genes were different. Five TCF7L2 splice forms and nine
genes showed significant expression differences between groups. RXRa gene was
pinpointed as showing the most different expression correlation pattern with
other genes. Therefore, T2DM risk alleles appear to be influencing TCF7L2 splice 
form's expression in vascular smooth muscle cells, and RXRa gene is pointed out
as a treatment target candidate for risk reduction in individuals with high risk 
of developing T2DM, especially individuals harboring TCF7L2 risk genotypes.

PMID: 22872755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Sep 1;176(5):423-30. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws123. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

Integrating genetic association, genetics of gene expression, and single
nucleotide polymorphism set analysis to identify susceptibility Loci for type 2
diabetes mellitus.

Greenawalt DM(1), Sieberts SK, Cornelis MC, Girman CJ, Zhong H, Yang X, Guinney
J, Qi L, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Merck Research Laboratories, Pasteur, Boston, MA
02115, USA. danielle_greenawalt@merck.com

Large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified over 40
genomic regions significantly associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. However, 
GWAS results are not always straightforward to interpret, and linking these loci 
to meaningful disease etiology is often difficult without extensive follow-up
studies. The authors expanded on previously reported type 2 diabetes mellitus
GWAS from the nested case-control studies of 2 prospective US cohorts by
incorporating expression single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) information and
applying SNP set enrichment analysis to identify sets of SNPs associated with
genes that could provide further biologic insight to traditional genome-wide
analysis. Using data collected between 1989 and 1994 in these previous studies to
form a nested case-control study, the authors found that 3 of the most
significantly associated SNPs to type 2 diabetes mellitus in their study are
expression SNPs to the lymphocyte antigen 75 gene (LY75), the ubiquitin-specific 
peptidase 36 gene (USP36), and the phosphatidylinositol transfer protein,
cytoplasmic 1 gene (PITPNC1). SNP set enrichment analysis of the GWAS results
identified enrichment for expression SNPs to the macrophage-enriched module and
the Gene Ontology (GO) biologic process fat cell differentiation human, which
includes the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), as well as other type 2
diabetes mellitus-associated genes. Integrating genome-wide association, gene
expression, and gene set analysis may provide valuable biologic support for
potential type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility loci and may be useful in
identifying new targets or pathways of interest for the treatment and prevention 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3499116
PMID: 22865700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2659-1. Epub 2012 
Aug 5.

Impact of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) on pancreatic islet function and
morphology in mice and men.

Renström E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Center, Inga-Marie Nilssons gata 53 floor 3, 205 02
Malmö, Sweden. erik.renstrom@med.lu.se

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2677-81.
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2667-76.

Common genetic variations in the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) reveal the strongest association with type 2-diabetes known to date.
These lead to impaired insulin production and output, but the mechanisms of
disease remain incompletely known. In this issue of Diabetologia, two
publications provide new insights into TCF7L2-dependent diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3433659
PMID: 22864463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013 Jan;15(1):91-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2012.01675.x. 
Epub 2012 Sep 9.

Incretin and pancreatic hormone secretion in Caucasian non-diabetic carriers of
the TCF7L2 rs7903146 risk T allele.

Færch K, Pilgaard K, Knop FK, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Jørgensen T, Holst JJ.

We characterised 62 non-diabetic, middle-aged, Caucasians with and without the T 
risk allele of rs7903146 in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) with regard to
secretion of insulin, glucagon, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) as well as insulin sensitivity and
endogenous glucose production. All participants had a 3-h oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT), an intravenous glucose tolerance test and a euglycaemic,
hyperinsulinaemic clamp. After adjustment for age and sex, risk T allele carriers
had higher haemoglobin A1c levels (p = 0.030), reduced first-phase insulin
response (p = 0.048), higher peripheral insulin sensitivity (p = 0.050) and lower
fasting GIP concentrations (p = 0.003) than CC allele carriers. The latter was
also reflected by lower total GIP secretion during the OGTT (p = 0.018). We found
no significant differences in endogenous glucose production, hepatic insulin
sensitivity or fasting concentrations of glucose, insulin, glucagon and GLP-1
between the groups. The findings suggest that the effect of TCF7L2 on diabetes
risk may include reduced secretion of GIP.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22862926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9455-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks690. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Intrinsic properties of Tcf1 and Tcf4 splice variants determine
cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

Wallmen B(1), Schrempp M, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine and Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Albertstr. 19A, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

T-cell factor (Tcf)/lymphoid-enhancer factor (Lef) proteins are a structurally
diverse family of deoxyribonucleic acid-binding proteins that have essential
nuclear functions in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. Expression of Wnt/ß-catenin target
genes is highly dependent on context, but the precise role of Tcf/Lef family
members in the generation and maintenance of cell-type-specific Wnt/ß-catenin
responses is unknown. Herein, we show that induction of a subset of Wnt/ß-catenin
targets in embryonic stem cells depends on Tcf1 and Tcf4, whereas other
co-expressed Tcf/Lef family members cannot induce these targets. The
Tcf1/Tcf4-dependent gene responses to Wnt are primarily if not exclusively
mediated by C-clamp-containing Tcf1E and Tcf4E splice variants. A combined
knockdown of Tcf1/Tcf4 abrogates Wnt-inducible transcription but does not affect 
the active chromatin conformation of their targets. Thus, the transcriptionally
poised state of Wnt/ß-catenin targets is maintained independent of Tcf/Lef
proteins. Conversely, ectopically overexpressed Tcf1E cannot invade silent
chromatin and fails to initiate expression of inactive Wnt/ß-catenin targets even
if repressive chromatin modifications are abolished. The observed non-redundant
functions of Tcf1/Tcf4 isoforms in acute transcriptional activation demonstrated 
that the cell-type-specific complement of Tcf/Lef proteins is a critical
determinant of context-dependent Wnt/ß-catenin responses. Moreover, the apparent 
inability to cope with chromatin uncovers an intrinsic property of Tcf/Lef
proteins that prevents false ectopic induction and ensures spatiotemporal
stability of Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3479169
PMID: 22859735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Oct;50(5):789-99. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0418-x. Epub 2012
Jul 28.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes: association with diabetic
retinopathy and cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.

Ciccacci C(1), Di Fusco D, Cacciotti L, Morganti R, D'Amato C, Novelli G,
Sangiuolo F, Spallone V, Borgiani P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Section of Medical Genetics, School 
of Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133, Rome, Italy,
cinziaciccacci@libero.it.

Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is a complex disease resulting from the contribution of
both environmental and genetic factors. Recently, the list of genes implicated in
the susceptibility to T2DM has substantially grown, also as a consequence of the 
great development of the genome-wide association studies in the last decade.
Common polymorphisms in TCF7L2 gene have shown to have a strong effect with
respect to many other involved genes. The aims of our study were to confirm the
role of TCF7L2 in the susceptibility to T2DM in the Italian population and to
investigate whether TCF7L2 genotypes also contribute to the clinical phenotypes
variability and to diabetic complications development. Three TCF7L2 polymorphisms
(rs7903146, rs7901695 and rs12255372) have been analyzed by allelic
discrimination assays in a cohort of 154 Italian patients with T2DM and 171
healthy controls. A case-control association study and a genotype-phenotype
correlation study have been carried out. Consistent with previous studies, all
three SNPs showed a strong association with susceptibility to T2DM, both at
genotypic (P = 0.003, P = 0.004 and P = 0.012) and at allelic level (P = 0.0004, 
P = 0.0004 and P = 0.003). Moreover, we observed associations between TCF7L2
variants and the following diabetic complications: diabetic retinopathy,
cardiovascular disease and coronary artery disease. We also found a strong
correlation between the rs7903146 and the presence of cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy (P = 0.02 with a high OR = 8.28). In conclusion, our study, in
addition to confirming the involvement of TCF7L2 gene in the T2DM susceptibility,
has shown that TCF7L2 genetic variability also contributes to the development of 
diabetic complications such as retinopathy and cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy.

PMID: 22843023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):71-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.016. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Visualization and exploration of Tcf/Lef function using a highly responsive
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-reporter transgenic zebrafish.

Shimizu N(1), Kawakami K, Ishitani T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Regulation Systems, Department of Immunobiology and
Neuroscience, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Evolutionarily conserved Tcf/Lef transcription factors (Lef1, Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and
Tcf7l2) mediate gene expression regulated by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which has
multiple roles in early embryogenesis, organogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis,
and tissue regeneration. However, the spatiotemporal dynamics of Tcf/Lef activity
during these events remain poorly understood. We generated stable transgenic
zebrafish lines carrying a new Wnt/ß-catenin signaling reporter,
Tcf/Lef-miniP:dGFP. The reporter revealed the transcriptional activities of four 
Tcf/Lef members controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which were expressed in
known Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-active sites during embryogenesis, organ
development and growth, and tissue regeneration. We used the transgenic lines to 
demonstrate the contribution of Tcf/Lef-mediated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to the
development of the anterior lateral line, dorsal and secondary posterior lateral 
lines, and gill filaments. Thus, these reporter lines are highly useful tools for
studying Tcf/Lef-mediated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-dependent processes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Chem Neuroanat. 2012 Oct;45(1-2):1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2012.06.002.
Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Review of the neuroanatomic landscape implicated in glucose sensing and
regulation of nutrient signaling: immunophenotypic localization of diabetes gene 
Tcf7l2 in the developing murine brain.

Weaver C(1), Turner N, Hall J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Cyprian@umn.edu

Genetic variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2(Tcf7l2) gene have been
found to confer a significant risk of type 2 diabetes and attenuated insulin
secretion. Based on its genomic wide association Tcf7l2 is considered the single 
most important predictor of diabetes to date. Previous studies of Tcf7l2 mRNA
localization in the adult brain suggest a putative role of Tcf7l2 in the CNS
regulation of energy homeostasis. The present study further characterizes the
immunophenotypic distribution of peptide expression in the brains of Tcf7l2
progeny during developmental time periods between E12.5 and P1. Tcf7l2(-/-) is
lethal beyond P1. Results show that while negligible TCF7L2 expression is found
in the developing brains of Tcf7l2(-/-)mice, TCF7L2 protein is relatively
widespread and robustly expressed in the brain by E18.5 and exhibits specific
expression within neuronal populations and regions of the brain in Tcf7l2(+/-)
and Tcf7l2(+/+) progeny. Strong immunophenotypic labeling was found in the
diencephalic structure of the thalamus that suggests a role of Tcf7l2 in the
development and maintenance of thalamic activity. Strongly expressed TCF7L2 was
localized in select hypothalamic and preoptic nuclei indicative of Tcf7l2
function within neurons controlling energy balance. Definitive neuronal staining 
for TCF7L2 within nuclei of the brain stem and circumventricular organs extends
TCF7L2 localization within autonomic neurons and its potential integration with
autonomic function. In addition robust TCF7L2 expression was found in the tectal 
and tegmental structures of the superior and inferior colliculi as well as
transient expression in neuroepithelium of the cerebral and hippocampal cortices 
of E16 and E18.5. Patterns of TCF7L2 peptide localization when compared to the
adult protein synthetic chemical/anatomical landscape of glucose sensing exhibit 
a good correlational fit between its expression and regions, nuclei, and pathways
regulating energy homeostasis via integration and response to peripheral
endocrine, metabolic and neuronal signaling. TCF was also found co-localized with
peptides that regulate energy homeostasis including AgRP, POMC and NPY. TCF7l2,
some variants of which have been shown to impair GLP-1-induced insulin secretion,
was also found co-localize with GLP-1 in adult TCF wild type progeny. Impaired
Tcf7l2-mediated neural regulation may contribute to the risk and/or underlying
pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes that has found high expression in genomic
studies of Tcf7l2 variants.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3455112
PMID: 22796301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2646-54. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2634-x. Epub 2012 
Jul 11.

Role of TCF7L2 risk variant and dietary fibre intake on incident type 2 diabetes.

Hindy G(1), Sonestedt E, Ericson U, Jing XJ, Zhou Y, Hansson O, Renström E,
Wirfält E, Orho-Melander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Lund University, Clinical Research
Center, Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The T allele of transcription factor 7-like 2 gene variant,
TCF7L2 rs7903146, increases the risk of type 2 diabetes by 40-50%. As TCF7L2
rs7903146 has been associated with diminished incretin effect we investigated
whether interaction between dietary intake of carbohydrate, fat, protein or fibre
and this variant affects the risk of type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A cohort of 24,799 non-diabetic individuals from the Malmö Diet and
Cancer Study (MDCS), with dietary data obtained by a modified diet history
method, were followed up for 12 years, with 1,649 recordings of incident type 2
diabetes made. Risk of type 2 diabetes in strata of diet quintiles was analysed
prospectively adjusting for potential confounders. Cross-sectional analyses were 
performed on baseline fasting glucose and HbA(1c) levels in a subset of 5,216
randomly selected individuals from the MDCS.
RESULTS: The elevated risk of type 2 diabetes with rs7903146 (OR 1.44, 95% CI
1.33, 1.56, p = 4.6 × 10(-19)) increased with higher intake of dietary fibre (OR 
1.24, 95% CI 1.04, 1.47 to OR 1.56, 95% CI 1.31, 1.86 from the lowest to highest 
quintile; p (interaction) = 0.049). High intake of dietary fibre was inversely
associated with diabetes incidence only among CC genotype carriers (OR 0.74, 95% 
CI 0.58, 0.94 per quintile, p = 0.025). The T allele was associated with 0.027%
elevated HbA(1c) (p = 0.02) and this effect increased with higher intake of fibre
(from -0.021% to 0.079% for the lowest to the highest quintile, p (interaction) =
0.02). Each quintile of higher fibre intake was associated with lower HbA(1c)
levels among CC and CT but not among TT genotype carriers (-0.036%, p = 6.5 ×
10(-7); -0.023%, p = 0.009; and 0.012%, p = 0.52, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study suggests that dietary fibre intake may
modify the association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and incidence of type 2 diabetes,
and that higher fibre intake may associate with protection from type 2 diabetes
only among non-risk allele carriers.

PMCID: PMC3433658
PMID: 22782288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Gastroenterology. 2012 Oct;143(4):1037-47. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.06.042.
Epub 2012 Jul 3.

ß-Catenin regulates deiodinase levels and thyroid hormone signaling in colon
cancer cells.

Dentice M(1), Luongo C, Ambrosio R, Sibilio A, Casillo A, Iaccarino A, Troncone
G, Fenzi G, Larsen PR, Salvatore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology and Oncology, University of
Naples "Federico II," Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Activation of the ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) complex occurs
in most colon tumors, and its actions correlate with the neoplastic phenotype of 
intestinal epithelial cells. Type 3 deiodinase (D3), the selenoenzyme that
inactivates thyroid hormone (3,5,3' triiodothyronine [T3]), is frequently
expressed by tumor cells, but little is known about its role in the regulation of
T3 signaling in cancer cells.
METHODS: We measured D3 expression in 6 colon cancer cell lines and human tumors 
and correlated it with the activity of the ß-catenin/TCF complex. We also
determined the effects of D3 loss on local thyroid hormone signaling and colon
tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: We show that D3 is a direct transcriptional target of the ß-catenin/TCF 
complex; its expression was higher in human intestinal adenomas and carcinomas
than in healthy intestinal tissue. Experimental attenuation of ß-catenin reduced 
D3 levels and induced type 2 deiodinase (the D3 antagonist that converts
3,5,3',5' tetraiodothyronine into active T3) thereby increasing T3-dependent
transcription. In the absence of D3, excess T3 reduced cell proliferation and
promoted differentiation in cultured cells and in xenograft mouse models. This
occurred via induction of E-cadherin, which sequestered ß-catenin at the plasma
membrane and promoted cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Deiodinases are at the interface between the ß-catenin and the
thyroid hormone pathways. Their synchronized regulation of intracellular T3
concentration is a hitherto unrecognized route by which the multiple effects of
ß-catenin are generated and may be targeted to reduce the oncogenic effects of
ß-catenin in intestinal cells.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039981. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Loss of the SxxSS motif in a human T-cell factor-4 isoform confers hypoxia
resistance to liver cancer: an oncogenic switch in Wnt signaling.

Koga H(1), Tsedensodnom O, Tomimaru Y, Walker EJ, Lee HC, Kim KM, Yano H, Wands
JR, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and the Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, United States of America.

PURPOSE: Aberrantly activated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is important in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. Downstream gene expressions involving
the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade occur through T-cell factor (TCF) proteins. Here, we
show the oncogenic potential of human TCF-4 isoforms based on the expression of a
single conserved SxxSS motif.
METHODS: We investigated the TCF-4J and K isoform pair characterized by the
presence (K) or absence (J) of the SxxSS motif. The mRNA expression profiles were
examined in 47 pairs of human HCCs and adjacent non-cancerous liver tissues by
RT-PCR. Proliferation, sphere assays and immunoblot analysis were performed under
normoxia and hypoxia conditions. The ability of HCC cells overexpressing TCF-4J
(J cells) and K (K cells) to grow as solid tumors in nude mice was explored.
RESULTS: TCF-4J expression was significantly upregulated in HCC tumors compared
to corresponding peritumor and normal liver and was preferentially expressed in
poorly differentiated HCCs. In contrast, TCF-4K was downregulated in those same
HCC tumors. TCF-4J-overexpressing HCC cells (J cells) revealed a survival
advantage under hypoxic conditions, high proliferation rate and formation of
aggregates/spheres compared to overexpression of TCF-4K (K cells). The hypoxic J 
cells had high expression levels of HIF-2a and EGFR as possible mechanisms to
promote tumorigenesis. Increased stability of HIF-2a under hypoxia in J cells was
associated with a decreased level of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein, a known E3 
ligase for HIF-as. In a xenograft model, the J cells rapidly developed tumors
compared to K cells. Tumor tissues derived from J cells exhibited high expression
levels of HIF-2a and EGFR compared to the slow developing and small K cell
derived tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the specific TCF-4J isoform, which lacks a 
regulatory SxxSS motif, has robust tumor-initiating potential under hypoxic
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3386968
PMID: 22768190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038224. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Allele summation of diabetes risk genes predicts impaired glucose tolerance in
female and obese individuals.

Linder K(1), Wagner R, Hatziagelaki E, Ketterer C, Heni M, Machicao F, Stefan N, 
Staiger H, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard Karls University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in approximately 40 genes
have been associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
genome-wide association studies. It is not known whether a similar genetic impact
on the risk of prediabetes (impaired glucose tolerance [IGT] or impaired fasting 
glycemia [IFG]) exists.
METHODS: In our cohort of 1442 non-diabetic subjects of European origin (normal
glucose tolerance [NGT] n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1046, isolated IFG n<U+200A>=<U+200A>142, isolated IGT n<U+200A>=<U+200A>140,
IFG+IGT n<U+200A>=<U+200A>114), an impact on glucose homeostasis has been shown for 9 SNPs in
previous studies in this specific cohort. We analyzed these SNPs (within or in
the vicinity of the genes TCF7L2, KCNJ11, HHEX, SLC30A8, WFS1, KCNQ1, MTNR1B,
FTO, PPARG) for association with prediabetes.
RESULTS: The genetic risk load was significantly associated with the risk for IGT
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0006) in a model including gender, age, BMI and insulin sensitivity. To
further evaluate potential confounding effects, we stratified the population on
gender, BMI and insulin sensitivity. The association of the risk score with IGT
was present in female participants (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008), but not in male participants. The
risk score was significantly associated with IGT (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008) in subjects with a
body mass index higher than 30 kg/m(2) but not in non-obese individuals.
Furthermore, only in insulin resistant subjects a significant association between
the genetic load and the risk for IGT (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) was found.
DISCUSSION: We found that T2D genetic risk alleles cause an increased risk for
IGT. This effect was not present in male, lean and insulin sensitive subjects,
suggesting a protective role of beneficial environmental factors on the genetic
risk.

PMCID: PMC3387191
PMID: 22768041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Nov;38(5):444-9. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.05.002. Epub
2012 Jun 27.

Contribution of common variants of ENPP1, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, MLXIPL, PPAR<U+03B3>, SLC30A8
and TCF7L2 to the risk of type 2 diabetes in Lebanese and Tunisian Arabs.

Mtiraoui N(1), Turki A, Nemr R, Echtay A, Izzidi I, Al-Zaben GS, Irani-Hakime N, 
Keleshian SH, Mahjoub T, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Biology and Genetics of Hematological and Autoimmune
diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: While several type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) susceptibility loci
identified through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been replicated in
many populations, their association in Arabs has not been reported. For this
reason, the present study looked at the contribution of ENNP1 (rs1044498),
IGF2BP2 (rs1470579), KCNJ11 (rs5219), MLXIPL (rs7800944), PPAR<U+03B3> (rs1801282),
SLC30A8 (rs13266634) and TCF7L2 (rs7903146) SNPs to the risk of T2DM in Lebanese 
and Tunisian Arabs.
METHODS: Study subjects (case/controls) were Lebanese (751/918) and Tunisians
(1470/838). Genotyping was carried out by the allelic discrimination method.
RESULTS: In Lebanese and Tunisians, neither ENNP1 nor MLXIPL was associated with 
T2DM, whereas TCF7L2 was significantly associated with an increased risk of T2DM 
in both the Lebanese [P < 0.001; OR (95% CI): 1.38 (1.20-1.59)] and Tunisians [P 
< 0.001; OR (95% CI): 1.36 (1.18-1.56)]. Differential associations of IGF2BP2,
KCNJ11, PPAR<U+03B3> and SLC30A8 with T2DM were noted in the two populations. IGF2BP2 [P
= 1.3 × 10(-5); OR (95% CI): 1.66 (1.42-1.94)] and PPAR<U+03B3> [P = 0.005; OR (95% CI):
1.41 (1.10-1.80)] were associated with T2DM in the Lebanese, but not Tunisians,
while KCNJ11 [P = 8.0 × 10(-4); OR (95% CI): 1.27 (1.09-1.47)] and SLC30A8 [P =
1.6 × 10(-5); OR (95% CI): 1.37 (1.15-1.62)] were associated with T2DM in the
Tunisians, but not Lebanese, after adjusting for gender and body mass index.
CONCLUSION: T2DM susceptibility loci SNPs identified through GWAS showed
differential associations with T2DM in two Arab populations, thus further
confirming the ethnic contributions of these variants to T2DM susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 10;109(28):11402-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205015109. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Chemical and genetic evidence for the involvement of Wnt antagonist Dickkopf2 in 
regulation of glucose metabolism.

Li X(1), Shan J, Chang W, Kim I, Bao J, Lee HJ, Zhang X, Samuel VT, Shulman GI,
Liu D, Zheng JJ, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Vascular Biology and Therapeutic Program, Yale 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):17141.

Mutations in Wnt receptor LRP5/6 and polymorphism in Wnt-regulated transcription 
factor TCF7L2 are associated with dysregulation of glucose metabolism. However,
it is not clear whether Wnt antagonist Dickkopf (Dkk) has a significant role in
the regulation of glucose metabolism. Here, we identified small-molecule
inhibitors of Wnt antagonist Dkk through molecular modeling, computation-based
virtual screens, and biological assays. One of the Dkk inhibitors reduced basal
blood-glucose concentrations and improved glucose tolerance in mice. This Dkk
inhibitor appeared to act through DKK2 because the inhibitor exerted no
additional effects on glucose metabolism in the Dkk2(-/-) mice. Our study of
Dkk2(-/-) mice showed that DKK2 deficiency was associated with increased hepatic 
glycogen accumulation and decreased hepatic glucose output. DKK2 deficiency did
not cause in increase in insulin production but resulted in increased Wnt
activity and GLP1 production in the intestines. Given that the Dkk inhibitor
improved glucose tolerance in a murine model of type 2 diabetes (db/db), we
suggest that DKK2 may be a potential therapeutic target for treating type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3396493
PMID: 22733757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(6):791-801. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4568. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Reduction in Tcf7l2 expression decreases diabetic susceptibility in mice.

Yang H(1), Li Q, Lee JH, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The WNT signaling pathway effector gene TCF7L2 has been associated
with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, it remains unclear how this
gene affects diabetic pathogenesis. The goal of this study was to investigate the
effects of Tcf7l2 haploinsufficiency on metabolic phenotypes in mice.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tcf7l2 knockout (Tcf7l<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice were generated. Because of
the early mortality of Tcf7l2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice, we characterized the metabolic phenotypes 
of heterozygous Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice in comparison to the wild-type controls. The mice 
were fed a normal chow diet or a high fat diet (HFD) for 9 weeks.
RESULTS: The Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice showed significant differences from the wild-type
mice with regards to body weight, fasting glucose and insulin levels. Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B>
mice displayed improved glucose tolerance. In the liver of Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice fed on 
the HFD, reduced lipogenesis and hepatic triglyceride levels were observed when
compared with those of wild-type mice. Furthermore, the Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice fed on the
HFD exhibited decreased peripheral fat deposition. Immunohistochemistry in mouse 
pancreatic islets showed that endogenous expression of Tcf7l2 was upregulated in 
the wild-type mice, but not in the Tcf7l2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice, after feeding with the HFD.
However, the haploinsufficiency of Tcf7l2 in mouse pancreatic islets resulted in 
little changes in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that decreased expression of Tcf7l2 confers
reduction of diabetic susceptibility in mice via regulation on the metabolism of 
glucose and lipid.

PMCID: PMC3372883
PMID: 22719219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2667-76. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2600-7. Epub 2012 
Jun 21.

Abnormal glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in pancreas-specific Tcf7l2-null
mice.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Mondragon A, Sun G, Chen L, McGinty JA, French PM, Rutter
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. g.dasilva-xavier@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2559-61.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Individuals carrying type 2 diabetes risk alleles in TCF7L2
display decreased beta cell levels of T cell factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2)
immunoreactivity, and impaired insulin secretion and beta cell sensitivity to
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). Here, we sought to determine whether selective
deletion of Tcf7l2 in mouse pancreas impairs insulin release and glucose
homeostasis.
METHODS: Pancreas-specific Tcf7l2-null (pTcf7l2) mice were generated by crossing 
mice carrying conditional knockout alleles of Tcf7l2 (Tcf7l2-flox) with mice
expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the Pdx1 promoter (Pdx1.Cre).
Gene expression was assessed by real-time quantitative PCR and beta cell mass by 
optical projection tomography. Glucose tolerance, insulin secretion from isolated
islets, and plasma insulin, glucagon and GLP-1 content were assessed by standard 
protocols.
RESULTS: From 12 weeks of age, pTcf7l2 mice displayed decreased oral glucose
tolerance vs control littermates; from 20 weeks they had glucose intolerance upon
administration of glucose by the intraperitoneal route. pTcf7l2 islets displayed 
impaired insulin secretion in response to 17 (vs 3.0) mmol/l glucose (54.6 ±
4.6%, p < 0.01) or to 17 mmol/l glucose plus 100 nmol/l GLP-1 (44.3 ± 4.9%, p <
0.01) compared with control islets. Glp1r (42 ± 0.08%, p < 0.01) and Ins2 (15.4 ±
4.6%, p < 0.01) expression was significantly lower in pTcf7l2 islets than in
controls. Maintained on a high-fat (but not on a normal) diet, pTcf7l2 mice
displayed decreased expansion of pancreatic beta cell volume vs control
littermates. No differences were observed in plasma insulin, proinsulin, glucagon
or GLP-1 concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Selective deletion of Tcf7l2 in the pancreas
replicates key aspects of the altered glucose homeostasis in human carriers of
TCF7L2 risk alleles, indicating the direct role of this factor in controlling
beta cell function.

PMID: 22717537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Psychogeriatrics. 2012 Jun;12(2):93-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00398.x.

TCF7L2 polymorphism and cognitive test performance in cardiovascular disease.

Keary TA(1), Gunstad J, Benitez A, Spitznagel MB, McCaffery J, McGeary JE, Poppas
A, Paul RH, Sweet LH, Cohen RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA.

AIMS: The present study examines cognitive function among transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) genotype groups in a sample of older adults with cardiovascular
disease.
METHODS: We recruited 111 older adults with diagnosed cardiovascular disease from
outpatient cardiology clinics. Neuropsychological tests assessed the following
domains of cognitive functioning: global function,
attention/executive/psychomotor speed, learning and memory,
visuospatial/construction, motor, and language. Genotyping of TCF7L2 single
nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 was conducted to determine membership in the
TT, CT, or CC genotype groups.
RESULTS: Controlling for diabetes status, participants with the TT genotype of
TCF7L2 (n= 12) performed worse on tests of attention/executive
function/processing speed than those with the CC (n= 46) and CT (n= 53)
genotypes, despite no between-group differences in demographic or medical
variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Older cardiovascular disease patients with the TCF7L2 TT genotype
performed worse on tests of attention/executive/ psychomotor speed than CC and CT
genotype carriers. Further work using neuroimaging and glucose tolerance indices 
is needed to clarify underlying mechanisms.

© 2012 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2012 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

PMCID: PMC4289601
PMID: 22712642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. EMBO Rep. 2012 Aug;13(8):750-8. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.88. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Kindlin 2 forms a transcriptional complex with ß-catenin and TCF4 to enhance Wnt 
signalling.

Yu Y(1), Wu J, Wang Y, Zhao T, Ma B, Liu Y, Fang W, Zhu WG, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China.

Kindlin 2, as a focal adhesion protein, controls integrin activation. However,
the association of Kindlin 2 with cancer-related signalling pathways is unknown. 
Here we identified a new direct interaction between Kindlin 2 and the active
ß-catenin. Importantly, Kindlin 2 forms a tripartite complex with ß-catenin and
TCF4. Mechanistically, Kindlin 2 selectively strengthens the occupancy of
ß-catenin on the Wnt target gene Axin2 and enhances Axin2 gene expression.
Functionally, the ß-catenin-Axin2-Snail cascade is required for Kindlin 2-induced
tumour cell invasion. Our data indicate that Kindlin 2 is a new regulator of Wnt 
signalling, providing a mechanistic insight into the role of Kindlin 2 in cancer 
progression.

PMCID: PMC3410388
PMID: 22699938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Diabetes Care. 2012 Aug;35(8):1763-70. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2006. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Genetic risk score constructed using 14 susceptibility alleles for type 2
diabetes is associated with the early onset of diabetes and may predict the
future requirement of insulin injections among Japanese individuals.

Iwata M(1), Maeda S, Kamura Y, Takano A, Kato H, Murakami S, Higuchi K, Takahashi
A, Fujita H, Hara K, Kadowaki T, Tobe K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama University,
Toyama, Japan. iwamino-tym@umin.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the clinical usefulness of a genetic risk score (GRS)
based on 14 well-established variants for type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 14 SNPs at HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2B,
SLC30A8, KCNJ11, IGF2BP2, PPARG, TCF7L2, FTO, KCNQ1, IRS-1, GCKR, UBE2E2, and
C2CD4A/B in 1,487 Japanese individuals (724 patients with type 2 diabetes and 763
control subjects). A GRS was calculated according to the number of risk alleles
by counting all 14 SNPs (T-GRS) as well as 11 SNPs related to ß-cell function
(ß-GRS) and then assessing the association between each GRS and the clinical
features.
RESULTS: Among the 14 SNPs, 4 SNPs were significantly associated with type 2
diabetes in the present Japanese sample (P < 0.0036). The T-GRS was significantly
associated with type 2 diabetes (P = 5.9 × 10(-21)). Among the subjects with type
2 diabetes, the ß-GRS was associated with individuals receiving insulin therapy
(ß = 0.0131, SE = 0.006, P = 0.0431), age at diagnosis (ß = -0.608, SE = 0.204, P
= 0.0029), fasting serum C-peptide level (ß = -0.032, SE = 0.0140, P = 0.022),
and C-peptide index (ß = -0.031, SE = 0.012, P = 0.0125).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the ß-GRS is associated with reduced ß-cell
functions and may be useful for selecting patients who should receive more
aggressive ß-cell-preserving therapy.

PMCID: PMC3402252
PMID: 22688542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;72(14):3607-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0006. Epub 
2012 May 25.

Wnt/Snail signaling regulates cytochrome C oxidase and glucose metabolism.

Lee SY(1), Jeon HM, Ju MK, Kim CH, Yoon G, Han SI, Park HG, Kang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan, Korea.

Wnt signaling plays a critical role in embryonic development, and its
deregulation is closely linked to the occurrence of a number of malignant tumors,
including breast and colon cancer. The pathway also induces Snail-dependent
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is responsible for tumor
invasion and metastasis. In this study, we show that Wnt suppresses mitochondrial
respiration and cytochrome C oxidase (COX) activity by inhibiting the expression 
of 3 COX subunits, namely, COXVIc, COXVIIa, and COXVIIc. We found that Wnt
induced a glycolytic switch via increased glucose consumption and lactate
production, with induction of pyruvate carboxylase (PC), a key enzyme of
anaplerosis. In addition, Wnt-induced mitochondrial repression and glycolytic
switching occurred through the canonical ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4/Snail pathway.
Short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of E-cadherin, a regulator of EMT, repressed
mitochondrial respiration and induced a glycolytic switch via Snail activation,
indicating that EMT may contribute to Wnt/Snail regulation of mitochondrial
respiration and glucose metabolism. Together, our findings provide a new function
for Wnt/Snail signaling in the regulation of mitochondrial respiration (via COX
gene expression) and glucose metabolism (via PC gene expression) in tumor growth 
and progression.

PMID: 22637725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Sep;97(3):394-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 May 14.

Genetic prediction of postpartum diabetes in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Ekelund M(1), Shaat N, Almgren P, Anderberg E, Landin-Olsson M, Lyssenko V, Groop
L, Berntorp K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Helsingborg, Helsingborg, Sweden.
magnus.ekelund@med.lu.se

AIMS: To examine whether genetic variants that predispose individuals to type 2
diabetes (T2D) could predict the development of diabetes after gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: 13 SNPs (FTO rs8050136, CDKAL1 rs7754840 and rs7756992, CDKN2A/2B
rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875, IGF2BP2 rs1470579 and rs4402960, SLC30A8 rs13266634, 
TCF7L2 rs7903146, PPARG rs1801282, GCK rs1799884, HNF1A rs1169288, and KCNJ11
rs5219) were genotyped in 793 women with GDM after a median follow-up of 57
months.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age and ethnicity, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and the FTO
rs8050136 variants significantly predicted postpartum diabetes; hazard ratio (95%
confidence interval 1.29 (1.01-1.66) and 1.36 (1.06-1.74), respectively (additive
model) versus 1.45 (1.01-2.08) and 1.56 (1.06-2.29) (dominant model)). Adjusting 
for BMI attenuated the effect of the FTO variant, suggesting that the effect was 
mediated through its effect on BMI. Combining all risk alleles to a weighted risk
score was significantly associated with the risk of postpartum diabetes (hazard
ratio 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.05-1.18, p=0.00016 after adjustment for age
and ethnicity).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 and FTO rs8050136 polymorphisms, and
particularly a weighted risk score of T2D risk alleles, predict diabetes after
GDM. Further studies in other populations are needed to confirm our results.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22591707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036501. Epub 2012 May 10.

An in vivo cis-regulatory screen at the type 2 diabetes associated TCF7L2 locus
identifies multiple tissue-specific enhancers.

Savic D(1), Bell GI, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. dsavic@uchicago.edu

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have repeatedly shown an association
between non-coding variants in the TCF7L2 locus and risk for type 2 diabetes
(T2D), implicating a role for cis-regulatory variation within this locus in
disease etiology. Supporting this hypothesis, we previously localized complex
regulatory activity to the TCF7L2 T2D-associated interval using an in vivo
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) enhancer-trapping reporter strategy. To
follow-up on this broad initial survey of the TCF7L2 regulatory landscape, we
performed a fine-mapping enhancer scan using in vivo mouse transgenic reporter
assays. We functionally interrogated approximately 50% of the sequences within
the T2D-associated interval, utilizing sequence conservation within this 92-kb
interval to determine the regulatory potential of all evolutionary conserved
sequences that exhibited conservation to the non-eutherian mammal opossum.
Included in this study was a detailed functional interrogation of sequences
spanning both protective and risk alleles of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs7903146, which has exhibited allele-specific enhancer function in pancreatic
beta cells. Using these assays, we identified nine segments regulating various
aspects of the TCF7L2 expression profile and that constitute nearly 70% of the
sequences tested. These results highlight the regulatory complexity of this
interval and support the notion that a TCF7L2 cis-regulatory disruption leads to 
T2D predisposition.

PMCID: PMC3349716
PMID: 22590553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77(5):305-8. doi: 10.1159/000338665. Epub 2012 May 15.

The effect of type 2 diabetes risk loci on insulin requirements in type 1
diabetes.

Moosavi M(1), Séguin J, Li Q, Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Paediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Que., Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the correlation between insulin requirements of type 1
diabetic (T1D) patients and genotype at type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk loci, obtained
in our genome-wide association study.
METHODS: From a database of detailed insulin dosing of 567 patients, we selected 
177 for whom we also had genome-wide genotyping data. Using PLINK software, we
examined the association between insulin requirement as a quantitative trait and 
nineteen T2D risk loci.
RESULTS: Out of 19 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs13266634 on
chromosome 8 and rs7901695 on chromosome 10 showed nominal significance of
association (p < 0.05). The first SNP is nonsynonymous (325 Arg>Trp) and maps to 
the SLC30A8 gene encoding the ß-cell-specific ZnT8 zinc transporter, while the
second is an intronic SNP in TCF7L2, the strongest known T2D association. Both
loci exert their effect on ß-cells and, in both, the T2D risk allele is
associated with lower insulin requirements.
CONCLUSION: We identified two T2D susceptibility loci that modulate insulin
requirements in T1D patients. Our results are consistent with the association of 
lower insulin secretion with higher insulin sensitivity. To explain the
continuation of this correlation after ß-cell destruction, we hypothesize an
epigenetic mechanism that alters insulin responsiveness in T1D patients based on 
ß-cell function in early life. Such knowledge may allow a more precise approach
to treatment.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22584884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Aug;16(8):948-51. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2012.0051.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Association of TCF7L2 and ADIPOQ with body mass index, waist-hip ratio, and
systolic blood pressure in an endogamous ethnic group of India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Walia GK, Kalla L, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Despite the increasing burden of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and its established
association with anthropometric and physiological traits as a risk factor,
genetic studies focusing on the association of T2D-related genes with
quantitative traits like body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR), and
systolic blood pressure (SBP) are only a few for western populations and rare for
Indian populations. The present study tested the association of TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ with BMI, SBP, and WHR in men and women of the Aggarwal
population of India and found a differential association of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs4506565, and rs12256372) and ADIPOQ (rs2241766 and rs1501299) genes with
increasing BMI, SBP, and WHR between the two sexes. We conclude that TCF7L2 and
ADIPOQ together might play an important role in explaining these traits and to
understand the biological and genetic mechanisms underlying T2D, and the role of 
other T2D genes must also be evaluated with these continuous traits.

PMCID: PMC3710444
PMID: 22583123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;68(12):1587-94. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1292-8.
Epub 2012 May 9.

Analysis of common type 2 diabetes mellitus genetic risk factors in new-onset
diabetes after transplantation in kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus.

Kurzawski M(1), Dziewanowski K, Lapczuk J, Wajda A, Drozdzik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Powstancow Wlkp. 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland. mkurz@op.pl

PURPOSE: New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a major complication
after kidney transplantation. The risk factors for NODAT include the use of
calcineurin inhibitors as part of the immunosuppressive regimen, among which
tacrolimus has the most pronounced diabetogenic effect. Both NODAT and type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) share several risk factors. Recent studies have
identified a number of common genetic variants associated with increased risk of 
T2DM. Here we report the results of our study on the potential effect of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated with T2DM on the risk of
NODAT in kidney transplant patients medicated with tacrolimus.
METHODS: Seven SNPs in six genes known to increase the risk of T2DM in Caucasians
were genotyped by means of TaqMan assays in 235 kidney transplant patients
medicated with tacrolimus: rs4402960 and rs1470579 in IGF2BP2; rs1111875 in HHEX;
rs10811661 upstream of CDKN2A/B; rs13266634 in SLC30A8; rs1801282 in PPARG;
rs5215 in KCNJ11. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP was also included in the multivariate 
analysis.
RESULTS: None of the analyzed SNPs was significantly associated with the risk of 
NODAT. However, the IGF2BP2 rs4402960 T allele was present significantly more
frequently among patients diagnosed with NODAT more than 2 weeks after
transplantation (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.048). Mean (± standard deviation) number of the analyzed
alleles tended to be lower in patients without NODAT (6.19<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.71) than in NODAT 
patients (6.58<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.1.95; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.09) and significantly lower compared to late-onset
NODAT patients (7.03<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.88; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018). Multivariate analysis confirmed the
significance of 'diabetogenic' allele number in late-onset NODAT development
[odds ratio (OR) 1.37, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.05-1.78; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017].
Additionally, individuals carrying >7 of the analyzed 'diabetogenic' alleles were
at a significantly higher risk of NODAT (OR 2.17, 95 % CI 1.18-3.99; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: Complex analysis of genotypes increasing the risk of diabetes may
lead to the identification of NODAT susceptibility predictors.

PMCID: PMC3496482
PMID: 22569928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nutr Hosp. 2012 Jan-Feb;27(1):46-53. doi: 10.1590/S0212-16112012000100006.

Nutrient-mediated modulation of incretin gene expression: a systematic review.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Martínez-Rodríguez R(1), Gil A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Institute of Nutrition
and Food Technology, Centre of Biomedical Research, University of Granada,
Granada, Spain.

Incretins are a cluster of hormones which are secreted and released into the
bloodstream after food intake by gut enteroendocrine cells, reaching to pancreas 
where produce a potentiating effect on insulin release. The aim of this study was
to perform a systematic review of incretins gene expression mediated by nutrients
using specific search equations in the PubMed database. The two most relevant
incretins are GLP-1 and GIP, which come from proglucagon and proGIP precursor
respectively. GLP-1 is mainly synthesized and released by ileum and colon L
cells, in contrast to GIP which does it by K cells in duodenum and proximal
jejunum. It has been shown that canonical Wnt signalling pathway is closely
related to the production of these hormones, since transcription factor TCF7L2
affects proglucagon and proGIP gene expression in L and K enteroendocrine cells. 
On the other hand, it has been shown that the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway can
produce N-linked glycosylation of -catenin, an essential component of canonical
Wnt signalling. This process hinders ß-catenin phosphorylation and, thereby
prevents proteasome degradation. Increasing glucose concentration enhances the
hexosamine pathway and thus ß-catenin glycosylation. This causes a ß-catenin
cytoplasmic accumulation allowing entry into nucleus, where it exerts its action 
by binding to a clump of molecules and transcription factors, allowing to express
the target genes, including the incretin hormones. There is also evidence that
glucose, through the hexosamine pathway, can induces autocrine activation of Wnt 
signalling pathway by stimulating secretion of Wnt proteins.

PMID: 22566303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035410. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Lack of association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genotypes and body weight
on the development of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes.

Winkler C(1), Raab J, Grallert H, Ziegler AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany.

AIM: To investigate whether type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and body weight 
influence the development of islet autoantibodies and the rate of progression to 
type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: Genotyping for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of the type 2
diabetes susceptibility genes CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO, HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2,
KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 was obtained in 1350 children
from parents with type 1 diabetes participating in the BABYDIAB study. Children
were prospectively followed from birth for islet autoantibodies and type 1
diabetes. Data on weight and height were obtained at 9 months, 2, 5, 8, 11, and
14 years of age.
RESULTS: None of type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO,
HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG and SLC30A8 loci were
associated with the development of islet autoantibodies or diabetes. The type 2
diabetes susceptible genotype of TCF7L2 was associated with a lower risk of islet
autoantibodies (7% vs. 12% by age of 10 years, P = 0.015, P(corrected) = 0.18).
Overweight children at seroconversion did not progress to diabetes faster than
non-overweight children (HR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.48-2.45, P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings do not support an association of type 2 diabetes risk
factors with islet autoimmunity or acceleration of diabetes in children with a
family history of type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3338842
PMID: 22558147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 Jun;95(6):1468-76. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.014670. Epub 2012
May 2.

Influence of dietary protein intake and glycemic index on the association between
TCF7L2 HapA and weight gain.

Fisher E(1), Meidtner K, Angquist L, Holst C, Hansen RD, Halkjær J, Masala G,
Ostergaard JN, Overvad K, Palli D, Vimaleswaran KS, Tjønneland A, van der A DL,
Wareham NJ, Sørensen TIa, Loos RJ, Boeing H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Nuthetal, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have 
been associated with type 2 diabetes and BMI.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to investigate whether TCF7L2 HapA is associated
with weight development and whether such an association is modulated by protein
intake or by the glycemic index (GI).
DESIGN: The investigation was based on prospective data from 5 cohort studies
nested within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.
Weight change was followed up for a mean (±SD) of 6.8 ± 2.5 y. TCF7L2 rs7903146
and rs10885406 were successfully genotyped in 11,069 individuals and used to
derive HapA. Multiple logistic and linear regression analysis was applied to test
for the main effect of HapA and its interaction with dietary protein or GI.
Analyses from the cohorts were combined by random-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: HapA was associated neither with baseline BMI (0.03 ± 0.07 BMI units per
allele; P = 0.6) nor with annual weight change (8.8 ± 11.7 g/y per allele; P =
0.5). However, a previously shown positive association between intake of protein,
particularly of animal origin, and subsequent weight change in this population
proved to be attenuated by TCF7L2 HapA (P-interaction = 0.01). We showed that
weight gain becomes independent of protein intake with an increasing number of
HapA alleles. Substitution of protein with either fat or carbohydrates showed the
same effects. No interaction with GI was observed.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 HapA attenuates the positive association between animal
protein intake and long-term body weight change in middle-aged Europeans but does
not interact with the GI of the diet.

PMID: 22552033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e33570. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033570. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Amerind ancestry, socioeconomic status and the genetics of type 2 diabetes in a
Colombian population.

Campbell DD(1), Parra MV, Duque C, Gallego N, Franco L, Tandon A, Hünemeier T,
Bortolini C, Villegas A, Bedoya G, McCarthy MI, Price A, Reich D, Ruiz-Linares A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

The "thrifty genotype" hypothesis proposes that the high prevalence of type 2
diabetes (T2D) in Native Americans and admixed Latin Americans has a genetic
basis and reflects an evolutionary adaptation to a past low calorie/high exercise
lifestyle. However, identification of the gene variants underpinning this
hypothesis remains elusive. Here we assessed the role of Native American
ancestry, socioeconomic status (SES) and 21 candidate gene loci in susceptibility
to T2D in a sample of 876 T2D cases and 399 controls from Antioquia (Colombia).
Although mean Native American ancestry is significantly higher in T2D cases than 
in controls (32% v 29%), this difference is confounded by the correlation of
ancestry with SES, which is a stronger predictor of disease status. Nominally
significant association (P<0.05) was observed for markers in: TCF7L2, RBMS1,
CDKAL1, ZNF239, KCNQ1 and TCF1 and a significant bias (P<0.05) towards OR>1 was
observed for markers selected from previous T2D genome-wide association studies, 
consistent with a role for Old World variants in susceptibility to T2D in Latin
Americans. No association was found to the only known Native American-specific
gene variant previously associated with T2D in a Mexican sample (rs9282541 in
ABCA1). An admixture mapping scan with 1,536 ancestry informative markers (AIMs) 
did not identify genome regions with significant deviation of ancestry in
Antioquia. Exclusion analysis indicates that this scan rules out ~95% of the
genome as harboring loci with ancestry risk ratios >1.22 (at P < 0.05).

PMCID: PMC3328483
PMID: 22529894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Sep;25(9):1783-6. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.663831. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene polymorphisms and gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Klein K(1), Haslinger P, Bancher-Todesca D, Leipold H, Knöfler M, Handisurya A,
Kautzky-Willer A, Worda C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Feto-maternal Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria. katharina.klein@meduniwien.ac.at

OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms were shown
to be associated with insulin resistance. We examined two single nucleotide
exchanges in this gene in women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and in
women with normal glucose tolerance.
METHODS: A total of 1800 unselected women were prospectively screened for GDM by 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation. Two
hundred and fifty Caucasian women of this collective, 125 patients with
pathological OGTT and 125 patients with normal glucose tolerance were randomly
selected. DNA samples were isolated and TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
(TCF7L2rs12255372 and TCF7L2rs7903146) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Women with GDM were significantly older (30.1 ± 3.4 years vs. 28.2 ± 4.8
years, p = 0.01), had a significantly higher body mass index (26.4 kg/m(2);
interquartile range: 23.33-31.19 vs. 24.6 kg/m(2); interquartile range:
21.05-27.28, p = 0.02) and were significantly more often homozygous for the T
allele of TCF7L2rs12255372 (17.2% vs. 2.6%, p = 0.002) than patients with normal 
glucose tolerance. Binary logistic regression analysis showed that the homozygous
variant of TCF7L2rs12255372 (T/T) is an independent risk factor for GDM (OR 7.7, 
95% CI: 1.71-34.60), but not the homozygous variant of TCF7L2rs7903146 (T/T).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2rs12255372 variant (T/T) is associated with increased risk of 
GDM in Caucasian women.

PMID: 22524208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Kidney Int. 2012 Jul;82(2):220-5. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.107. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

The association of genetic variants of type 2 diabetes with kidney function.

Franceschini N(1), Shara NM, Wang H, Voruganti VS, Laston S, Haack K, Lee ET,
Best LG, Maccluer JW, Cochran BJ, Dyer TD, Howard BV, Cole SA, North KE, Umans
JG.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
noraf@unc.edu

Type 2 diabetes is highly prevalent and is the major cause of progressive chronic
kidney disease in American Indians. Genome-wide association studies identified
several loci associated with diabetes but their impact on susceptibility to
diabetic complications is unknown. We studied the association of 18 type 2
diabetes genome-wide association single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR; MDRD equation) and urine
albumin-to-creatinine ratio in 6958 Strong Heart Study family and cohort
participants. Center-specific residuals of eGFR and log urine
albumin-to-creatinine ratio, obtained from linear regression models adjusted for 
age, sex, and body mass index, were regressed onto SNP dosage using variance
component models in family data and linear regression in unrelated individuals.
Estimates were then combined across centers. Four diabetic loci were associated
with eGFR and one locus with urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio. A SNP in the WFS1
gene (rs10010131) was associated with higher eGFR in younger individuals and with
increased albuminuria. SNPs in the FTO, KCNJ11, and TCF7L2 genes were associated 
with lower eGFR, but not albuminuria, and were not significant in prospective
analyses. Our findings suggest a shared genetic risk for type 2 diabetes and its 
kidney complications, and a potential role for WFS1 in early-onset diabetic
nephropathy in American Indian populations.

PMCID: PMC3664521
PMID: 22513821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;26(2):189-201. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.002.

Is genetic testing useful to predict type 2 diabetes?

Vassy JL(1), Meigs JB.

Author information: 
(1)General Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 02114, USA.
jvassy@partners.org

The early identification of individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D) enables
prevention. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have added at least 40 
genetic variants to the list of already well characterized T2D risk predictors,
including family history, obesity, and elevated fasting plasma glucose levels.
Although these variants can significantly predict T2D alone and as a part of
genotype risk scores, they do not yet offer clinical discrimination beyond that
achieved with common clinical measurements. Future progress on at least two
research fronts may improve the predictive performance of genotype information.
First, expanded GWAS efforts in non-European populations will allow targeted
sequencing of risk loci and the identification of true causal variants. Second,
studies with longer prediction time horizons may demonstrate that genotype
information performs better than clinical risk predictors over a longer period of
the life course. At present, however, genetic testing cannot be recommended for
clinical T2D risk prediction in adults.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4070012
PMID: 22498248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Diabetes. 2012 Jul;61(7):1726-33. doi: 10.2337/db11-1516. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Reduced insulin exocytosis in human pancreatic ß-cells with gene variants linked 
to type 2 diabetes.

Rosengren AH(1), Braun M, Mahdi T, Andersson SA, Travers ME, Shigeto M, Zhang E, 
Almgren P, Ladenvall C, Axelsson AS, Edlund A, Pedersen MG, Jonsson A, Ramracheya
R, Tang Y, Walker JN, Barrett A, Johnson PR, Lyssenko V, McCarthy MI, Groop L,
Salehi A, Gloyn AL, Renström E, Rorsman P, Eliasson L.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmo, Lund
University, Malmo, Sweden. anders.rosengren@med.lu.se

The majority of genetic risk variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D) affect insulin
secretion, but the mechanisms through which they influence pancreatic islet
function remain largely unknown. We functionally characterized human islets to
determine secretory, biophysical, and ultrastructural features in relation to
genetic risk profiles in diabetic and nondiabetic donors. Islets from donors with
T2D exhibited impaired insulin secretion, which was more pronounced in lean than 
obese diabetic donors. We assessed the impact of 14 disease susceptibility
variants on measures of glucose sensing, exocytosis, and structure. Variants near
TCF7L2 and ADRA2A were associated with reduced glucose-induced insulin secretion,
whereas susceptibility variants near ADRA2A, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, and TCF7L2 were
associated with reduced depolarization-evoked insulin exocytosis. KCNQ1, ADRA2A, 
KCNJ11, HHEX/IDE, and SLC2A2 variants affected granule docking. We combined our
results to create a novel genetic risk score for ß-cell dysfunction that includes
aberrant granule docking, decreased Ca(2+) sensitivity of exocytosis, and reduced
insulin release. Individuals with a high risk score displayed an impaired
response to intravenous glucose and deteriorating insulin secretion over time.
Our results underscore the importance of defects in ß-cell exocytosis in T2D and 
demonstrate the potential of cellular phenotypic characterization in the
elucidation of complex genetic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3379663
PMID: 22492527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;29(2):194-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.02.017.

[Association analysis of genetic polymorphisms of TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX
genes and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu LL(1), Lin Y, Yang ZL, Yin YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX with diabetic retinopathy (DR) and nephropathy (DN)
in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: A total of 479 subjects with DR,248 with DN and 650 without DR or DN
were recruited to assess the associations between SNPs of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs6585205, rs11196218), CDKAL1 (rs10946398,rs4712527), SLC30A8 (rs13266634,
rs3802177, rs11558471) and HHEX (rs1111875, rs7923837) and the development of DR 
and DN.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in genotypic and allele frequencies
of rs11558471 (SLC30A8) between DR and control groups (P< 0.05), the odds ratio
(OR) values of A and AA were 1.27 and 1.68. The distributions of genotype and
allele frequency for rs11196218 (TCF7L2) were significantly different between DN 
and control group (P=0.0051,OR=1.37). However, the P value after Bonferroni
correction showed no significant difference. No significant differences were
found in the distributions of rs13266634 and rs3802177 (SLC30A8), rs10946398
(CDKAL1), rs6585205, rs7903146 and rs11196218 (TCF7L2) and rs7923837 (HHEX)
between DR and control groups, and nor significant differences were found in
distributions of rs6585205 (TCF7L2), rs4712527 (CDKAL1), rs13266634, rs3802177
and rs11558471 (SLC30A8), and 7923837 (HHEX) between DN and control groups,
though for all comparison the OR values were greater than 1.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 genes may be associated with the 
development of DR and DN, respectively. Association between the polymorphisms of 
CKDAL1, TCF7L2 and HHEX genes and DR, and between the polymorphisms of SLC30A8,
HHEX and CDKAL1 genes and DN, cannot be excluded.

PMID: 22487833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Physiol Res. 2012;61(3):229-40. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

T2D risk haplotypes of the TCF7L2 gene in the Czech population sample: the
association with free fatty acids composition.

Vcelák J(1), Vejraková D, Vanková M, Lukáová P, Bradnová O, Hálková T, Beták
J, Andelová K, Kvasnicková H, Hoskovcová P, Vondra K, Vrbíková J, Bendlová B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Institute of Endocrinology, Prague,
Czech Republic. jvcelak@endo.cz

The association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene variants with the 
pathogenesis of T2D, gestational diabetes and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
was examined. The study involved 1460 individuals: 347 T2D patients (D); 261
gestational diabetics (G); 147 offspring of T2D (O); 329 women with PCOS, and 376
controls (C). The SNPs: rs7901695; rs7903146; rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
genotyped. Anthropometric and biochemical parameters, oGTT derived indices were
assessed. In addition, free fatty acids (FFAs) were evaluated in 183 non-diabetic
women. The CTT haplotype showed the strongest association with T2D with OR 1.57, 
p=0.0003. The frequency of the CTT/CTT haplotype was decreasing in following
order: D 10.6, O 9.5, G 6.1, C 5.3 and PCOS 4.9 [%]. Among CTT carriers,
significantly decreased levels of oGTT-stimulated insulin and C-peptide as well
as proportions of fasting PUFAs were observed. The carriership of CTG/TCG was
associated with gestational diabetes, OR 2.59, p=0.036. The association of TCF7L2
haplotypes with T2D and gestational diabetes but not with PCOS was confirmed.
Novel association of TCF7L2 with FFAs composition was found.

PMID: 22480428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013 Jan-Feb;22(1):54-7. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in epicardial fibrosis of failed pediatric
heart allografts with diastolic dysfunction.

Ye B(1), Ge Y, Perens G, Hong L, Xu H, Fishbein MC, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Failed pediatric heart allografts with diastolic dysfunction exhibit 
severe epicardial fibrosis. The molecular mechanism underlying this process is
poorly understood. Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays an important role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is implicated in fibrosing diseases. In
this study, we tested the hypothesis that canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is
activated in epicardial fibrosis of end-stage dysfunctional pediatric allografts.
METHODS: Fourteen explanted heart grafts of 12 patients who had undergone 14
heart transplantations were used for immunohistochemical staining of ß-catenin
and its nuclear binding partners, T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor family
transcriptional factors. Fourteen age-matched native hearts from patients who had
undergone first heart transplantation without evidence of epicardial fibrosis
were used as controls.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Epicardial fibroblasts from explanted allografts
demonstrated nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin. These cells also showed nuclear
positivity for T-cell factor 4. No T-cell factor 3 expression was present in the 
epicardium. T-cell factor 1 and lymphoid enhancer factor 1 were observed in
lymphocytes, but not in other cell types of the epicardium. These findings
suggest an association between canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
epicardial fibrosis of failed pediatric heart allografts. Should activation of
this pathway be shown to be causal to epicardial fibrosis in this setting, then
inhibition of this pathway may help to prevent this devastating process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3427707
PMID: 22475572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2012 Apr 1;2012(4):425-32. doi: 10.1101/pdb.top068510.

Microsatellite markers for linkage and association studies.

Gulcher J.

During the 1990s and the first several years of this century, microsatellites or 
short tandem repeats were the workhorse genetic markers for
hypothesis-independent studies in human genetics, facilitating genome-wide
linkage studies and allelic imbalance studies. However, the rise of higher
throughput and cost-effective single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) platforms led 
to the era of the SNP for genome scans. Nevertheless, it is important to note
that microsatellites remain highly informative and useful measures of genomic
variation for linkage and association studies. Their continued advantage in
complementing SNPs lies in their greater allelic diversity than biallelic SNPs as
well as in their population history, in which single-step expansion or
contraction of the tandem repeat on the background of ancestral SNP haplotypes
can break up common haplotypes, leading to greater haplotype diversity within the
linkage disequilibrium block of interest. In fact, microsatellites have starred
in association studies leading to widely replicated discoveries of type 2
diabetes (TCF7L2) and prostate cancer genes (the 8q21 region). At the end of the 
day, it will be important to catalog all variation, including SNPs,
microsatellites, copy number variations, and polymorphic inversions in human
genetic studies. This article describes the utilities of microsatellites and
experimental approaches in their use.

PMID: 22474656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012 Apr 1;4(4):a007989. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a007989.

Wnt signaling, stem cells, and cancer of the gastrointestinal tract.

Schepers A(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Centre Utrecht, 3584CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Wnt signaling pathway was originally uncovered as one of the prototype
developmental signaling cascades in invertebrates as well as in vertebrates. The 
first indication that Wnt signaling also plays a role in the adult animal came
from the study of the intestine of Tcf-4 (Tcf7L2) knockout mice. The
gastrointestinal epithelium continuously self-renews over the lifetime of an
organism and is, in fact, the most rapidly self-renewing tissue of the mammalian 
body. Recent studies indicate that Wnt signaling plays a central role in the
biology of gastrointestinal stem cells. Furthermore, mutational activation of the
Wnt cascade is the principle cause of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3312683
PMID: 22474007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Oct;38(4):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

European genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes in North African Arabs.

Cauchi S(1), Ezzidi I, El Achhab Y, Mtiraoui N, Chaieb L, Salah D, Nejjari C,
Labrune Y, Yengo L, Beury D, Vaxillaire M, Mahjoub T, Chikri M, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Genomics and Metabolic Diseases, Lille, France.

AIMS: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and previous approaches have 
identified many genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of European descent, but their contribution in Arab populations from 
North Africa is unknown. Our study aimed to validate these markers and to assess 
their combined effects, using large case-control studies of Moroccan and Tunisian
individuals.
METHODS: Overall, 44 polymorphisms, located at 37 validated European loci, were
first analyzed in 1055 normoglycaemic controls and 1193 T2D cases from Morocco.
Associations and trends were then assessed in 942 normoglycaemic controls and
1446 T2D cases from Tunisia. Finally, their ability to discriminate cases from
controls was evaluated.
RESULTS: Carrying a genetic variant in BCL11A, ADAMTS9, IGF2BP2, WFS1, CDKAL1,
TP53INP1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HNF1A, FTO, MC4R and GCK increased the risk of
T2D when assessing the Moroccan and Tunisian samples together. Each additional
risk allele increased the susceptibility for developing the disease by 12% (P =
9.0 × 10(-9)). Genotype information for 13 polymorphisms slightly improved the
classification of North Africans with and without T2D, as assessed by clinical
parameters, with an increase in the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve from 0.64 to 0.67 (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: In addition to TCF7L2, 12 additional loci were found to be shared
between Europeans and North African Arabs. As for Europeans, the reliability of
genetic testing based on these markers to determine the risk for T2D is low. More
genome-wide studies, including next-generation sequencing, in North African
populations are needed to identify the genetic variants responsible for ethnic
disparities in T2D susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22463974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Diabetes. 2012 May;61(5):1082-9. doi: 10.2337/db11-1732. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Diabetes-associated common genetic variation and its association with GLP-1
concentrations and response to exogenous GLP-1.

Smushkin G(1), Sathananthan M, Sathananthan A, Dalla Man C, Micheletto F,
Zinsmeister AR, Cobelli C, Vella A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The mechanisms by which common genetic variation predisposes to type 2 diabetes
remain unclear. The disease-associated variants in TCF7L2 (rs7903146) and WFS1
(rs10010131) have been shown to affect response to exogenous glucagon-like
peptide 1 (GLP-1), while variants in KCNQ1 (rs151290, rs2237892, and rs2237895)
alter endogenous GLP-1 secretion. We set out to validate these observations using
a model of GLP-1-induced insulin secretion. We studied healthy individuals using 
a hyperglycemic clamp and GLP-1 infusion. In addition, we measured active and
total GLP-1 in response to an oral challenge in nondiabetic subjects. After
genotyping the relevant single nucleotide polymorphisms, generalized linear
regression models and repeated-measures ANCOVA models incorporating potential
confounders, such as age and BMI, were used to assess the associations, if any,
of response with genotype. These variants did not alter GLP-1 concentrations in
response to oral intake. No effects on ß-cell responsiveness to hyperglycemia and
GLP-1 infusion were apparent. Diabetes-associated variation (T allele at
rs7903146) in TCF7L2 may impair the ability of hyperglycemia to suppress glucagon
(45 ± 2 vs. 47 ± 2 vs. 60 ± 5 ng/L for CC, CT, and TT, respectively, P = 0.02).
In nondiabetic subjects, diabetes-associated genetic variation does not alter
GLP-1 concentrations after an oral challenge or its effect on insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3331759
PMID: 22461567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Sep;77(3):439-45. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2012.04389.x.

Polycystic ovary syndrome is not associated with polymorphisms of the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, KCNJ11, FTO and SLC30A8 genes.

Kim JJ(1), Choi YM, Cho YM, Hong MA, Chae SJ, Hwang KR, Hwang SS, Yoon SH, Moon
SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance is a core feature of polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). Recently, genome-wide association studies have reported a number of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with reproducible associations and
susceptibilities to type 2 diabetes. We examined the potential association
between the diabetogenic genes uncovered in the genome-wide association studies
and PCOS in Korean women.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
PATIENTS: Women with or without PCOS.
MEASUREMENTS: DNA samples from 377 patients with PCOS and 386 age-matched
controls were genotyped.
RESULTS: None of the 12 SNPs in the six genes (KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, FTO
and CDKAL1) uncovered in the genome-wide association studies were associated with
PCOS. For further analysis, the patients with PCOS were divided into two or three
subgroups according to genotype, and the associations between the genotypes and
insulin resistance or insulin secretory capacity were assessed. No SNPs were
significantly associated with HOMA-IR, HOMA (ßcell) (%), or 2-h 75-g oral glucose
tolerance test insulin levels in the patients with PCOS; there were no
significant associations with other serum hormonal and metabolic markers, such as
androgen or glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the six type 2 diabetes-associated genes
identified in genome-wide association studies are not associated with PCOS.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22443257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Sep;120(8):466-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1306298.
Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Stronger association of common variants in TCF7L2 gene with nonobese type 2
diabetes in the Latvian population.

Kalnina I(1), Geldnere K, Tarasova L, Nikitina-Zake L, Peculis R, Fridmanis D,
Pirags V, Klovins J.

Author information: 
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia.

Polymorphisms in the gene coding for transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2) are
recognized as the strongest common genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D)
across multiple ethnicities. This study was conducted to evaluate an association 
between TCF7L2 variants and diabetes susceptibility in the population of Latvia. 
We genotyped 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) rs7901695, rs7903146,
rs11196205 and rs12255372 in 1<U+2009>093 controls and 1<U+2009>043 diabetic subjects.
Association with T2D was found for 3 SNPs rs7901695, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in 
the whole sample (under an additive genetic model, the adjusted odds ratios (OR) 
were 1.26, 95% CI [1.08-1.48], P=0.003; OR=1.32, 95% CI [1.12-1.55], P=0.001 and 
OR=1.35, 95% CI [1.15-1.60], P=0.0004 respectively). In addition observed effects
on T2D susceptibility for analysed SNPs were higher among subjects with BMI under
30<U+2009>kg/m². The impact of TCF7L2 variation on T2D risk in Latvian population is
compatible with that demonstrated by a range of studies conducted in various
ethnic groups.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22441719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 May;97(5):E845-51. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2565. Epub 
2012 Mar 14.

Effect of type 2 diabetes predisposing genetic variants on colorectal cancer
risk.

Sainz J(1), Rudolph A, Hoffmeister M, Frank B, Brenner H, Chang-Claude J,
Hemminki K, Försti A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The link between colorectal cancer (CRC) and type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2D) has been extensively studied. Although it is commonly accepted that T2D is 
a risk factor for CRC, the underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Given that the genetic background contributes to
both traits, it is conceivable that genetic variants associated with T2D may also
influence the risk of CRC. We selected 26 T2D-related single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) previously identified by genome-wide association studies and 
assessed their association with CRC and their interaction with known risk factors
(gender, T2D, and body mass index) of CRC. Selected SNP were genotyped in 1798
CRC cases and 1810 controls from the population-based Darmkrebs: Chancen der
Verhütung durch Screening (DACHS) study (Germany).
RESULTS: Patients carrying the TCF7L2_rs7903146_T allele had an increased risk of
CRC (P(trend) = 0.02), whereas patients harboring the IL13_rs20541_T allele had a
reduced risk (P(trend) = 0.02). A further analysis revealed gender-specific
effects: the TCF7L2_rs7903146_T allele was associated with an increased risk of
CRC in women (P(trend) = 0.003) but not in men (P(interaction) = 0.06); the
LTA_rs1041981_A allele was associated with a decreased risk for CRC in women
(P(trend) = 0.02), with an opposite effect in men (P(trend) = 0.05;
P(interaction) = 0.002); the CDKAL1_rs7754840_C allele was associated with a
decreased risk for CRC in men (P(trend) = 0.03), with no effect in women
(P(interaction) = 0.03). The risk associated with the presence of T2D was
modified both by IGF2BP2_rs4402960 and PPAR<U+03B3>_rs1801282 SNP (P(interaction) = 0.04
and 0.04, respectively). None of the findings were significant after correction
for multiple comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that T2D-related variants modify CRC risk
independently and/or in an interactive manner according to the gender and the
presence or absence of T2D.

PMID: 22419714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2012 May;15(3):258-64. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e328351f543.

Genetic origins of low birth weight.

Yaghootkar H(1), Freathy RM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Smaller size at birth is associated with a higher risk of type
2 diabetes in later life, but the mechanisms behind this association are poorly
understood. Genetic variants which influence susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
via effects on insulin secretion or action are good candidates for association
with birth weight because foetal insulin is a key foetal growth factor. This
review will focus on recent progress in identifying associations between common
genetic variants and birth weight.
RECENT FINDINGS: Foetal genetic variants at two loci (near CCNL1 and in ADCY5)
were robustly associated with birth weight via the foetal genotype in the first
genome-wide association study of birth weight. The birth weight-lowering allele
at ADCY5 also predisposes to type 2 diabetes. In addition, evidence from studies 
of other type 2 diabetes loci is accumulating for association between the foetal 
risk alleles at CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE and lower birth weight, and the maternal risk
alleles at GCK and TCF7L2 and higher birth weight.
SUMMARY: The associations with birth weight at ADCY5, CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE support
the foetal insulin hypothesis, which proposed that type 2 diabetes and lower
birth weight could be two phenotypes of the same genotype. The associations at
GCK and TCF7L2 illustrate that maternal genes are also important determinants of 
birth weight.

PMID: 22406741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Jun;23(6):550-6. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2011.12.012. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Functional analysis of TCF7L2 genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes.

Pang DX(1), Smith AJ, Humphries SE.

Author information: 
(1)BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, University
College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Common non-coding variations within the TCF7L2 locus have a 
strong influence on type 2 diabetes (T2D) susceptibility through uncharacterised 
mechanisms. An islet-specific functional polymorphism has been identified,
although this does not explain the association between genotype and gene
expression in other cell types. This study sought to identify these other
functional TCF7L2 variants.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Alternative splicing and gene expression from TCF7L2 was
examined from peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 100 healthy Caucasians
using two T2D-associated SNPs, rs7903146 and rs12255372. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays and luciferase reporter assays were performed with these SNPs and
those in strong LD to determine potential SNP functionality. Individuals
homozygous for rs7903146 and rs12255372 T2D risk alleles (TT/TT) expressed
2.6-fold greater levels of TCF7L2 mRNA compared to individuals homozygous for the
non-risk alleles (CC/GG, p = 0.006), although differentially spliced TCF7L2
transcripts did not differ by T2D risk-associated genotype. From SNPs identified 
to be in strong LD with the T2D-associated SNPs, rs7903146 and rs12255372, five
(rs4132670, rs4506565, rs7903146, rs7901695, rs17747324) demonstrated
allele-specific binding in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). In
luciferase reporter assays, rs4132670 exhibited 1.3-fold higher levels of
enhancer activity in the Huh7 cell line (p = 3.8 × 10(-5)) and 2-fold higher
levels in a WiDr colon carcinoma cell line (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rs4132670, located in a region of
chromatin accessibility, is a non-tissue-specific candidate functional SNP that
has the potential to play a role in TCF7L2 gene expression and T2D risk.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3778915
PMID: 22402060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002523. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Association of a functional variant in the Wnt co-receptor LRP6 with early onset 
ileal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Teltschik Z, Beisner J, Schaeffeler E, Wang G, Kübler I,
Gersemann M, Cooney R, Jewell D, Reinisch W, Vermeire S, Rutgeerts P, Schwab M,
Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete-Fischer-Bosch Institute for Clinical Pharmacology and University
of Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany.

Ileal Crohn's Disease (CD), a chronic small intestinal inflammatory disorder, is 
characterized by reduced levels of the antimicrobial peptides DEFA5 (HD-5) and
DEFA6 (HD-6). Both of these a-defensins are exclusively produced in Paneth cells 
(PCs) at small intestinal crypt bases. Different ileal CD-associated genes
including NOD2, ATG16L1, and recently the ß-catenin-dependant Wnt transcription
factor TCF7L2 have been linked to impaired PC antimicrobial function. The Wnt
pathway influences gut mucosal homeostasis and PC maturation, besides directly
controlling HD-5/6 gene expression. The herein reported candidate gene study
focuses on another crucial Wnt factor, the co-receptor low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6). We analysed exonic single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in a large cohort (Oxford: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,893) and prospectively
tested 2 additional European sample sets (Leuven: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>688, Vienna: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,628). We
revealed an association of a non-synonymous SNP (rs2302685; Ile1062Val) with
early onset ileal CD (OR 1.8; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00034; for homozygous carriers: OR 4.1;
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00004) and additionally with penetrating ileal CD behaviour (OR 1.3;
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00917). In contrast, it was not linked to adult onset ileal CD, colonic CD,
or ulcerative colitis. Since the rare variant is known to impair LRP6 activity,
we investigated its role in patient mucosa. Overall, LRP6 mRNA was diminished in 
patients independently from the genotype. Analysing the mRNA levels of PC product
in biopsies from genotyped individuals (15 controls, 32 ileal, and 12 exclusively
colonic CD), we found particularly low defensin levels in ileal CD patients who
were carrying the variant. In addition, we confirmed a direct relationship
between LRP6 activity and the transcriptional expression of HD-5 using transient 
transfection. Taken together, we identified LRP6 as a new candidate gene in ileal
CD. Impairments in Wnt signalling and Paneth cell biology seem to represent
pathophysiological hallmarks in small intestinal inflammation and should
therefore be considered as interesting targets for new therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3285585
PMID: 22393312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(10):1918-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06288-11. Epub 2012 Mar 
5.

A critical role for the Wnt effector Tcf4 in adult intestinal homeostatic
self-renewal.

van Es JH(1), Haegebarth A, Kujala P, Itzkovitz S, Koo BK, Boj SF, Korving J, van
den Born M, van Oudenaarden A, Robine S, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research &
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Throughout life, intestinal Lgr5+ stem cells give rise to proliferating transient
amplifying cells in crypts, which subsequently differentiate into one of the five
main cell types and migrate along the crypt-villus axis. These dynamic processes 
are coordinated by a relatively small number of evolutionarily conserved
signaling pathways, which includes the Wnt signaling pathway. The DNA-binding
proteins of the T-cell factor family, Tcf1/Tcf7, Lef, Tcf3/Tcf7l1, and
Tcf4/Tcf7l2, constitute the downstream effectors of the Wnt signaling pathway.
While Tcf4 is the major member active during embryogenesis, the role of these Wnt
effectors in the homeostasis of the adult mouse intestinal epithelium is
unresolved. Using Tcf1-/-, Tcf3(flox), and novel Tcf4(flox) mice, we demonstrate 
an essential role for Tcf4 during homeostasis of the adult mouse intestine.

PMCID: PMC3347420
PMID: 22393260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;57(4):265-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.16. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Impact of common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants on future type 2 diabetes in 
the non-diabetic population in Korea.

Park SE(1), Lee WY, Oh KW, Baek KH, Yoon KH, Kang MI, Son HY, Lee WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We prospectively examined the association between type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
progression and common T2DM-risk gene variants in 870 non-diabetic participants
in a Chungju Metabolic Disease Cohort Study in Korea. We genotyped the following 
six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): KCNQ1 (potassium voltage-gated
channel, KQT-like subfamily member 1) rs2237892, CDKAL1 (regulatory
subunit-associated protein 1-like 1) rs7554840, CDKN2A/B (cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A/B) rs1081161, SCL30A8 (solute carrier family 30 member 8 gene)
rs13266634, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2) rs7903146, and PPARG
(peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma) rs1801282. Anthropometric data
and metabolic parameters were obtained at baseline and year 4. Pancreatic ß cell 
function was assessed by the homeostasis model assessment index of ß cells
(HOMA-ß). After 4 years, 137 subjects developed T2DM (15.7%). A significant
association was found in the variant of KCNQ1 rs2237892, whereas the SNPs of
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, SCL30A8, TCF7L2 and PPARG were not associated. The C-allele
carriers of KCNQ1 conferred a significantly increased risk for T2DM compared with
the T/T genotype, independently of clinical risk factors (odds ratio=2.61, 95%
confidence intervals=1.02-6.69, P=0.04). Although no differences were observed at
baseline among the KCNQ1 variants, HOMA-ß levels by year 4 were significantly
lower in the C-allele carriers after controlling for metabolic parameters. The
genetic variations in KCNQ1 are associated with future development of T2DM in
Koreans, which might be mediated by differences in insulin secretory function.

PMID: 22377714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Hum Genet. 2012 May;57(5):305-10. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.21. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Association between type 2 diabetes genetic susceptibility loci and visceral and 
subcutaneous fat area as determined by computed tomography.

Hotta K(1), Kitamoto A, Kitamoto T, Mizusawa S, Teranishi H, So R, Matsuo T,
Nakata Y, Hyogo H, Ochi H, Nakamura T, Kamohara S, Miyatake N, Kotani K, Komatsu 
R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda M, Nakajima A, Funahashi T, Miyazaki S,
Tokunaga K, Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Chayama K, Hamaguchi K, Yamada K, Hanafusa T,
Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Sakata T, Tanaka K, Matsuzawa Y, Nakao K, Sekine A.

Author information: 
(1)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine,Yoshida-Konoecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. kikukoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Visceral fat accumulation has an important role in the development of several
metabolic disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension. New 
genetic loci that contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes have been
identified by genome-wide association studies. To examine the association of type
2 diabetes susceptibility loci and visceral fat accumulation, we genotyped 1279
Japanese subjects (556 men and 723 women), who underwent computed tomography for 
measurements of visceral fat area (VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) for the
following single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): NOTCH2 rs10923931, THADA
rs7578597, PPARG rs1801282, ADAMTS9 rs4607103, IGF2BP2 rs1470579, VEGFA
rs9472138, JAZF1 rs864745, CDKN2A/CDKN2B rs564398 and rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875 
and rs5015480, TCF7L2 rs7901695, KCNQ1 rs2237892, KCNJ11 rs5215 and rs5219, EXT2 
rs1113132, rs11037909, and rs3740878, MTNR1B rs10830963, DCD rs1153188,
TSPAN8/LGR5 rs7961581, and FTO rs8050136 and rs9939609. None of the above SNPs
were significantly associated with VFA. The FTO rs8050136 and rs9939609 risk
alleles exhibited significant associations with body mass index (BMI; P=0.00088
and P=0.0010, respectively) and SFA (P=0.00013 and P=0.00017, respectively). No
other SNPs were significantly associated with BMI or SFA. Our results suggest
that two SNPs in the FTO gene are associated with subcutaneous fat accumulation. 
The contributions of other SNPs are inconclusive because of a limitation of the
sample power.

PMID: 22377712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Atherosclerosis. 2012 May;222(1):138-47. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.01.039. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Genetic determinants of the ankle-brachial index: a meta-analysis of a
cardiovascular candidate gene 50K SNP panel in the candidate gene association
resource (CARe) consortium.

Wassel CL(1), Lamina C, Nambi V, Coassin S, Mukamal KJ, Ganesh SK, Jacobs DR Jr, 
Franceschini N, Papanicolaou GJ, Gibson Q, Yanek LR, van der Harst P, Ferguson
JF, Crawford DC, Waite LL, Allison MA, Criqui MH, McDermott MM, Mehra R, Cupples 
LA, Hwang SJ, Redline S, Kaplan RC, Heiss G, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, Taylor HA, 
Eraso LH, Haun M, Li M, Meisinger C, O'Connell JR, Shuldiner AR, Tybjærg-Hansen
A, Frikke-Schmidt R, Kollerits B, Rantner B, Dieplinger B, Stadler M, Mueller T, 
Haltmayer M, Klein-Weigel P, Summerer M, Wichmann HE, Asselbergs FW, Navis G,
Mateo Leach I, Brown-Gentry K, Goodloe R, Assimes TL, Becker DM, Cooke JP, Absher
DM, Olin JW, Mitchell BD, Reilly MP, Mohler ER 3rd, North KE, Reiner AP,
Kronenberg F, Murabito JM.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Department of Family and Preventive
Medicine, Division of Preventive Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Candidate gene association studies for peripheral artery disease
(PAD), including subclinical disease assessed with the ankle-brachial index
(ABI), have been limited by the modest number of genes examined. We conducted a
two stage meta-analysis of ~50,000 SNPs across ~2100 candidate genes to identify 
genetic variants for ABI.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied subjects of European ancestry from 8 studies
(n=21,547, 55% women, mean age 44-73 years) and African American ancestry from 5 
studies (n=7267, 60% women, mean age 41-73 years) involved in the candidate gene 
association resource (CARe) consortium. In each ethnic group, additive genetic
models were used (with each additional copy of the minor allele corresponding to 
the given beta) to test each SNP for association with continuous ABI (excluding
ABI>1.40) and PAD (defined as ABI<0.90) using linear or logistic regression with 
adjustment for known PAD risk factors and population stratification. We then
conducted a fixed-effects inverse-variance weighted meta-analyses considering a
p<2×10(-6) to denote statistical significance.
RESULTS: In the European ancestry discovery meta-analyses, rs2171209 in SYTL3
(ß=-0.007, p=6.02×10(-7)) and rs290481 in TCF7L2 (ß=-0.008, p=7.01×10(-7)) were
significantly associated with ABI. None of the SNP associations for PAD were
significant, though a SNP in CYP2B6 (p=4.99×10(-5)) was among the strongest
associations. These 3 genes are linked to key PAD risk factors (lipoprotein(a),
type 2 diabetes, and smoking behavior, respectively). We sought replication in 6 
population-based and 3 clinical samples (n=15,440) for rs290481 and rs2171209.
However, in the replication stage (rs2171209, p=0.75; rs290481, p=0.19) and in
the combined discovery and replication analysis the SNP-ABI associations were no 
longer significant (rs2171209, p=1.14×10(-3); rs290481, p=8.88×10(-5)). In
African Americans, none of the SNP associations for ABI or PAD achieved an
experiment-wide level of significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic determinants of ABI and PAD remain elusive. Follow-up of
these preliminary findings may uncover important biology given the known
gene-risk factor associations. New and more powerful approaches to PAD gene
discovery are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3596171
PMID: 22361517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Diabetes Care. 2012 Mar;35(3):e24. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2012.

Dietary fiber intake modulates the association between variants in TCF7L2 and
weight loss during a lifestyle intervention.

Heni M, Herzberg-Schäfer S, Machicao F, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

PMCID: PMC3322689
PMID: 22355027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar 9;90(3):410-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.022. Epub
2012 Feb 9.

Large-scale gene-centric meta-analysis across 39 studies identifies type 2
diabetes loci.

Saxena R, Elbers CC, Guo Y, Peter I, Gaunt TR, Mega JL, Lanktree MB, Tare A,
Castillo BA, Li YR, Johnson T, Bruinenberg M, Gilbert-Diamond D, Rajagopalan R,
Voight BF, Balasubramanyam A, Barnard J, Bauer F, Baumert J, Bhangale T, Böhm BO,
Braund PS, Burton PR, Chandrupatla HR, Clarke R, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Crook ED,
Davey-Smith G, Day IN, de Boer A, de Groot MC, Drenos F, Ferguson J, Fox CS,
Furlong CE, Gibson Q, Gieger C, Gilhuijs-Pederson LA, Glessner JT, Goel A, Gong
Y, Grant SF, Grobbee DE, Hastie C, Humphries SE, Kim CE, Kivimaki M, Kleber M,
Meisinger C, Kumari M, Langaee TY, Lawlor DA, Li M, Lobmeyer MT, Maitland-van der
Zee AH, Meijs MF, Molony CM, Morrow DA, Murugesan G, Musani SK, Nelson CP,
Newhouse SJ, O'Connell JR, Padmanabhan S, Palmen J, Patel SR, Pepine CJ,
Pettinger M, Price TS, Rafelt S, Ranchalis J, Rasheed A, Rosenthal E, Ruczinski
I, Shah S, Shen H, Silbernagel G, Smith EN, Spijkerman AW, Stanton A, Steffes MW,
Thorand B, Trip M, van der Harst P, van der A DL, van Iperen EP, van Setten J,
van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Verweij N, Wolffenbuttel BH, Young T, Zafarmand MH,
Zmuda JM; Look AHEAD Research Group; DIAGRAM consortium, Boehnke M, Altshuler D, 
McCarthy M, Kao WH, Pankow JS, Cappola TP, Sever P, Poulter N, Caulfield M,
Dominiczak A, Shields DC, Bhatt DL, Zhang L, Curtis SP, Danesh J, Casas JP, van
der Schouw YT, Onland-Moret NC, Doevendans PA, Dorn GW 2nd, Farrall M, FitzGerald
GA, Hamsten A, Hegele R, Hingorani AD, Hofker MH, Huggins GS, Illig T, Jarvik GP,
Johnson JA, Klungel OH, Knowler WC, Koenig W, März W, Meigs JB, Melander O,
Munroe PB, Mitchell BD, Bielinski SJ, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Rich SS, Rotter JI,
Saleheen D, Samani NJ, Schadt EE, Shuldiner AR, Silverstein R, Kottke-Marchant K,
Talmud PJ, Watkins H, Asselbergs FW, de Bakker PI, McCaffery J, Wijmenga C,
Sabatine MS, Wilson JG, Reiner A, Bowden DW, Hakonarson H, Siscovick DS, Keating 
BJ.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr 6;90(4):753. Sever, Peter [added]; Poulter, Neil [added]
Bhatt, Deepak [corrected to Bhatt, Deepak L]; Asselbergs, Folkert [corrected to
Asselbergs, Folkert W].

To identify genetic factors contributing to type 2 diabetes (T2D), we performed
large-scale meta-analyses by using a custom ~50,000 SNP genotyping array (the
ITMAT-Broad-CARe array) with ~2000 candidate genes in 39 multiethnic
population-based studies, case-control studies, and clinical trials totaling
17,418 cases and 70,298 controls. First, meta-analysis of 25 studies comprising
14,073 cases and 57,489 controls of European descent confirmed eight established 
T2D loci at genome-wide significance. In silico follow-up analysis of putative
association signals found in independent genome-wide association studies
(including 8,130 cases and 38,987 controls) performed by the DIAGRAM consortium
identified a T2D locus at genome-wide significance (GATAD2A/CILP2/PBX4; p = 5.7 ×
10(-9)) and two loci exceeding study-wide significance (SREBF1, and TH/INS; p <
2.4 × 10(-6)). Second, meta-analyses of 1,986 cases and 7,695 controls from eight
African-American studies identified study-wide-significant (p = 2.4 × 10(-7))
variants in HMGA2 and replicated variants in TCF7L2 (p = 5.1 × 10(-15)). Third,
conditional analysis revealed multiple known and novel independent signals within
five T2D-associated genes in samples of European ancestry and within HMGA2 in
African-American samples. Fourth, a multiethnic meta-analysis of all 39 studies
identified T2D-associated variants in BCL2 (p = 2.1 × 10(-8)). Finally, a
composite genetic score of SNPs from new and established T2D signals was
significantly associated with increased risk of diabetes in African-American,
Hispanic, and Asian populations. In summary, large-scale meta-analysis involving 
a dense gene-centric approach has uncovered additional loci and variants that
contribute to T2D risk and suggests substantial overlap of T2D association
signals across multiple ethnic groups.

Copyright Â© 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3309185
PMID: 22325160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10703-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.323311. Epub
2012 Feb 8.

MUC1-C oncoprotein induces TCF7L2 transcription factor activation and promotes
cyclin D1 expression in human breast cancer cells.

Rajabi H(1), Ahmad R, Jin C, Kosugi M, Alam M, Joshi MD, Kufe D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

MUC1 is a heterodimeric glycoprotein that is overexpressed in breast cancers. The
present studies demonstrate that the oncogenic MUC1 C-terminal subunit (MUC1-C)
associates with the TCF7L2 transcription factor. The MUC1-C cytoplasmic domain
(MUC1-CD) binds directly to the TCF7L2 C-terminal region. MUC1-C blocks the
interaction between TCF7L2 and the C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP), a
suppressor of TCF7L2-mediated transcription. TCF7L2 and MUC1-C form a complex on 
the cyclin D1 gene promoter and MUC1-C promotes TCF7L2-mediated transcription by 
the recruitment of ß-catenin and p300. Silencing MUC1-C in human breast cancer
cells down-regulated activation of the cyclin D1 promoter and decreased cyclin D1
expression. In addition, a MUC1-C inhibitor blocked the interaction with TCF7L2
and suppressed cyclin D1 levels. These findings indicate that the MUC1-C
oncoprotein contributes to TCF7L2 activation and thereby promotes cyclin D1
expression in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3322974
PMID: 22318732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Aug;20(8):1675-82. doi: 10.1038/oby.2012.11. Epub
2012 Feb 6.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci with one-year weight loss in
the look AHEAD clinical trial.

Peter I(1), McCaffery JM, Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Hakonarson H, Reis S, Wagenknecht
LE, Kopin AS, Huggins GS; Genetics Subgroup of the Look AHEAD Study.

Collaborators: Brancati FL, Honas J, Cheskin L, Clark JM, Stewart K, Rubin R,
Charleston J, Horak K, Bray GA, Rau K, Strate A, Armand B, Greenway FL, Ryan DH, 
Williamson D, Bachand A, Begnaud M, Berhard B, Caderette E, Cerniauskas B, Creel 
D, Crow D, Guay H, Kora N, LaFleur K, Landry K, Lingle M, Perault J, Shipp M,
Smith M, Tucker E, Lewis CE, Thomas S, Safford M, DiLillo V, Bragg C, Dobelstein 
A, Gilbert S, Glasser S, Hannum S, Hubbell A, Jones J, Lee D, Luketic R, Marshall
K, Oden L, Raines J, Roche C, Truman J, Webb N, Wrenn A, Nathan DM, Turgeon H,
Schumann K, Cagliero E, Delahanty L, Hayward K, Anderson E, Bissett L, Ginsburg
R, Goldman V, Harlan V, McKitrick C, McNamara A, Michel T, Poulos A, Steiner B,
Tosch J, Horton ES, Jackson SD, Hamdy O, Caballero A, Bain S, Bovaird E,
Goebel-Fabbri A, Lambert L, Ledbury S, Malloy M, Ovalle K, Blackburn G, Mantzoros
C, Day K, McNamara A, Hill JO, Miller M, Phillipp J, Schwartz R, Dorsten BV,
Regensteiner J, Benchekroun S, Coelho L, Cohrs P, Daeninck E, Fields A, Green S, 
Hamilton A, Hamilton J, Leshchinskiy E, McDermott M, Munkwitz L, Rome L, Wallace 
K, Worley T, Foreyt JP, Reeves RS, Pownall H, Balasubramanyam A, Jones P,
Burrington M, Chen CH, Clark A, Gee M, Griggs S, Hamilton M, Holley V, Joseph J, 
Pace P, Palencia J, Satterwhite O, Schmidt J, Volding D, White C, Johnson KC,
Gresham C, Connelly S, Brewer A, Coday M, Jones L, Lichtermann L, Vosburg S,
Taylor J, Kitabchi AE, Lambeth H, Clark D, Crisler A, Cunningham G, Green D,
Force D, Kores R, Rosenthal R, Smith E, Sun M, Soberman J, Jeffery RW, Thorson C,
Bantle JP, Redmon J, Crow RS, Crow S, Raatz SK, Brelje K, Campbell C, Carls J,
Carmean-Mihm T, Finch E, Fox A, Hoelscher E, James LD, Maddy VA, Ockenden T, Rice
BI, Skarphol T, Tucker AD, Voeller MS, Walcheck C, Pi-Sunyer X, Patricio J,
Heshka S, Pal C, Allen L, Hirsch D, Holowaty MA, Wadden TA, Maschak- Carey BJ,
Schwartz S, Foster GD, Berkowitz RI, Glick H, Kumanyika SK, Brock J, Chomentowski
H, Clark V, Crerand C, Davenport R, Diamond A, Fabricatore A, Hesson L,
Krauthamer-Ewing S, Kuehnel R, Lipschutz P, Mullen M, Womble L, Iqbal N, Kelley
DE, Wesche-Thobaben J, Kuller L, Kriska A, Bonk J, Danchenko R, Edmundowicz D,
Klem ML, Yamamoto ME, Elnyczky B, Grove GA, Harper P, Krulia J, Mancino J,
Mathews A, Murray TY, Ritchea JR, Rush J, Vujevich K, Wolf D, Wing RR, Bright R, 
Pera V, Jakicic J, Tate D, Gorin A, Gallagher K, Bach A, Bancroft B, Bertorelli
A, Carey R, Charron T, Chenot H, Chula-Maguire K, Coward P, Cronkite L, Currin J,
Daly M, Egan C, Ferguson E, Foss L, Gauvin J, Kieffer D, Lessard L, Maier D,
Massaro JP, Monk T, Nicholson R, Patterson E, Phelan S, Raynor H, Raynor D,
Robinson N, Robles D, Tavares J, Haffner SM, Montez MG, Lorenzo C, Kahn S,
Montgomery B, Knopp R, Lipkin E, Maciejewski ML, Trence D, Barrett T, Bartell J, 
Greenberg D, Murillo A, Richmond BA, Thomas A, Espeland MA, Bahnson JL,
Wagenknecht L, Reboussin D, Rejeski W, Bertoni A, Lang W, Miller G, Lefkowitz D, 
Reynolds PS, Ribisl P, Vitolins M, Booth M, Dotson KM, Hodges A, Williams CC,
Barnes JM, Feeney PA, Griffin J, Harvin L, Herman W, Hogan P, Jaramillo S, King
M, Lane K, Neiberg R, Ruggiero A, Speas C, Walkup MP, Wall K, Ward M, West DS,
Windham T, Marcovina SM, Strylewicz G.

The importance of lifestyle intervention for the prevention and treatment of type
2 diabetes (T2D) has been underscored by the limited benefit of pharmacologic
therapies. We sought to determine whether genetic variants that contribute to T2D
risk modify the response of weight and waist circumference to an intensive
lifestyle intervention (ILI) in patients with obesity and T2D. Look AHEAD (Action
for Health in Diabetes) is a randomized clinical trial comparing an ILI with a
control condition on the risk of cardiovascular disease in overweight adults with
T2D. We analyzed 28 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at/near 17
T2D-susceptibility genes in 3,903 consented participants. We genetically
characterized the cohort by assessing whether T2D-susceptibility loci were
overrepresented compared with a nondiabetic community-based cohort (N = 1,016).
We evaluated the association of individual variants and a composite genetic risk 
score (GRS) with anthropometric traits at baseline and after 1-year of
intervention. Look AHEAD subjects carried more T2D-susceptibility alleles than
the control population. At baseline, TCF7L2 risk alleles and the highest GRS were
associated with lower BMI and waist circumference. Nominally significant
genotype-by-intervention interactions were detected for 1-year change in waist
circumference with JAZF1, MTNR1B, and IRS1, and BMI with JAZF1. Highest GRS was
associated with a greater reduction in waist circumference at year 1, although
the variance in change attributable to the GRS was small. This study shows that
the genetic burden associated with T2D risk does not undermine the effect of
lifestyle intervention and suggests the existence of additional genomic regions, 
distinct from the T2D-susceptibility loci, which may enhance or mitigate weight
loss.

PMCID: PMC3406235
PMID: 22307069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Jun;20(6):1273-8. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.400. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Association of fibrillin-3 and transcription factor-7-like 2 gene variants with
metabolic phenotypes in PCOS.

Yalamanchi SK(1), Sam S, Cardenas MO, Holaday LW, Urbanek M, Dunaif A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex genetic disease characterized by
heritable reproductive and metabolic abnormalities. Genetic variants associated
with the reproductive phenotype have been mapped to the fibrillin-3 (FBN3) gene
and to a novel transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus (rs11196236 G). The
association of these genetic variants with metabolic phenotypes was investigated 
in 31 PCOS and 18 control women of European ancestry. The insulinogenic index
during an oral glucose tolerance test (<U+0394>I30/<U+0394>G30) and insulin secretion rates at 
the maximal dose during a graded-glucose infusion (ISRmax) were used as indexes
of insulin secretion. Endogenous glucose production (EGP) and insulin sensitivity
(M/I) were determined during a euglycemic clamp. The disposition index (DI) was
calculated using M/I and <U+0394>I30/<U+0394>G30 or ISRmax. Compared with noncarriers (n = 10) 
and control (n = 10), M/I was decreased (P = 1.1 × 10(-5)) in heterozygous and
homozygous PCOS carriers (n = 14) of rs11196236 G and this variant predicted M/I 
(partial r(2) = 0.34, P = 0.005) in a regression analysis. Postabsorptive EGP
tended to be higher (P = 0.040) in heterozygous and homozygous PCOS carriers of
the FBN3-associated allele (n = 12), allele 8 of D19S884 (FBN3(+)), compared to
PCOS noncarriers (n = 19). PCOS carriers of the rs12255372 T (TCF7L2 Caucasian
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) locus) had no significant associated metabolic
phenotypes. We conclude that rs11196236 G TCF7L2 variant is associated with
peripheral insulin resistance in PCOS but this effect is not seen in control
women. The FBN3 risk allele may be associated with changes in basal glucose
homeostasis in PCOS. These findings require replication in additional PCOS
cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3346885
PMID: 22301903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;28(8):594-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.650755. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Common variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with
reduced insulin secretion in women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Liu B(1), Lv HM, Li LN, Xia L, Zhang HX, Zhang YJ, Lei L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China.

Common variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene were
identified as one of the few genetic polymorphisms with powerful effects on the
risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Given the genetic overlap between polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS) and T2D, the present study was undertaken to investigate whether 
the TCF7L2 variants are also associated with PCOS. We analyzed single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) rs11196218 and rs290487 of the TCF7L2 gene, which showed
robust associations with T2D in Chinese population, in 430 PCOS patients and 360 
control subjects by pyrosequencing, and also assessed the effect of genotype on
clinical and biochemical traits in the PCOS group. We found no evidence for
association between SNP rs11196218 and PCOS. The SNP rs290487 showed marginal
differences in genotype frequencies between the PCOS and control group, with the 
minor C allele being the at-risk allele for PCOS. In PCOS women, the C allele
carriers of rs290487 had higher levels of 2h blood glucose but lower
insulinogenic index than noncarriers, suggesting impaired insulin secretion. Our 
data suggested that the TCF7L2 variants may confer an increased risk for early
impairment of glucose homeostasis in PCOS.

PMID: 22296403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030847. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

COUP-TFII controls mouse pancreatic ß-cell mass through GLP-1-ß-catenin signaling
pathways.

Boutant M(1), Ramos OH, Tourrel-Cuzin C, Movassat J, Ilias A, Vallois D,
Planchais J, Pégorier JP, Schuit F, Petit PX, Bossard P, Maedler K, Grapin-Botton
A, Vasseur-Cognet M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute national del santé et de la recherché medicale, Department of
Endocrinology, Metabolism and Cancer, Cochin Institute, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The control of the functional pancreatic ß-cell mass serves the key
homeostatic function of releasing the right amount of insulin to keep blood sugar
in the normal range. It is not fully understood though how ß-cell mass is
determined.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Conditional chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor II (COUP-TFII)-deficient mice were generated and crossed
with mice expressing Cre under the control of pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(pdx1) gene promoter. Ablation of COUP-TFII in pancreas resulted in glucose
intolerance. Beta-cell number was reduced at 1 day and 3 weeks postnatal.
Together with a reduced number of insulin-containing cells in the ductal
epithelium and normal ß-cell proliferation and apoptosis, this suggests decreased
ß-cell differentiation in the neonatal period. By testing islets isolated from
these mice and cultured ß-cells with loss and gain of COUP-TFII function, we
found that COUP-TFII induces the expression of the ß-catenin gene and its target 
genes such as cyclin D1 and axin 2. Moreover, induction of these genes by
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) via ß-catenin was impaired in absence of
COUP-TFII. The expression of two other target genes of GLP-1 signaling, GLP-1R
and PDX-1 was significantly lower in mutant islets compared to control islets,
possibly contributing to reduced ß-cell mass. Finally, we demonstrated that
COUP-TFII expression was activated by the Wnt signaling-associated transcription 
factor TCF7L2 (T-cell factor 7-like 2) in human islets and rat ß-cells providing 
a feedback loop.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings show that COUP-TFII is a novel component
of the GLP-1 signaling cascade that increases ß-cell number during the neonatal
period. COUP-TFII is required for GLP-1 activation of the ß-catenin-dependent
pathway and its expression is under the control of TCF7L2.

PMCID: PMC3265526
PMID: 22292058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Diabetes Care. 2012 Feb;35(2):287-92. doi: 10.2337/dc11-0957.

Genetic risk assessment of type 2 diabetes-associated polymorphisms in African
Americans.

Cooke JN(1), Ng MC, Palmer ND, An SS, Hester JM, Freedman BI, Langefeld CD,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine and Translational Science, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2012 Feb;35(2):193-5.

OBJECTIVE: Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2
diabetes (T2D) susceptibility have been identified in predominantly
European-derived populations. These SNPs have not been extensively investigated
for individual and cumulative effects on T2D risk in African Americans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Seventeen index T2D risk variants were genotyped in 
2,652 African American case subjects with T2D and 1,393 nondiabetic control
subjects. Individual SNPs and cumulative risk allele loads were assessed for
association with risk for T2D. Cumulative risk was assessed by counting risk
alleles and evaluating the difference in cumulative risk scores between case
subjects and control subjects. A second analysis weighted risk scores (ln [OR])
based on previously reported European-derived effect sizes.
RESULTS: Frequencies of risk alleles ranged from 8.6 to 99.9%. Eleven SNPs had
ORs >1, and 5 from ADAMTS9, WFS1, CDKAL1, JAZF1, and TCF7L2 trended or had
nominally significant evidence of T2D association (P < 0.05). Individuals carried
between 13 and 29 risk alleles. Association was observed between T2D and increase
in risk allele load (unweighted OR 1.04 [95% CI 1.01-1.08], P = 0.010; weighted
1.06 [1.03-1.10], P = 8.10 × 10(-5)). When TCF7L2 SNP rs7903146 was included as a
covariate, the risk score was no longer associated with T2D in either model
(unweighted 1.02 [0.98-1.05], P = 0.33; weighted 1.02 [0.98-1.06], P = 0.40).
CONCLUSIONS: The trend of increase in risk for T2D with increasing risk allele
load is similar to observations in European-derived populations; however, these
analyses indicate that T2D genetic risk is primarily mediated through the effect 
of TCF7L2 in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC3263882
PMID: 22275441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Recenti Prog Med. 2011 Dec;102(12):468-75. doi: 10.1701/998.10858.

[Perspectives on the contribution of genetics to the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Italian]

Brunetti A(1), Chiefari E, Foti D.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di endocrilogia, Dipartmento di Scienze della Salute, Università
Magna Grsscia, Catanzaro. brunetti@unicz.it

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common metabolic-endocrine disorder often
associated with overweight or obesity. It is a complex disease determined by both
predisposing genetic factors and non-genetic environmental factors and
interactions between them, leading to impaired beta-cell insulin secretion and
peripheral insulin resistance. Insulin resistance is a prominent feature of most 
patients with type 2 DM and obesity, resulting in a reduced response of target
tissues (muscle, liver and fat) to both endogenous and exogenous insulin. There
is considerable evidence that heredity is a major contributor to the insulin
resistance of type 2 DM. Initially, among those destined to develop diabetes, the
beta cells of the pancreas compensate with increased insulin secretion to
maintain normal glucose tolerance. Type 2 DM develops when beta cells fail to
compensate. Despite of the numerous studies in the recent years, the actual
genetic causes of insulin resistance and type 2 DM have not yet been clearly
elucidated. Through linkage and "genome-wide" studies, genes were identified most
frequently associated with type 2 DM, such as TCF7L2, considered, until recently,
the most important gene among those predisposing to type 2 DM. On the other hand,
numerous candidate genes have been analyzed for genetic variants that increase
susceptibility to type 2 DM. Several variants have been identified in many of
these genes, including the insulin receptor gene, INSR, and other genes involved 
in adipogenesis and beta-cell insulin secretion. In this context, recently our
group has identified a new gene involved in the pathogenesis of insulin
resistance and type 2 DM: the HMGA1 gene. Functional genetic variants of the
HMGA1 gene, capable of reducing the intracellular levels of INSR in insulin
target tissues, were found in 10% of patients with type 2 DM in three distinct
populations: Italian, North American and French.

PMID: 22258190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029228. Epub 2012 Jan 11.

Association of the type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility gene, TCF7L2, with
schizophrenia in an Arab-Israeli family sample.

Alkelai A(1), Greenbaum L, Lupoli S, Kohn Y, Sarner-Kanyas K, Ben-Asher E, Lancet
D, Macciardi F, Lerer B.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Dept. of Psychiatry, Hadassah - Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Many reports in different populations have demonstrated linkage of the 10q24-q26 
region to schizophrenia, thus encouraging further analysis of this locus for
detection of specific schizophrenia genes. Our group previously reported linkage 
of the 10q24-q26 region to schizophrenia in a unique, homogeneous sample of
Arab-Israeli families with multiple schizophrenia-affected individuals, under a
dominant model of inheritance. To further explore this candidate region and
identify specific susceptibility variants within it, we performed re-analysis of 
the 10q24-26 genotype data, taken from our previous genome-wide association study
(GWAS) (Alkelai et al, 2011). We analyzed 2089 SNPs in an extended sample of 57
Arab Israeli families (189 genotyped individuals), under the dominant model of
inheritance, which best fits this locus according to previously performed MOD
score analysis. We found significant association with schizophrenia of the TCF7L2
gene intronic SNP, rs12573128, (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.01×10<U+207B>6) and of the nearby intergenic SNP, 
rs1033772, (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.59×10<U+207B>6) which is positioned between TCF7L2 and HABP2. TCF7L2
is one of the best confirmed susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes (T2D) among
different ethnic groups, has a role in pancreatic beta cell function and may
contribute to the comorbidity of schizophrenia and T2D. These preliminary results
independently support previous findings regarding a possible role of TCF7L2 in
susceptibility to schizophrenia, and strengthen the importance of integrating
linkage analysis models of inheritance while performing association analyses in
regions of interest. Further validation studies in additional populations are
required.

PMCID: PMC3256145
PMID: 22247771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Gene. 2012 Mar 10;495(2):115-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.12.055. Epub 2012 Jan 8.

Genetic variants of TCF7L2 are associated with type 2 diabetes in a northeastern 
Chinese population.

Qiao H(1), Zhang X, Zhao X, Zhao Y, Xu L, Sun H, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150081, China. qiaoh0823@sina.com

Variants in the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) in several ethnic groups. Two
intronic variants, rs290487 and rs11196218, were originally identified as T2D
modifiers in Hong Kong Chinese and Taiwan Chinese populations, respectively.
However, discrepancies were noted in subsequent replicated studies. In this
study, an association of these two loci with T2D was investigated in a Harbin
Chinese population. Whereas the two populations in the initial studies were
southern Han Chinese, Harbin Chinese are from northeastern China. The SNPs
rs290487 and rs11196218 were genotyped by ligase detection reactions in 700 T2D
patients and 570 unrelated non-diabetic controls. Association analyses, which
were carried out using the case-control sample set, yielded a significant
association between rs290487 and T2D, with a trend opposite to that described in 
a previous report. Specifically, rs290487T was found to be significantly
associated with disease susceptibility (p=0.039), and the allelic OR of rs290487T
carriers was 1.184 (95% CI 1.008-1.391). There was no significant association
between rs11196218 and T2D. Taken together, TCF7L2 may be an important
susceptibility gene for T2D in some Chinese populations. The discrepancies in the
allelic associations determined for northern vs. southern Chinese allude to the
presence of genetic variation among the Han Chinese.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Rev Diabet Stud. 2011 Summer;8(2):230-44. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2011.8.230. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

Association between genetics of diabetes, coronary artery disease, and
macrovascular complications: exploring a common ground hypothesis.

Sousa AG(1), Selvatici L, Krieger JE, Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute, University
of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease (CAD) are conditions that cause a
substantial public health burden. Since both conditions often coexist in the same
individual, it has been hypothesized that they have a common effector. Insulin
and hyperglycemia are assumed to play critical roles in this scenario. In recent 
years, many genetic risk factors for both diabetes and CAD have been discovered, 
mainly through genome-wide association studies. Genetic aspects of diabetes,
diabetic macrovascular complications, and CAD are assumed to have intersections
leading to the common effector hypothesis. However, only a few genetic risk
factors could be identified that modulate the risk for both conditions.
Polymorphisms in TCF7L2 and near the CDKN2A/B genes seem to be of great
importance in this regard since they appear to modulate both conditions, and they
are not necessarily related to insulinism, or hyperglycemia, for CAD development.
Other issues related to this hypothesis, such as the problems of phenotype
heterogeneity, are also of interest. Recent studies have contributed to a better 
understanding of the complex genetics of diabetic macrovascular complications.
Much effort is still needed to clarify the associations in the genetics of
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. At present, there is little genetic
evidence to support a common effector hypothesis, other than insulin or
hyperglycemia, for the association between these conditions.

Copyright © by Lab & Life Press/SBDR

PMCID: PMC3280008
PMID: 22189546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2012 Apr;32(3):345-52. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9778-y. Epub
2011 Dec 13.

Tcf7l2 is tightly controlled during myelin formation.

Fu H(1), Kesari S, Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Basic Medical College of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. hueyfu@yahoo.com

Recent, studies have shown that Tcf7l2, an important transcription factor in Wnt 
pathway, plays critical roles in oligodendrocyte development. In this article we 
report a study showing that Tcf7l2 is under tight regulation during myelin
formation. We have found that during early development, Tcf7l2 mRNA appears much 
earlier than the protein, suggesting a regulation at the translational level. We 
induced demyelination in a mouse model by a dietary toxin, where remyelination
followed after a few weeks, and found that Tcf7l2 protein was expressed
specifically during the active remyelination phase. Similarly, in human patients 
with demyelination diseases, Tcf7l2 protein expression was specifically promoted 
in regions undergoing active remyelination. During remyelination, Tcf7l2 was only
expressed in non-dividing oligodendrocyte precursors and was associated with
modest levels of nuclear beta-catenin. We also documented that Tcf7l2 could form 
protein complex with Olig2, but not with Olig1. Our data showed that during
myelin formation, Tcf7l2/beta-catenin is regulated temporally, spatially, and
also at levels of expression. These data suggest a key role for Tcf7l2 in
myelination/remyelination processes via a tightly controlled activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and the interaction with Olig2.

PMCID: PMC4026294
PMID: 22160878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 15;10(24):4199-200. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.24.18465. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

Dominant-negative isoforms of Tcf/Lef proteins in development and disease.

Vacik T, Lemke G.

PMID: 22157225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Diabetes. 2012 Sep;4(3):238-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-0407.2011.00177.x.

Genetic variants in potassium channels are associated with type 2 diabetes in a
Mongolian population.

Odgerel Z(1), Lee HS, Erdenebileg N, Gandbold S, Luvsanjamba M, Sambuughin N,
Sonomtseren S, Sharavdorj P, Jodov E, Altaisaikhan K, Goldfarb LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Infectious Diseases
and Immunogenetics Section, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more
than 40 common sequence variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, 
the results are not always the same in populations with differing genetic
backgrounds. In the present study, we evaluated a hypothesis that a North Asian
population living in a geographic area with unusually harsh environmental
conditions would develop unique genetic risks.
METHODS: A population-based association study was performed with 21
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in nine genes selected according to the
results of GWAS conducted in other populations. The study participants included
393 full-heritage Mongolian individuals (177 diagnosed with T2D and 216 matched
controls). Genotyping was performed by TaqMan methodology.
RESULTS: The strongest association was detected with SNPs located within the
potassium channel-coding genes KCNQ1 (highest odds ratio [OR] = 1.92; P = 3.4 ×
10(-5) ) and ABCC8 (OR = 1.79; P = 5 × 10(-4) ). Genetic variants identified as
strongly influencing the risk of T2D in other populations (e.g. KCNJ11 or TCF7L2)
did not show significant association in Mongolia.
CONCLUSIONS:   The strongest T2D risk-associated SNPs in Mongolians are located
within two of three tested potassium channel-coding genes. Accumulated variations
in these genes may be related to the exposure to harsh environmental conditions.

© 2011 Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and Wiley
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3309067
PMID: 22151254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Feb;12(1):88-92. doi: 10.1007/s11892-011-0245-4.

Determining genetic risk factors for pediatric type 2 diabetes.

Morgan AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, 85 Park Road, Grafton, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.
ang.morgan@auckland.ac.nz

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing significantly in the
pediatric population. A strong family history of the disease suggests the
involvement of genetic factors for diabetes development, but defining the
molecular genetics of T2D in children is difficult due to a low number of
subjects and the lack of robust diagnostic criteria. Thus, genetic studies of T2D
have been carried out almost exclusively in adults. In this review, the genetics 
of T2D is summarized and options for discovering the missing heritability
explored. The review concludes with a discussion of future research that will be 
required for determining genetic risk factors for pediatric T2D.

PMID: 22139555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Arch Med Res. 2011 Aug;42(6):495-501. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2011.05.006.

rs12255372 variant of TCF7L2 gene is protective for obesity in Mexican children.

Klünder-Klünder M(1), Mejía-Benitez MA, Flores-Huerta S, Burguete-García AI,
García-Mena J, Cruz M.

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Research Department, Hospital Infantil de México Federico
Gómez, Ministry of Health, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene 
are consistently associated with type 2 diabetes in adults, but the association
of TCF7L2 with weight-related traits and body fat in humans is unclear. The aim
of this study was to determine the relationship between the TCF7L2 gene
(rs12255372) and obese phenotype in Mexican school-age children.
METHODS: The study was performed in schools in Mexico City; 186 obese and 194
control children were studied. Fasting insulin and glucose, total cholesterol,
LDL-C, HDL-C and triglycerides concentration were determined. The variant
rs12255372 of the TCF7L2 gene was genotyped. We used age- and sex-adjusted linear
models to test for association with metabolic measurements with this variant.
RESULTS: Genotype of the TCF7L2 rs12255372 gene was associated with lower fasting
plasma glucose (p = 0.001) and lower homeostasis model assessment of insulin
resistance (HOMA-R; p = 0.001) in nonobese children. Heterozygous carriers for
this variant were more prevalent in lean children (32.5%) than in the obese group
(23.7%), which resulted in a strong protective effect for the normal weight
condition (OR = 0.56, 0.32-0.97).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism protects Mexican children from
obesity. Further research in other large, population-based studies is needed to
replicate these findings.

Copyright © 2011 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22136959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2011;21(3):207-36.

Cell-context dependent TCF/LEF expression and function: alternative tales of
repression, de-repression and activation potentials.

Mao CD(1), Byers SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Markey Cancer 
Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. cdmao2@uky.edu

Wnt signaling controls cell specification and fate during development and adult
tissue homeostasis by converging on a small family of DNA binding factors, the
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) family. In response to Wnt
signals, TCF/LEF members undergo a transcriptional switch from repression to
activation mediated in part by nuclear ß-catenin binding and recruitment of
co-activator complexes. In mammals, the specificity and fine tuning of this
transcriptional switch is also achieved by the cell-context-dependent expression 
of four members (TCF7, TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and LEF1) and numerous variants, which
display differential DNA binding affinity and specificity, repression strength,
activation potential, and regulators. TCF7/LEF1 variants are generated by
alternative promoters, alternative exon cassettes, and alternative donor/acceptor
splicing sites, allowing combinatorial insertion/exclusion of modular functional 
and regulatory domains. In this review we present mounting evidence for the
interdependency of TCF7/LEF1 variant expression and functions with cell lineage
and cell state. We also illustrate how the p53 and nuclear receptor family of
transcription factors, known to control cell fate and to inhibit Wnt signaling,
may participate in the fine tuning of TCF7/LEF1 repression/activation potentials.

PMCID: PMC3434703
PMID: 22111711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nat Commun. 2011 Nov 22;2:548. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1551.

Identification of a link between Wnt/ß-catenin signalling and the cell fusion
pathway.

Matsuura K(1), Jigami T, Taniue K, Morishita Y, Adachi S, Senda T, Nonaka A,
Aburatani H, Nakamura T, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

Cell fusion has a critical role in various developmental processes, immune
response, tissue homeostasis and regeneration, and possibly, in cancer. However, 
the signals that regulate cell fusion remain poorly understood. In a screen for
novel targets of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling, we identified glial cells missing 1
(GCM1), which encodes a transcription factor that is involved in epigenetic
regulation and is critical for the fusion of syncytiotrophoblast (ST) cells. Here
we show that ß-catenin/BCL9-Like (BCL9L)/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) signalling
directly targets the GCM1/syncytin pathway and thereby regulates the fusion of
human choriocarcinoma cells. Furthermore, we show that the GCM1/syncytin-B
pathway is significantly downregulated in the placenta of BCL9L-deficient mice
and that the fusion and differentiation of ST-II cells are blocked. Our results
demonstrate a signal transduction pathway that regulates cell fusion, and may
provide intriguing perspectives into the various biological and pathological
processes that involve cell fusion.

PMID: 22109522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Diabetologia. 2012 Mar;55(3):689-93. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2378-z. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

The type 2 diabetes-associated variant in TCF7L2 is associated with latent
autoimmune diabetes in adult Europeans and the gene effect is modified by
obesity: a meta-analysis and an individual study.

Lukacs K(1), Hosszufalusi N, Dinya E, Bakacs M, Madacsy L, Panczel P.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Bókay u 53-54, 1083
Budapest, Hungary. krisztinalukacs@hotmail.com

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have
been proposed to be associated with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA). 
We sought to confirm the possible association in Europeans and to examine the
interaction between one gene variant and clinical data.
METHODS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 C-to-T polymorphism was genotyped in 211 LADA,
1,297 type 2 diabetic, 545 type 1 diabetic and 1,497 control individuals from
Hungary. A meta-analysis of our and previously published studies was performed to
evaluate the size and the heterogeneity of the gene effect.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis yielded a significant effect of TCF7L2 T allele (OR
1.28; p < 0.0001) on LADA risk without heterogeneity among Europeans. The T
allele conferred equally strong susceptibility to LADA and type 2 diabetes. In
the Hungarian dataset, the T allele was associated with LADA and type 2 diabetes,
but not with type 1 diabetes. T allele carriers had significantly lower BMI than 
patients with the CC genotype in the LADA and type 2 diabetes groups (p = 0.0021 
and p = 0.0013, respectively). In both diseases, the diabetes risk was
significantly higher in the non-overweight than in the overweight BMI category (p
= 0.0013 and p < 0.0001, respectively); susceptibility to LADA was increased by
2.84-fold in non-overweight individuals compared with overweight ones.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The meta-analysis demonstrates that TCF7L2 rs7903146 
polymorphism is a population-independent susceptibility locus for LADA in
Europeans. The effect size is similar for LADA and type 2 diabetes. The gene
effect on diabetes risk may be modulated by BMI, such that the lower the BMI, the
higher the gene effect.

PMID: 22109281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan;26(1):37-51. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1109. Epub 2011 Nov
22.

VDR/RXR and TCF4/ß-catenin cistromes in colonic cells of colorectal tumor origin:
impact on c-FOS and c-MYC gene expression.

Meyer MB(1), Goetsch PD, Pike JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Many of the transcriptional and growth regulating activities of
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)] in the intestine and colon are
recapitulated in the human colorectal cancer cell LS180. We therefore used this
line together with chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq and gene expression analyses
to identify the vitamin D receptor (VDR)/retinoid X receptor (RXR) and
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2/TCF4)/ß-catenin cistromes and the genes
that they regulate. VDR and RXR colocalized to predominantly promoter distal,
vitamin D response element-containing sites in a largely ligand-dependent manner.
These regulatory sites control the expression of both known as well as novel
1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) target genes. TCF4 and ß-catenin cistromes partially overlapped,
contained TCF/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor consensus elements, and were only 
modestly influenced by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3). However, the two heterodimer complexes
colocalized at sites near a limited set of genes that included c-FOS and c-MYC;
the expression of both genes was modulated by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3). At the c-FOS
gene, both VDR/RXR and TCF4/ß-catenin bound to a single distal enhancer located
24 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site. At the c-MYC locus, however,
binding was noted at a cluster of sites between -139 and -165 kb and at a site
located -335 kb upstream. Examined as isolated enhancer fragments, these regions 
exhibited basal and 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)-inducible activities that were interlinked
to both VDR and ß-catenin activation. These data reveal additional complexity in 
the regulation of target genes by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and support a direct action of
both VDR and the TCF4/ß-catenin regulatory complex at c-FOS and c-MYC.

PMCID: PMC3248320
PMID: 22108803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012 Mar-Apr;19(2):212-8. doi:
10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000439. Epub 2011 Nov 19.

Use of diverse electronic medical record systems to identify genetic risk for
type 2 diabetes within a genome-wide association study.

Kho AN(1), Hayes MG, Rasmussen-Torvik L, Pacheco JA, Thompson WK, Armstrong LL,
Denny JC, Peissig PL, Miller AW, Wei WQ, Bielinski SJ, Chute CG, Leibson CL,
Jarvik GP, Crosslin DR, Carlson CS, Newton KM, Wolf WA, Chisholm RL, Lowe WL.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. abel.kho@nmff.org

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) require high specificity and
large numbers of subjects to identify genotype-phenotype correlations accurately.
The aim of this study was to identify type 2 diabetes (T2D) cases and controls
for a GWAS, using data captured through routine clinical care across five
institutions using different electronic medical record (EMR) systems.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An algorithm was developed to identify T2D cases and
controls based on a combination of diagnoses, medications, and laboratory
results. The performance of the algorithm was validated at three of the five
participating institutions compared against clinician review. A GWAS was
subsequently performed using cases and controls identified by the algorithm, with
samples pooled across all five institutions.
RESULTS: The algorithm achieved 98% and 100% positive predictive values for the
identification of diabetic cases and controls, respectively, as compared against 
clinician review. By standardizing and applying the algorithm across
institutions, 3353 cases and 3352 controls were identified. Subsequent GWAS using
data from five institutions replicated the TCF7L2 gene variant (rs7903146)
previously associated with T2D.
DISCUSSION: By applying stringent criteria to EMR data collected through routine 
clinical care, cases and controls for a GWAS were identified that subsequently
replicated a known genetic variant. The use of standard terminologies to define
data elements enabled pooling of subjects and data across five different
institutions to achieve the robust numbers required for GWAS.
CONCLUSIONS: An algorithm using commonly available data from five different EMR
can accurately identify T2D cases and controls for genetic study across multiple 
institutions.

PMCID: PMC3277617
PMID: 22101970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Jan;56(1):67-76. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100531. Epub 2011
Nov 17.

Metabolic syndrome: evidences for a personalized nutrition.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Garcia-Rios A, Delgado-Lista J, Perez-Jimenez F,
Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC/Reina Sofia University
Hospital/University of Cordoba, and CIBER Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutricion
(CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.

Both insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia are determined by genetic and
environmental factors. Depending on their expression and their function, gene
variants may influence either insulin action or other metabolic traits. Nutrition
also plays an important role in the development and progression of these
conditions. Genetic background may interact with habitual dietary fat
composition, affecting predisposition to insulin resistance syndrome and
individual responsiveness to changes in dietary fat intake. In this context,
nutrigenetics has emerged as a multidisciplinary field focusing on studying the
interactions between nutritional and genetic factors and health outcomes. Due to 
the complex nature of gene-environment interactions, however, dietary therapy may
require a "personalized" nutrition approach in the future. Although the results
have not always been consistent, gene variants that affect primary insulin
action, and particularly their interaction with the environment, are important
modulators of glucose metabolism. The purpose of this review is to present some
evidence of studies that have already demonstrated the significance of
gene-nutrient interactions (adiponectin gene, Calpain-10, glucokinase regulatory 
protein, transcription factor 7-like 2, leptin receptor, scavenger receptor class
B type I etc.) that influence insulin resistance in subjects with metabolic
syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22095824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027425. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Novel common integration sites targeted by mouse mammary tumor virus insertion in
mammary tumors have oncogenic activity.

Kim HH(1), van den Heuvel AP, Schmidt JW, Ross SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
of America.

Non-acute transforming retroviruses like mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) cause
cancer, at least in part, through integration near cellular genes involved in
growth control, thereby de-regulating their expression. It is well-established
that MMTV commonly integrates near and activates expression of members of the Wnt
and Fgf pathways in mammary tumors. However, there are a significant number of
tumors for which the proviral integration sites have not been identified. Here,
we used high through-put screening to identify common integration sites (CISs) in
MMTV-induced tumors from C3H/HeN and BALB/c mice. As expected, members of both
the Wnt and Fgf families were identified in this screen. In addition, a number of
novel CISs were found, including Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and Arhgap18. We show here 
that expression of these three putative oncogenes in normal murine mammary gland 
cells altered their growth kinetics and caused their morphological transformation
when grown in three dimensional cultures. Additionally, expression of Tcf7l2 and 
Antxr1/Tem8 sensitized cells to exogenous WNT ligand. As Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and
Arhgap18 have been associated with human breast and other cancers, these data
demonstrate that MMTV-induced insertional mutation remains an important means for
identifying genes involved in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3210173
PMID: 22087314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar;20(3):298-304. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.194. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

Copy number detection in discordant monozygotic twins of Congenital Diaphragmatic
Hernia (CDH) and Esophageal Atresia (EA) cohorts.

Veenma D(1), Brosens E, de Jong E, van de Ven C, Meeussen C, Cohen-Overbeek T,
Boter M, Eussen H, Douben H, Tibboel D, de Klein A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
d.veenma@erasmusmc.nl

The occurrence of phenotypic differences between monozygotic (MZ) twins is
commonly attributed to environmental factors, assuming that MZ twins have a
complete identical genetic make-up. Yet, recently several lines of evidence
showed that both genetic and epigenetic factors could have a role in phenotypic
discordance after all. A high occurrence of copy number variation (CNV)
differences was observed within MZ twin pairs discordant for Parkinson's disease,
thereby stressing on the importance of post-zygotic mutations as
disease-predisposing events. In this study, the prevalence of discrepant CNVs was
analyzed in discordant MZ twins of the Esophageal Atresia (EA) and Congenital
Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) cohort in the Netherlands. Blood-derived DNA from 11
pairs (7 EA and 4 CDH) was screened using high-resolution SNP arrays. Results
showed an identical copy number profile in each twin pair. Mosaic chromosome gain
or losses could not be detected either with a detection threshold of 20%. Some of
the germ-line structural events demonstrated in five out of eleven twin pairs
could function as a susceptible genetic background. For example, the 177-Kb loss 
of chromosome 10q26 in CDH pair-3 harbors the TCF7L2 gene (Tcf4 protein), which
is implicated in the regulation of muscle fiber type development and maturation. 
In conclusion, discrepant CNVs are not a common cause of twin discordancy in
these investigated congenital anomaly cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3283183
PMID: 22071887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Diabetologia. 2012 Feb;55(2):349-57. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2355-6. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Association analysis of 31 common polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes and its
related traits in Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Rafiq S, Kranthikumar MV, Janipalli CS, Giambartolomei C,
Evans DM, Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor AE, Kinra S, Sullivan RM, Bowen L, Timpson 
NJ, Smith GD, Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S,
Chandak GR; Indian Migration Study Group.

Collaborators: Ebrahim S, Kinra S, Reddy KS, Prabhakaran D, Patel T, Ramakrishnan
L, Gupta R, Lyngdoh T, Ahuja RC, Saran RK, Joshi P, Thakre NM, Sarma KV, Das SM, 
Jain RK, Potnis SS, Bhogadi S, Kurpad AV, Vaz M, Barathi AV, Mohan M, Yajnik CS, 
Smith GD, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
C-1/52, Safdarjung Development Area, New Delhi 110016, India. udaiig@gmail.com

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Evaluation of the association of 31 common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with fasting glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA-beta cell
function (HOMA-ß), HOMA-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and type 2 diabetes in the
Indian population.
METHODS: We genotyped 3,089 sib pairs recruited in the Indian Migration Study
from four cities in India (Lucknow, Nagpur, Hyderabad and Bangalore) for 31 SNPs 
in 24 genes previously associated with type 2 diabetes in European populations.
We conducted within-sib-pair analysis for type 2 diabetes and its related
quantitative traits.
RESULTS: The risk-allele frequencies of all the SNPs were comparable with those
reported in western populations. We demonstrated significant associations of
CXCR4 (rs932206), CDKAL1 (rs7756992) and TCF7L2 (rs7903146, rs12255372) with
fasting glucose, with ß values of 0.007 (p = 0.05), 0.01 (p = 0.01), 0.007 (p =
0.05), 0.01 (p = 0.003) and 0.08 (p = 0.01), respectively. Variants in NOTCH2
(rs10923931), TCF-2 (also known as HNF1B) (rs757210), ADAM30 (rs2641348) and
CDKN2A/B (rs10811661) significantly predicted fasting insulin, with ß values of
-0.06 (p = 0.04), 0.05 (p = 0.05), -0.08 (p = 0.01) and -0.08 (p = 0.02),
respectively. For HOMA-IR, we detected associations with TCF-2, ADAM30 and
CDKN2A/B, with ß values of 0.05 (p = 0.04), -0.07 (p = 0.03) and -0.08 (p =
0.02), respectively. We also found significant associations of ADAM30 (ß = -0.05;
p = 0.01) and CDKN2A/B (ß = -0.05; p = 0.03) with HOMA-ß. THADA variant
(rs7578597) was associated with type 2 diabetes (OR 1.5; 95% CI 1.04, 2.22; p =
0.03).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We validated the association of seven established
loci with intermediate traits related to type 2 diabetes in an Indian population 
using a design resistant to population stratification.

PMCID: PMC3245821
PMID: 22052079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026897. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Modulation ofTcf7l2 expression alters behavior in mice.

Savic D(1), Distler MG, Sokoloff G, Shanahan NA, Dulawa SC, Palmer AA, Nobrega
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

The comorbidity of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with several psychiatric diseases is
well established. While environmental factors may partially account for these
co-occurrences, common genetic susceptibilities could also be implicated in the
confluence of these diseases. In support of shared genetic burdens, TCF7L2, the
strongest genetic determinant for T2D risk in the human population, has been
recently implicated in schizophrenia (SCZ) risk, suggesting that this may be one 
of many loci that pleiotropically influence both diseases. To investigate whether
Tcf7l2 is involved in behavioral phenotypes in addition to its roles in glucose
metabolism, we conducted several behavioral tests in mice with null alleles of
Tcf7l2 or overexpressing Tcf7l2. We identified a role for Tcf7l2 in anxiety-like 
behavior and a dose-dependent effect of Tcf7l2 alleles on fear learning. None of 
the mutant mice showed differences in prepulse inhibition (PPI), which is a
well-established endophenotype for SCZ. These results show that Tcf7l2 alters
behavior in mice. Importantly, these differences are observed prior to the onset 
of detectable glucose metabolism abnormalities. Whether these differences are
related to human anxiety-disorders or schizophrenia remains to be determined.
These animal models have the potential to elucidate the molecular basis of
psychiatric comorbidities in diabetes and should therefore be studied further.

PMCID: PMC3203170
PMID: 22046400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell. 2011 Oct 28;147(3):577-89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.044.

Lineage regulators direct BMP and Wnt pathways to cell-specific programs during
differentiation and regeneration.

Trompouki E(1), Bowman TV, Lawton LN, Fan ZP, Wu DC, DiBiase A, Martin CS, Cech
JN, Sessa AK, Leblanc JL, Li P, Durand EM, Mosimann C, Heffner GC, Daley GQ,
Paulson RF, Young RA, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

BMP and Wnt signaling pathways control essential cellular responses through
activation of the transcription factors SMAD (BMP) and TCF (Wnt). Here, we show
that regeneration of hematopoietic lineages following acute injury depends on the
activation of each of these signaling pathways to induce expression of key blood 
genes. Both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 co-occupy sites with master regulators adjacent to
hematopoietic genes. In addition, both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 follow the binding of the
predominant lineage regulator during differentiation from multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells to erythroid cells. Furthermore, induction of the 
myeloid lineage regulator C/EBPa in erythroid cells shifts binding of SMAD1 to
sites newly occupied by C/EBPa, whereas expression of the erythroid regulator
GATA1 directs SMAD1 loss on nonerythroid targets. We conclude that the
regenerative response mediated by BMP and Wnt signaling pathways is coupled with 
the lineage master regulators to control the gene programs defining cellular
identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3219441
PMID: 22036566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Epidemiology (Sunnyvale). 2011 Nov 1;1(3):108.

Cumulative Effect of Common Genetic Variants Predicts Incident Type 2 Diabetes: A
Study of 21,183 Subjects from Three Large Prospective Cohorts.

Yang J(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and their meta-analyses have
identified multiple genetic loci that are associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). 
Except for variants in the TCF7L2 gene which had a modest effect on diabetic
risk, most genetic variants identified so far have only a weak association with
diabetes. It is possible that the combination of multiple variants may have a
larger effect on disease risk and improve risk prediction. In this study, we
focus on SNPs that had been robustly replicated in previous GWAS and were also
genotyped in a large sample of 21,183 participants from three large prospective
cohorts, including Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study, Framingham
Offspring Study (FOS) and Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Among
these, we were able to successfully confirm the associations of 12 SNPs with
baseline prevalent T2D in these two cohorts. A genotype risk score (GRS) using
these12 risk variants was constructed to examine whether GRS predicts incident
diabetes. In a combined meta-analysis, subjects in the highest tertile of GRS had
a 1.62-fold increased risk of incident T2D (95% CI, 1.08-2.44, P=1.5×10(-14))
compared to those in the lowest tertile of GRS after adjustment for age, sex,
race, smoking, body mass index (BMI), lipids (HDL and LDL) and systolic blood
pressure. Moreover, GRS significantly improves risk prediction and
reclassification in T2D beyond known risk factors.

PMCID: PMC3956676
PMID: 24653947  [PubMed]


442. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Jan 1;83(1):47-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.10.001. Epub
2011 Oct 8.

DIF-1 inhibits the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by inhibiting TCF7L2
expression in colon cancer cell lines.

Jingushi K(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F, Yoshihara T, Shiraishi F, Watanabe Y, Hirata
M, Morimoto S, Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

We previously reported that differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), a
morphogen in Dictyostelium discoideum, inhibits the proliferation of human cancer
cell lines by inducing ß-catenin degradation and suppressing the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway. To determine whether ß-catenin degradation is essential for
the effect of DIF-1, we examined the effect of DIF-1 on human colon cancer cell
lines (HCT-116, SW-620 and DLD-1), in which the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway
is constitutively active. DIF-1 strongly inhibited cell proliferation and
arrested the cell cycle in the G(0)/G(1) phase via the suppression of cyclin D1
expression at mRNA and protein levels without reducing ß-catenin protein.
TCF-dependent transcriptional activity and cyclin D1 promoter activity were
revealed to be inhibited via suppression of transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) expression. Luciferase reporter assays and EMSAs using the TCF7L2
promoter fragments indicated that the binding site for the transcription factor
early growth response-1 (Egr-1), which is located in the -609 to -601 bp region
relative to the start codon in the TCF7L2 promoter, was involved in DIF-1
activity. Moreover, RNAi-mediated depletion of endogenous TCF7L2 resulted in
reduced cyclin D1 promoter activity and protein expression, and the
overexpression of TCF7L2 overrode the inhibition of the TCF-dependent
transcriptional activity and cyclin D1 promoter activity induced by DIF-1.
Therefore, DIF-1 seemed to inhibit the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by
suppressing TCF7L2 expression via reduced Egr-1-dependent transcriptional
activity in these colon cancer cell lines. Our results provide a novel insight
into the mechanisms by which DIF-1 inhibits the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22005519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Dec;32(12):1824-31. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr222. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

Silencing of the Wnt transcription factor TCF4 sensitizes colorectal cancer cells
to (chemo-) radiotherapy.

Kendziorra E(1), Ahlborn K, Spitzner M, Rave-Fränk M, Emons G, Gaedcke J, Kramer 
F, Wolff HA, Becker H, Beissbarth T, Ebner R, Ghadimi BM, Pukrop T, Ried T, Grade
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center,
Göttingen 37075, Germany.

A considerable percentage of rectal cancers are resistant to standard
preoperative chemoradiotherapy. Because patients with a priori-resistant tumors
do not benefit from multimodal treatment, understanding and overcoming this
resistance remains of utmost clinical importance. We recently reported
overexpression of the Wnt transcription factor TCF4, also known as TCF7L2, in
rectal cancers that were resistant to 5-fluorouracil-based chemoradiotherapy.
Because Wnt signaling has not been associated with treatment response, we aimed
to investigate whether TCF4 mediates chemoradioresistance. RNA
interference-mediated silencing of TCF4 was employed in three colorectal cancer
(CRC) cell lines, and sensitivity to (chemo-) radiotherapy was assessed using a
standard colony formation assay. Silencing of TCF4 caused a significant
sensitization of CRC cells to clinically relevant doses of X-rays. This effect
was restricted to tumor cells with high T cell factor (TCF) reporter activity,
presumably in a ß-catenin-independent manner. Radiosensitization was the
consequence of (i) a transcriptional deregulation of Wnt/TCF4 target genes, (ii) 
a silencing-induced G(2)/M phase arrest, (iii) an impaired ability to adequately 
halt cell cycle progression after radiation and (iv) a compromised DNA double
strand break repair as assessed by <U+03B3>H2AX staining. Taken together, our results
indicate a novel mechanism through which the Wnt transcription factor TCF4
mediates chemoradioresistance. Moreover, they suggest that TCF4 is a promising
molecular target to sensitize resistant tumor cells to (chemo-) radiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3254167
PMID: 21983179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jan 1;21(1):196-207. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr454. Epub 2011 Sep
30.

Survival of pancreatic beta cells is partly controlled by a
TCF7L2-p53-p53INP1-dependent pathway.

Zhou Y(1), Zhang E, Berggreen C, Jing X, Osmark P, Lang S, Cilio CM, Göransson O,
Groop L, Renström E, Hansson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden.
yuedan.zhou@med.lu.se

The transcription factor T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) confers type 2 diabetes 
risk mainly through impaired insulin secretion, perturbed incretin effect and
reduced beta-cell survival. The aim of this study was to identify the molecular
mechanism through which TCF7L2 influences beta-cell survival. TCF7L2 target genes
in INS-1 cells were identified using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation. Validation of
targets was obtained by: siRNA silencing, real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, luciferase reporter assays and
western blot. Apoptosis rate was measured by DNA degradation and caspase-3
content. Islet viability was estimated by measuring metabolic rate. TCF7L2 binds 
to 3646 gene promoters in INS-1 cells in high or low glucose, including Tp53,
Pten, Uggt1, Adamts9 and Fto. SiRNA-mediated reduction in TCF7L2 activity
resulted in increased apoptosis and increased expression of Tp53, which resulted 
in elevated p53 protein activity and an increased expression of the p53 target
gene Tp53inp1 (encoding p53-induced-nuclear-protein 1). Reversing the increase in
p53INP1 protein expression, seen after Tcf7l2 silencing, protected INS-1 cells
from Tcf7l2 depletion-induced apoptosis. This result was replicated in primary
rat islets. The risk T-allele of rs7903146 is associated with increased TCF7L2
mRNA expression and transcriptional activity. On the other hand, in vitro
silencing of TCF7L2 lead to increased apoptosis. One possibility is that the risk
T-allele increases expression of an inhibitory TCF7L2 isoform with lower
transcriptional activity. These results identify the p53-p53INP1 pathway as a
molecular mechanism through which TCF7L2 may affect beta-cell survival and
established a molecular link between Tcf7l2 and two type 2 diabetes-associated
genes, Tp53inp1 and Adamts9.

PMID: 21965303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Orv Hetil. 2011 Oct 9;152(41):1651-60. doi: 10.1556/OH.2011.29175.

[Pharmacogenetics of insulin secretagogue antidiabetics].

[Article in Hungarian]

Winkler G(1), Gerô L.

Author information: 
(1)Fovárosi Szent János Kórház és Észak-budai Egyesített Intézményei II.
Belgyógyászat-Diabetológia Budapest.

Type 2 diabetes is making up to 90% of the all diabetic cases. In addition to
insulin resistance, insufficient B-cell function also plays an important role in 
the pathogenesis of the disease. The insufficient production and secretion of
insulin can be increased by secretagogue drugs, like sulfonylureas and incretin
mimetics/enhancers. In recent years growing number of genetic failures of the
B-cells has been detected. These genetic variants can influence the efficacy of
secretagogue drugs. Some of these gene polymorphisms were identified in the genes
encoding the KATP channel (KCNJ11 and ABCC8). These mutations are able either to 
reduce or increase the insulin secretion and can modify the insulin response to
sulfonylurea treatment. Other polymorphisms were found on genes encoding enzymes 
or transcription factors. In recent years, the genetic variants of TCF7L2 and its
clinical importance have been intensely studied. Authors give a summary of the
above gene polymorphisms and their role in insulin secretion.

PMID: 21959939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Oncol. 2012 Feb;40(2):519-26. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1215. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Genome-wide identification of TCF7L2/TCF4 target miRNAs reveals a role for miR-21
in Wnt-driven epithelial cancer.

Lan F(1), Yue X, Han L, Shi Z, Yang Y, Pu P, Yao Z, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300052, 
PR China.

Transcription factor 7 like 2 (TCF7L2, also known as TCF4) is a Wnt signaling
pathway transcription factor involved in regulation of numerous Wnt targeted
genes. Recently, thousands of high-confidence TCF4 binding sites were reported in
LS174T colon carcinoma cells, however, potential TCF4 target miRNAs remain
largely unknown. Here, we utilized a bioinformatics approach to discover 26 miRNA
transcription start sites (TSSs) within close proximity to TCF4 chromatin
occupancy sites, and validated these sites as bona fide TCF4 targets in LS174T
colon carcinoma cells, MCF-7 breast cancer cells and U87 glioma cells by
ChIP-PCR. We then selected miR-21 to demonstrate for the first time direct TCF4
transcriptional activation of a miRNA via binding to the promoter region. Tissue 
array analysis supported this finding, revealing a positive correlation between
activation of the ß-catenin pathway and in situ expression of miR-21. Finally,
based upon the well known but poorly understood preventive effect of aspirin on
colorectal cancer incidence and mortality, we report downregulation of miR-21
upon administration of aspirin. In sum, our findings identify direct
transcriptional regulation of miR-21 by TCF4 and suggest a role for miR-21 in
cancer cell proliferation and invasion upon activation of ß-catenin/TCF4
signaling.

PMID: 21956205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024710. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Effects of 16 genetic variants on fasting glucose and type 2 diabetes in South
Asians: ADCY5 and GLIS3 variants may predispose to type 2 diabetes.

Rees SD(1), Hydrie MZ, O'Hare JP, Kumar S, Shera AS, Basit A, Barnett AH, Kelly
MA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom. s.d.rees@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The Meta-Analysis of Glucose and Insulin related traits Consortium
(MAGIC) recently identified 16 loci robustly associated with fasting glucose,
some of which were also associated with type 2 diabetes. The purpose of our study
was to explore the role of these variants in South Asian populations of Punjabi
ancestry, originating predominantly from the District of Mirpur, Pakistan.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Sixteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were genotyped in 1678 subjects with type 2 diabetes and 1584 normoglycaemic
controls from two Punjabi populations; one resident in the UK and one indigenous 
to the District of Mirpur. In the normoglycaemic controls investigated for
fasting glucose associations, 12 of 16 SNPs displayed ß values with the same
direction of effect as that seen in European studies, although only the SLC30A8
rs11558471 SNP was nominally associated with fasting glucose (ß<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.063 [95% CI: 
0.013, 0.113] p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015). Of interest, the MTNR1B rs10830963 SNP displayed a
negative ß value for fasting glucose in our study; this effect size was
significantly lower than that seen in Europeans (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29×10(-4)). In addition to
previously reported type 2 diabetes risk variants in TCF7L2 and SLC30A8, SNPs in 
ADCY5 (rs11708067) and GLIS3 (rs7034200) displayed evidence for association with 
type 2 diabetes, with odds ratios of 1.23 (95% CI: 1.09, 1.39; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.1×10(-4))
and 1.16 (95% CI: 1.05, 1.29; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.49×10(-3)) respectively.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although only the SLC30A8 rs11558471 SNP was nominally 
associated with fasting glucose in our study, the finding that 12 out of 16 SNPs 
displayed a direction of effect consistent with European studies suggests that a 
number of these variants may contribute to fasting glucose variation in
individuals of South Asian ancestry. We also provide evidence for the first time 
in South Asians that alleles of SNPs in GLIS3 and ADCY5 may confer risk of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3176767
PMID: 21949744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Obes Facts. 2011;4(4):290-6. doi: 10.1159/000330881. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Evaluation of the obesity genes FTO and MC4R and the type 2 diabetes mellitus
gene TCF7L2 for contribution to stroke risk: The Mannheim-Heidelberg Stroke
Study.

Winter Y(1), Back T, Scherag A, Linseisen J, Rohrmann S, Lanczik O, Hinney A,
Scherag S, Neumaier M, Ringleb PA, Dodel R, Hebebrand J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Studies evaluating genetic markers for vascular risk and risk of
stroke are limited, and none of them evaluated obesity genes. The objective was
to investigate the genetic markers related to obesity genes FTO and MC4R and the 
gene of type 2 diabetes mellitus TCF7L2 for their contribution to risk of stroke 
and transient ischemic attacks (TIA).
METHODS: We recruited 379 consecutive patients with stroke/TIA and 379 healthy
population-based controls. The single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs9937053
(FTO), rs2229616 (MC4R V103I), rs17782313 (188kb downstream of MC4R), and
rs7903146 (TCF7L2) were evaluated for association with stroke using logistic
regression analyses.
RESULTS: The odds ratios for stroke/TIA were 1.14 (95%CI 0.91-1.42) for
rs9937053/FTO, 1.11 (95%CI 0.49-2.51) for rs2229616/MC4R, 1.05 (95%CI 0.82-1.3)
for rs17782313/MC4R, and 0.99 (95%CI 0.78-1.25) for rs7903146/TCF7L2. Further
exploration revealed that male patients with the T allele of rs7903146/TCF7L2 had
a worse clinical outcome compared with male patients carrying the C allele.
CONCLUSION: The observed trends of obesity risk alleles for risk of stroke/TIA as
well as the possible sex-specific differences in clinical outcomes found for the 
TCF7L2 (rs7903146) require replication in future studies. Our study demonstrates 
that candidate gene studies for common stroke may benefit from focusing on
polymorphisms that predispose to vascular risk.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21921652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3078-82. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2290-6. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

An alternative polyadenylation signal in TCF7L2 generates isoforms that inhibit T
cell factor/lymphoid-enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)-dependent target genes.

Locke JM(1), Da Silva Xavier G, Rutter GA, Harries LW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3170.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms within the
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with risk of type 2
diabetes. It is widely hypothesised that the predisposing variation is involved
in cis-regulation of TCF7L2 activity. The aim of this study was to seek evidence 
for the existence of novel TCF7L2 isoforms encoded within the type 2
diabetes-associated genomic region.
METHODS: We searched expressed sequence tag (EST) databases for novel TCF7L2
transcripts and sought to validate the function and integrity of any isoforms
found using a combination of RT-PCR, western blotting and reporter gene
techniques.
RESULTS: Analysis of EST databases suggested the presence of an alternative
polyadenylation site located in intron 4 of TCF7L2. We used 3' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends and real-time PCR to validate the integrity of this
polyadenylation signal and show its wide use across human tissues. Western
blotting results are consistent with the use of this polyadenylation signal to
generate novel protein isoforms. The alternative polyadenylation signal results
in the production of isoforms that retain the ß-catenin binding domain but do not
possess the high-mobility group box DNA-binding domain. Promoter-reporter gene
assays suggest that these isoforms inhibit TCF7L2-dependent target genes by
sequestering ß-catenin.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have identified a novel polyadenylation signal
within TCF7L2 that can result in the production of isoforms that act to repress
TCF/LEF-dependent target genes. These findings may provide new insights into the 
association of TCF7L2 with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3210366
PMID: 21913056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2654-63. doi: 10.2337/db10-1442. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Effects of genetic susceptibility for type 2 diabetes on the evolution of glucose
homeostasis traits before and after diabetes diagnosis: data from the D.E.S.I.R. 
Study.

Gautier A(1), Roussel R, Lange C, Piguel X, Cauchi S, Vol S, Froguel P, Balkau B,
Bonnet F.

Author information: 
(1)Service Endocrinologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Rennes, Université
Rennes 1, Hôpital Sud, INSERM U991, Rennes, France.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of genetic susceptibility on evolution toward
type 2 diabetes (T2D) by analyzing time trajectories of fasting glucose, glycated
hemoglobin (HbA(1c)), insulin sensitivity (homeostasis model assessment
[HOMA2%S]), and ß-cell secretion (HOMA2%B) in a large nondiabetic cohort. We also
examined whether baseline HbA(1c) modified the effect of genetic predisposition
on the time trajectories.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Time trajectories were drawn in 4,744 participants
from the French Data from an Epidemiological Study on the Insulin Resistance
Syndrome (D.E.S.I.R.) cohort based on samples collected every 3 years over a
9-year follow-up. Trajectories were analyzed according to the TCF7L2 common
variant, a family history of T2D, and a combination of at-risk alleles from nine 
T2D-associated genes.
RESULTS: There was a marked decrease in HOMA2%B in parallel to a steep increase
in HbA(1c) over the 3 years before incident diabetes, which was not influenced by
genetic predisposition when considered alone. However, after the onset of T2D,
the TCF7L2 at-risk variant was associated with a greater decrease in HOMA2%B.
There was a joint effect of a family history of T2D with the presence of the
TCF7L2 risk allele with a greater rise in HbA(1c) conferred by the coexistence of
a family history and the T risk allele. An HbA(1c) =5.7% at baseline was
associated with a greater increase in both glycemia and HbA(1c) levels in the
presence of a combination of diabetes at-risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: After incident T2D, TCF7L2 at-risk variants were associated with a
faster decrease in ß-cell function compared with those with the CC genotype.
There was a joint effect of family history of T2D and TCF7L2 risk variant on the 
rise in glycemia and the decrease in insulin secretion at the end of follow-up,
suggesting the joint influence of the combination of diabetes genetic
predisposition with familial factors on the evolution of glycemia over time.

PMCID: PMC3178301
PMID: 21911746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Diabetologia. 2011 Dec;54(12):3132-42. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2289-z. Epub 2011 
Sep 7.

Chromatin occupancy of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and its role in
hepatic glucose metabolism.

Norton L(1), Fourcaudot M, Abdul-Ghani MA, Winnier D, Mehta FF, Jenkinson CP,
Defronzo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health Science Center, 7703 Floyd Curl 
Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. nortonl@uthscsa.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The mechanisms by which transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
regulates the pathways that are important in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes 
are unknown. We therefore examined the role of TCF7L2 in hepatic glucose
production (HGP) in vitro and characterised the whole-genome chromatin occupancy 
of TCF7L2 in hepatocytes.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of TCF7L2 silencing and overexpression on HGP
from gluconeogenic precursors and used chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
combined with massively parallel DNA sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to investigate the DNA
binding patterns of TCF7L2 across the whole genome.
RESULTS: Silencing of TCF7L2 induced a marked increase in basal HGP, which was
accompanied by significant increases in the expression of the gluconeogenic genes
Fbp1, Pck1 and G6pc. Overexpression of Tcf7l2 reversed this phenotype and
significantly reduced HGP. TCF7L2 silencing did not affect the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration of insulin or metformin, but HGP remained elevated in
TCF7L2-silenced cells due to the increased baseline HGP. Using ChIP-Seq, we
detected 2,119 binding events across the genome. Pathway analysis demonstrated
that diabetes genes were significantly over-represented in the dataset. Our
results indicate that TCF7L2 binds directly to multiple genes that are important 
in regulation of glucose metabolism in the liver, including Pck1, Fbp1, Irs1,
Irs2, Akt2, Adipor1, Pdk4 and Cpt1a.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 is an important regulator of HGP in vitro and 
binds directly to genes that are important in pathways of glucose metabolism in
the liver. These data highlight the possibility that TCF7L2 may affect fasting
and postprandial hyperglycaemia in carriers of at-risk TCF7L2 genetic
polymorphisms.

PMID: 21901280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Biochem Genet. 2012 Apr;50(3-4):159-79. doi: 10.1007/s10528-011-9456-2. Epub 2011
Sep 7.

Worldwide distribution of type II diabetes-associated TCF7L2 SNPs: evidence for
stratification in Europe.

Guinan KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)guinank@tcd.ie

Type II diabetes is a multifactorial disease with a complex etiology. Numerous
genes have been implicated in disease pathogenesis. In particular, SNPs at the
TCF7L2 locus have consistently shown strong associations with type II diabetes.
This study characterizes the global distribution of type II diabetes-associated
TCF7L2 SNPs utilizing HapMap, HGDP-CEPH, and Alfred databases and the literature.
High frequencies of rs7903146(T), rs12255372(T), and rs7901695(C) SNPs are
observed in Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, but they are reduced and almost 
absent in Southeast Asian and Native American populations. In contrast,
rs11196218(A) has the highest frequency in Eurasia but is reduced in sub-Saharan 
African and Native American populations. Regional variations in rs7903146(T)
follow a gradient of decreasing frequency from southern into northeastern Europe.
These findings demonstrate extensive global and regional variations in the
frequencies of TCF7L2 SNPs, which may contribute to differences in the incidence 
of type II diabetes worldwide.

PMID: 21898192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1759-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.17594311.

Wnt signaling meets internal dissent.

Grove EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA. egrove@bsd.uchicago.edu

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1783-95.

In canonical Wnt signaling, ß-catenin translocates to the cell nucleus,
interacting with Tcf/Lef factors to activate transcription of Wnt target genes.
In this issue of Genes & Development, Vacik and colleagues (pp. 1783-1795) report
that a highly conserved sequence in intron 5 of Tcf7l2 conceals an internal
promoter region that, when activated by Vax2, drives transcription of truncated
Tcf7l2 mRNAs. The encoded Tcf7l2 protein binds to DNA, but not ß-catenin, and
therefore acts as a dominant-negative Wnt antagonist.

PMCID: PMC3175712
PMID: 21896652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 4;43(10):964-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.936.

Genomic sequencing of colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent
VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion.

Bass AJ(1), Lawrence MS, Brace LE, Ramos AH, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C,
Voet D, Saksena G, Sivachenko A, Jing R, Parkin M, Pugh T, Verhaak RG, Stransky
N, Boutin AT, Barretina J, Solit DB, Vakiani E, Shao W, Mishina Y, Warmuth M,
Jimenez J, Chiang DY, Signoretti S, Kaelin WG, Spardy N, Hahn WC, Hoshida Y,
Ogino S, Depinho RA, Chin L, Garraway LA, Fuchs CS, Baselga J, Tabernero J,
Gabriel S, Lander ES, Getz G, Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Prior studies have identified recurrent oncogenic mutations in colorectal
adenocarcinoma and have surveyed exons of protein-coding genes for mutations in
11 affected individuals. Here we report whole-genome sequencing from nine
individuals with colorectal cancer, including primary colorectal tumors and
matched adjacent non-tumor tissues, at an average of 30.7× and 31.9× coverage,
respectively. We identify an average of 75 somatic rearrangements per tumor,
including complex networks of translocations between pairs of chromosomes. Eleven
rearrangements encode predicted in-frame fusion proteins, including a fusion of
VTI1A and TCF7L2 found in 3 out of 97 colorectal cancers. Although TCF7L2 encodes
TCF4, which cooperates with ß-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, the fusion
lacks the TCF4 ß-catenin-binding domain. We found a colorectal carcinoma cell
line harboring the fusion gene to be dependent on VTI1A-TCF7L2 for
anchorage-independent growth using RNA interference-mediated knockdown. This
study shows previously unidentified levels of genomic rearrangements in
colorectal carcinoma that can lead to essential gene fusions and other oncogenic 
events.

PMCID: PMC3802528
PMID: 21892161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Aug;93 Suppl 1:S9-24. doi:
10.1016/S0168-8227(11)70008-0.

New type 2 diabetes risk genes provide new insights in insulin secretion
mechanisms.

Schäfer SA(1), Machicao F, Fritsche A, Häring HU, Kantartzis K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Germany.

Type 2 diabetes results from the inability of beta cells to increase insulin
secretion sufficiently to compensate for insulin resistance. Insulin resistance
is thought to result mainly from environmental factors, such as obesity. However,
there is compelling evidence that the decline of both insulin sensitivity and
insulin secretion have also a genetic component. Recent genome-wide association
studies identified several novel risk genes for type 2 diabetes. The vast
majority of these genes affect beta cell function by molecular mechanisms that
remain unknown in detail. Nevertheless, we and others could show that a group of 
genes affect glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, a group incretin-stimulated
insulin secretion (incretin sensitivity or secretion) and a group
proinsulin-to-insulin conversion. The most important so far type 2 diabetes risk 
gene, TCF7L2, interferes with all three mechanisms. In addition to advancing
knowledge in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes, the discovery of novel
genetic determinants of diabetes susceptibility may help understanding of
gene-environment, gene-therapy and gene-gene interactions. It was also hoped that
it could make determination of the individual risk for type 2 diabetes feasible. 
However, the allelic relative risks of most genetic variants discovered so far
are relatively low. Thus, at present, clinical criteria assess the risk for type 
2 diabetes with greater sensitivity and specificity than the combination of all
known genetic variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21864758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2645-53. doi: 10.2337/db11-0364. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Genetic analysis of adult-onset autoimmune diabetes.

Howson JM(1), Rosinger S, Smyth DJ, Boehm BO; ADBW-END Study Group, Todd JA.

Collaborators: Aldinger G, Aufschild J, Bechtold J, Becker G, Beischer W, Bickel 
R, Blagieva R, Boehm BO, Brückel J, Claudi-Boehm S, Dapp A, Eiermann T, Ermerling
R, Gloyer J, Haak T, Haenle M, Hecker W, Holl R, Holland A, Höpfer S, Jung S,
Junginger W, Jütting G, Käser T, Kieferle J, Koenig W, Kratzer W, Kristen P,
Kühnl P, Kurkhaus A, Limberg G, Lippmann-Grob B, Lobmann R, Maas U, Manfras B,
Merger S, Müller KA, Nikolaus T, Offensperger W-, Renner H, Rosak C, Rosinger S, 
Schilling S, Schreiber GH, Schuler A, Schwinn GJ, Siegel E, Sing R, Spohr E,
Standop M, Trischler G, Weickert U, Wildemann-Gilbert G, Wörner D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome
Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K. joanna.howson@cimr.cam.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: In contrast with childhood-onset type 1 diabetes, the genetics of
autoimmune diabetes in adults are not well understood. We have therefore
investigated the genetics of diabetes diagnosed in adults positive for
autoantibodies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: GAD autoantibodies (GADAs), insulinoma-associated
antigen-2 antibodies (IA-2As), and islet cell autoantibodies were measured at
time of diagnosis. Autoantibody-positive diabetic subjects (n = 1,384) and
population-based control subjects (n = 2,235) were genotyped at 20
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes loci and FCRL3, GAD2, TCF7L2, and FTO.
RESULTS: PTPN22 (1p13.2), STAT4 (2q32.2), CTLA4 (2q33.2), HLA (6p21), IL2RA
(10p15.1), INS (11p15.5), ERBB3 (12q13.2), SH2B3 (12q24.12), and CLEC16A
(16p13.13) were convincingly associated with autoimmune diabetes in adults (P =
0.002), with consistent directions of effect as reported for pediatric type 1
diabetes. No evidence of an HLA-DRB1*03/HLA-DRB1*04 (DR3/4) genotype effect was
obtained (P = 0.55), but it remained highly predisposing (odds ratio 26.22).
DR3/4 was associated with a lower age at diagnosis of disease, as was DR4 (P =
4.67 × 10(-6)) but not DR3. DR3 was associated with GADA positivity (P = 6.03 ×
10(-6)) but absence of IA-2A (P = 3.22 × 10(-7)). DR4 was associated with IA-2A
positivity (P = 5.45 × 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the genetics of 
autoimmune diabetes in adults and children are differentiated by only relatively 
few age-dependent genetic effects. The slower progression toward autoimmune
insulin deficiency in adults is probably due to a lower genetic load overall
combined with subtle variation in the HLA class II gene associations and
autoreactivity.

PMCID: PMC3178303
PMID: 21873553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2624-34. doi: 10.2337/db11-0415. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Genome-wide association identifies nine common variants associated with fasting
proinsulin levels and provides new insights into the pathophysiology of type 2
diabetes.

Strawbridge RJ, Dupuis J, Prokopenko I, Barker A, Ahlqvist E, Rybin D, Petrie JR,
Travers ME, Bouatia-Naji N, Dimas AS, Nica A, Wheeler E, Chen H, Voight BF,
Taneera J, Kanoni S, Peden JF, Turrini F, Gustafsson S, Zabena C, Almgren P,
Barker DJ, Barnes D, Dennison EM, Eriksson JG, Eriksson P, Eury E, Folkersen L,
Fox CS, Frayling TM, Goel A, Gu HF, Horikoshi M, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Jameson
KA, Kajantie E, Kerr-Conte J, Kuulasmaa T, Kuusisto J, Loos RJ, Luan J,
Makrilakis K, Manning AK, Martínez-Larrad MT, Narisu N, Nastase Mannila M, Ohrvik
J, Osmond C, Pascoe L, Payne F, Sayer AA, Sennblad B, Silveira A, Stancáková A,
Stirrups K, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tuomi T, van 't Hooft FM, Walker M, Weedon MN, 
Xie W, Zethelius B; DIAGRAM Consortium; GIANT Consortium; MuTHER Consortium;
CARDIoGRAM Consortium; C4D Consortium, Ongen H, Mälarstig A, Hopewell JC,
Saleheen D, Chambers J, Parish S, Danesh J, Kooner J, Ostenson CG, Lind L, Cooper
CC, Serrano-Ríos M, Ferrannini E, Forsen TJ, Clarke R, Franzosi MG, Seedorf U,
Watkins H, Froguel P, Johnson P, Deloukas P, Collins FS, Laakso M, Dermitzakis
ET, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Wareham NJ, Groop L, Pattou F, Gloyn AL, Dedoussis
GV, Lyssenko V, Meigs JB, Barroso I, Watanabe RM, Ingelsson E, Langenberg C,
Hamsten A, Florez JC.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, Mcculloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, Mccarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B,
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Bengtsson
Boström K, Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt P, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis
M, Couper DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS,
Franklin CS, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C,
Hadjadj S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, 
Kao WH, Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A,
Lindgren CM, Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, 
Nilsson P, Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen K, Platou C, Proença C,
Prokopenko I, Rathmann W, William Rayner N, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M,
Sampson MJ, Saxena R, Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger
K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van
Haeften TW, van Herpt T, van Vliet JV, Bragi Walters G, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C,
Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T,
Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD,
Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J,
Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO,
Campbell H, Daly MJ, Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O,
Wichmann E, Barroso I, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, Stefansson K, Altshuler D,
Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Speliotes EK, Willer CJ, Berndt SI, Monda KL,
Thorleifsson G, Jackson AU, Allen HL, Lindgren CM, Luan J, Mägi R, Randall JC,
Vedantam S, Winkler TW, Qi L, Workalemahu T, Heid IM, Steinthorsdottir V,
Stringham HM, Weedon MN, Wheeler E, Wood AR, Ferreira T, Weyant RJ, Segrè AV,
Estrada K, Liang L, Nemesh J, Park JH, Gustafsson S, Kilpeläinen TO, Yang J,
Bouatia-Naji N, Esko T, Feitosa MF, Kutalik Z, Mangino M, Raychaudhuri S, Scherag
A, Smith AV, Welch R, Zhao JH, Aben KK, Absher DM, Amin N, Dixon AL, Fisher E,
Glazer NL, Goddard ME, Heard-Costa NL, Hoesel V, Hottenga JJ, Johansson Å,
Johnson T, Ketkar S, Lamina C, Li S, Moffatt MF, Myers RH, Narisu N, Perry JR,
Peters MJ, Preuss M, Ripatti S, Rivadeneira F, Sandholt C, Scott LJ, Timpson NJ, 
Tyrer JP, van Wingerden S, Watanabe RM, White CC, Wiklund F, Barlassina C,
Chasman DI, Cooper MN, Jansson JO, Lawrence RW, Pellikka N, Prokopenko I, Shi J, 
Thiering E, Alavere H, Alibrandi MT, Almgren P, Arnold AM, Aspelund T, Atwood LD,
Balkau B, Balmforth AJ, Bennett AJ, Ben-Shlomo Y, Bergman RN, Bergmann S,
Biebermann H, Blakemore AI, Boes T, Bonnycastle LL, Bornstein SR, Brown MJ,
Buchanan TA, Busonero F, Campbell H, Cappuccio FP, Cavalcanti-Proença C, Ida Chen
YD, Chen CM, Chines PS, Clarke R, Coin L, Connell J, Day IN, den Heijer M, Duan
J, Ebrahim S, Elliott P, Elosua R, Eiriksdottir G, Erdos MR, Eriksson JG,
Facheris MF, Felix SB, Fischer-Posovszky P, Folsom AR, Friedrich N, Freimer NB,
Fu M, Gaget S, Gejman PV, Geus EJ, Gieger C, Gjesing AP, Goel A, Goyette P,
Grallert H, Grässler J, Greenawalt DM, Groves CJ, Gudnason V, Guiducci C,
Hartikainen AL, Hassanali N, Hall AS, Havulinna AS, Hayward C, Heath AC,
Hengstenberg C, Hicks AA, Hinney A, Hofman A, Homuth G, Hui J, Igl W, Iribarren
C, Isomaa B, Jacobs KB, Jarick I, Jewell E, John U, Jørgensen T, Jousilahti P,
Jula A, Kaakinen M, Kajantie E, Kaplan LM, Kathiresan S, Kettunen J, Kinnunen L, 
Knowles JW, Kolcic I, König IR, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Kuusisto J, Kraft P, Kvaløy
K, Laitinen J, Lantieri O, Lanzani C, Launer LJ, Lecoeur C, Terho L, Lettre G,
Liu J, Lokki ML, Lorentzon M, Luben RN, Ludwig B, MAGIC, Manunta P, Marek D,
Marre M, Martin NG, McArdle WL, McCarthy A, McKnight B, Meitinger T, Melander O, 
Meyre D, Midthjell K, Montgomery GW, Morken MA, Morris AP, Mulic R, Ngwa JS,
Nelis M, Neville MJ, Nyholt DR, O'Donnell CJ, O'Rahilly S, Ong KK, Oostra B, Paré
G, Parker AN, Perola M, Pichler I, Pietiläinen KH, Platou CG, Polasek O, Pouta A,
Rafelt S, Raitakari O, Rayner NW, Ridderstråle M, Rief W, Ruokonen A, Robertson
NR, Rzehak P, Salomaa V, Sanders AR, Sandhu MS, Sanna S, Saramies J, Savolainen
MJ, Scherag S, Schipf S, Schreiber S, Schunkert H, Silander K, Sinisalo J,
Siscovick DS, Smit JH, Soranzo N, Sovio U, Stephens J, Surakka I, Swift AJ,
Tammesoo ML, Tardif JC, Teder-Laving M, Teslovich TM, Thompson JR, Thomson B,
Tönjes A, Tuomi T, van Meurs JB, van Ommen GJ, Vatin V, Viikari J, Visvikis-Siest
S, Vitart V, Vogel CI, Voight BF, Waite LL, Wallaschofski H, Walters GB, Widen E,
Wiegand S, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Witte DR, Witteman JC, Xu J, Zhang Q, Zgaga L,
Ziegler A, Zitting P, Beilby JP, Farooqi IS, Hebebrand J, Huikuri HV, James AL,
Kähönen M, Levinson DF, Macciardi F, Nieminen MS, Ohlsson C, Palmer LJ, Ridker
PM, Stumvoll M, Beckmann JS, Boeing H, Boerwinkle E, Dorret I B, Caulfield MJ,
Chanock SJ, Collins FS, Cupples LA, Smith GD, Erdmann J, Froguel P, Grönberg H,
Gyllensten U, Hall P, Hansen T, Harris TB, Hattersley AT, Hayes RB, Heinrich J,
Hu FB, Hveem K, Illig T, Jarvelin MR, Kaprio J, Karpe F, Khaw KT, Kiemeney LA,
Krude H, Laakso M, Lawlor DA, Metspalu A, Munroe PB, Ouwehand WH, Pedersen O,
Penninx BW, Peters A, Pramstaller PP, Quertermous T, Reinehr T, Rissanen A, Rudan
I, Samani NJ, Schwarz PE, Shuldiner AR, Spector TD, Tuomilehto J, Uda M,
Uitterlinden A, Valle TT, Wabitsch M, Waeber G, Wareham NJ, Watkins H, McCarroll 
SA, Shaun P, Eric E S, Peter M V, Assimes TL, Borecki IB, Deloukas P, Fox CS,
Groop LC, Haritunians T, Hunter DJ, Kaplan RC, Mohlke KL, O'Connell JR, Peltonen 
L, Schlessinger D, Strachan DP, van Duijn CM, Barroso H, Boehnke M, Stefansson K,
North KE, McCarthy MI, Hirschhorn JN, Ingelsson E, Loos RJ, Nica AC, Parts L,
Glass D, Nisbet J, Barrett A, Sekowska M, Travers M, Potter S, Grundberg E, Small
K, Hedman ÅK, Bataille V, Bell JT, Surdulescu G, Dimas AS, Ingle C, Nestle FO, di
Meglio P, Min JL, Wilk A, Hammond CJ, Hassanali N, Yang TP, Montgomery SB,
O'Rahilly S, Lindgren CM, Zondervan KT, Soranzo N, Barroso I, Durbin R, Ahmadi K,
Deloukas P, McCarthy MI, Dermitzakis ET, Spector TD, Schunkert H, König IR,
Kathiresan S, Reilly MP, Assimes TL, Holm H, Preuss M, Stewart AF, Barbalic M,
Gieger C, Absher D, Aherrahrou Z, Allayee H, Altshuler D, Anand SS, Andersen K,
Anderson JL, Ardissino D, Ball SG, Balmforth AJ, Barnes TA, Becker DM, Becker LC,
Berger K, Bis JC, Boekholdt SM, Boerwinkle E, Braund PS, Brown MJ, Burnett MS,
Buysschaert I, Cardiogenics, Carlquist JF, Chen L, Cichon S, Codd V, Davies RW,
Dedoussis G, Dehghan A, Demissie S, Devaney JM, Diemert P, Do R, Doering A,
Eifert S, El Mokhtari NE, Ellis SG, Elosua R, Engert JC, Epstein SE, de Faire U, 
Fischer M, Folsom AR, Freyer J, Gigante B, Girelli D, Gretarsdottir S, Gudnason
V, Gulcher JR, Halperin E, Hammond N, Hazen SL, Hofman A, Horne BD, Illig T,
Iribarren C, Jones GT, Jukema JW, Kaiser MA, Kaplan LM, Kastelein JJ, Khaw KT,
Knowles JW, Kolovou G, Kong A, Laaksonen R, Lambrechts D, Leander K, Lettre G, Li
M, Lieb W, Loley C, Lotery AJ, Mannucci PM, Maouche S, Martinelli N, McKeown PP, 
Meisinger C, Meitinger T, Melander O, Merlini PA, Mooser V, Morgan T, Mühleisen
TW, Muhlestein JB, Münzel T, Musunuru K, Nahrstaedt J, Nelson CP, Nöthen MM,
Olivieri O, Patel RS, Patterson CC, Peters A, Peyvandi F, Qu L, Quyyumi AA, Rader
DJ, Rallidis LS, Rice C, Rosendaal FR, Rubin D, Salomaa V, Sampietro ML, Sandhu
MS, Schadt E, Schäfer A, Schillert A, Schreiber S, Schrezenmeir J, Schwartz SM,
Siscovick DS, Sivananthan M, Sivapalaratnam S, Smith A, Smith TB, Snoep JD,
Soranzo N, Spertus JA, Stark K, Stirrups K, Stoll M, Tang WH, Tennstedt S,
Thorgeirsson G, Thorleifsson G, Tomaszewski M, Uitterlinden AG, van Rij AM,
Voight BF, Wareham NJ, Wells GA, Wichmann HE, Wild PS, Willenborg C, Witteman JC,
Wright BJ, Ye S, Zeller T, Ziegler A, Cambien F, Goodall AH, Cupples LA,
Quertermous T, März W, Hengstenberg C, Blankenberg S, Ouwehand WH, Hall AS,
Deloukas P, Thompson JR, Stefansson K, Roberts R, Thorsteinsdottir U, O'Donnell
CJ, McPherson R, Erdmann J, Nilesh J S.

OBJECTIVE: Proinsulin is a precursor of mature insulin and C-peptide. Higher
circulating proinsulin levels are associated with impaired ß-cell function,
raised glucose levels, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Studies of 
the insulin processing pathway could provide new insights about T2D
pathophysiology.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We have conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide
association tests of ~2.5 million genotyped or imputed single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and fasting proinsulin levels in 10,701 nondiabetic adults
of European ancestry, with follow-up of 23 loci in up to 16,378 individuals,
using additive genetic models adjusted for age, sex, fasting insulin, and
study-specific covariates.
RESULTS: Nine SNPs at eight loci were associated with proinsulin levels (P < 5 × 
10(-8)). Two loci (LARP6 and SGSM2) have not been previously related to metabolic
traits, one (MADD) has been associated with fasting glucose, one (PCSK1) has been
implicated in obesity, and four (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, VPS13C/C2CD4A/B, and ARAP1,
formerly CENTD2) increase T2D risk. The proinsulin-raising allele of ARAP1 was
associated with a lower fasting glucose (P = 1.7 × 10(-4)), improved ß-cell
function (P = 1.1 × 10(-5)), and lower risk of T2D (odds ratio 0.88; P = 7.8 ×
10(-6)). Notably, PCSK1 encodes the protein prohormone convertase 1/3, the first 
enzyme in the insulin processing pathway. A genotype score composed of the nine
proinsulin-raising alleles was not associated with coronary disease in two large 
case-control datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified nine genetic variants associated with fasting
proinsulin. Our findings illuminate the biology underlying glucose homeostasis
and T2D development in humans and argue against a direct role of proinsulin in
coronary artery disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3178302
PMID: 21873549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Intervirology. 2012;55(4):263-75. doi: 10.1159/000328323. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

HIV-1 infection suppresses expression of host cell cycle-associated gene PDS5A.

Capalbo G(1), Müller-Kuller T, Ottmann OG, Hoelzer D, Scheuring UJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Infectious Diseases, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To unravel the interplay between HIV-1 and its host cell, the effect
of HIV-1 infection on cellular gene expression was investigated.
METHODS: HIV-1(SF33)-infected and uninfected H9 T cells were screened by
differential display and RNase protection assay. The finding (PDS5A) was
confirmed in HIV-1(Lai)-infected P4-CCR5 HeLa cells, which were also examined
after PDS5A siRNA knockdown in regard to HIV-1 replication by quantitative
RT-PCR, p24 ELISA and LTR-driven ß-galactosidase expression. The PDS5A knockdown 
effect on cellular gene expressions was studied by microarray analysis. PDS5A
tissue expression was determined by Northern blotting.
RESULTS: Regulator of cohesion maintenance, homolog A (PDS5A) was found to be
down-regulated by HIV-1. When PDS5A was suppressed by siRNA, HIV-1 replication
was unaffected. PDS5A was found to be highly expressed in skeletal muscle tissue,
and to lesser degrees in pancreas, heart, placenta, lung, kidney, liver and
brain. Microarray analysis of PDS5A knockdown revealed 91 differential gene
products over-representing cell cycle, transport and protein stability
regulation, including 4 genes (PP2A, RANTES, PCAF, TCF7L2) previously reported to
interact with HIV-1.
CONCLUSION: The data show a downregulation of proliferation-associated host gene 
PDS5A and suggest a role of PDS5A in HIV-1-induced cellular pathogenesis but not 
viral replication.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21865657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Bratisl Lek Listy. 2011;112(8):441-6.

Pharmacogenetics of oral antidiabetic treatment.

Schroner Z(1), Javorsky M, Kozarova M, Tkac I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 4, Center of Excellence for the Study of
Atherosclerosis, Faculty of Medicine, Safarik University, Kosice, Slovakia.
zbynek.schroner@gmail.com

In the majority of patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D), oral antidiabetic drug
(OAD) treatment is the first line treatment after lifestyle measures fail. Two
major groups of OAD are used in clinical practice--insulin secretagogues and
insulin sensitisers. Sulphonyluea (SU) derivatives are insulin secretagogues and 
stimulate insulin secretion by inhibiting ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Genes
KCNJ11 and ABCC8 encode potassium channel proteins. KCNJ11 gene Glu23Lys
polymorphism was associated with an increased risk of SU secondary failure, while
Ser1369Ala polymorphism of ABCC8 gene had influence antidiabetic efficacy of SU
drug gliclazide. In addition, the polymorphism of TCF7L2 gene, which has the
strongest association with T2D, also influenced secondary SU drug failure.
Insulin sensitisers include both metformin and glitazones. Some drug-genotype
associations were observed for metformin in patients with T2D. Several genes
influenced the effect of glitazone treatment. Rosiglitazone was more effective in
diabetes control in carriers of Prol2Ala polymorphism of PPARG gene encoding the 
PPARg-receptor--the target of this drug. Rosiglitazone treatment had less effect 
on glycemic control and adiponectin increase in T2D patients with GG-genotypes of
adiponectin (APM1) polymorphism. Pioglitazone treatment had smaller effect on
glycemic control in patients with LPL Ser447X polymorphism. Identification of
drug-genotype interactions in pharmacogenetic studies of the OAD treatment might 
have clinical implications in the near future resulting in selection of more
specific "patient-tailored therapy" in T2D (Tab. 1, Ref. 58).

PMID: 21863614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Pharmacol Rep. 2011;63(3):826-33.

Association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism with
posttransplant diabetes mellitus in kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus.

Kurzawski M(1), Dziewanowski K, Kedzierska K, Wajda A, Lapczuk J, Drozdzik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstanców Wlkp.
72, PL 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.

New onset posttransplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) has a high incidence after
kidney transplantation in patients medicated with tacrolimus. PTDM can adversely 
affect patient and graft survival. The pathophysiology of PTDM closely mimics
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). One of the possible genetic factors predisposing
individuals to PTDM might be a polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 
gene (TCF7L2). This polymorphism has previously been associated with increased
risk of T2DM in the general population. Therefore, the present study aimed to
evaluate TCF7L2 polymorphisms in PTDM in kidney transplant patients medicated
with tacrolimus. Non-diabetic kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus (n = 234) were genotyped for the presence of TCF7L2 gene variants
(rs12255372 and rs7903146) using TaqMan probes. Of the 234 patients, 66 patients 
had developed PTDM and 168 had not. Frequencies of the studied single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) did not differ significantly between the study groups.
Moreover, haplotype analyses failed to detect any associations between TCF7L2
haplotypes and PTDM. However, in late-onset PTDM (developed later that 2 weeks
from transplantation), frequencies of the rs7903146 TT genotype and T minor
allele were significantly increased compared to non-PTDM controls (17.9% vs.
5.9%, p = 0.017, OR: 4.13, 95% CI: 1.19-14.33 for TT genotype, 39.3% vs. 25.9%, p
= 0.038 for T allele). If the application of TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNPs as a marker
for PTDM is confirmed by further independent studies, replacing tacrolimus with
other immunosuppressants could be warranted in patients at high risk of PTDM, as 
diagnosed by TCF7L2 genotyping.

PMID: 21857094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1783-95. doi: 10.1101/gad.17227011. Epub 2011 Aug
19.

A novel mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of Wnt signaling in
development.

Vacik T(1), Stubbs JL, Lemke G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 Sep 1;25(17):1759-62.

Axial patterning of the embryonic brain requires a precise balance between
canonical Wnt signaling, which dorsalizes the nervous system, and Sonic hedgehog 
(Shh), which ventralizes it. The ventral anterior homeobox (Vax) transcription
factors are induced by Shh and ventralize the forebrain through a mechanism that 
is poorly understood. We therefore sought to delineate direct Vax target genes.
Among these, we identify an extraordinarily conserved intronic region within the 
gene encoding Tcf7l2, a key mediator of canonical Wnt signaling. This region
functions as a Vax2-activated internal promoter that drives the expression of
dnTcf7l2, a truncated Tcf7l2 isoform that cannot bind ß-catenin and that
therefore acts as a potent dominant-negative Wnt antagonist. Vax2 concomitantly
activates the expression of additional Wnt antagonists that cooperate with
dnTcf7l2. Specific elimination of dnTcf7l2 in Xenopus results in headless
embryos, a phenotype consistent with a fundamental role for this regulator in
forebrain development.

PMCID: PMC3175715
PMID: 21856776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Nov;94(2):e43-6. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.07.033. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

The expression of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in fat and placental
tissue from women with gestational diabetes.

Kuzmicki M(1), Telejko B, Wawrusiewicz-Kurylonek N, Kalejta K, Lemancewicz A,
Zdrodowski M, Grabiec M, Pryszczepko-Wawreszuk AM, Kretowski A, Gorska M,
Szamatowicz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. 
mkuzmicki@op.pl

In the present study we showed that the expression of transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) mRNA in visceral adipose tissue obtained from 20 women with
gestational diabetes was lower than in 18 pregnant women with normal glucose
tolerance (p = 0.02), however after adjusting for BMI values, the difference was 
not significant.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;75(5):612-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2011.00668.x.

A replication study of the IRS1, CAPN10, TCF7L2, and PPARG gene polymorphisms
associated with type 2 diabetes in two different populations of Mexico.

Martínez-Gómez LE(1), Cruz M, Martínez-Nava GA, Madrid-Marina V, Parra E,
García-Mena J, Espinoza-Rojo M, Estrada-Velasco BI, Piza-Roman LF, Aguilera P,
Burguete-García AI.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, México.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a chronic degenerative disease that involves the
participation of several genetic and environmental factors. The objective of the 
study was to determine the association of the IRS1 (rs1801278), CAPN10
(rs3792267), TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), and PPARG (rs1801282) gene
polymorphisms with T2D, in two different Mexican populations. We conducted a
case-control replication study in the state of Guerrero and in Mexico City, with 
400 subjects from Guerrero and 1065 from Mexico City. Data were analyzed by
logistic regression, adjusting by ancestry, age, gender, and BMI, to determine
the association with T2D. Heterozygosity for the Gly972Arg variant of the IRS1
gene showed the strongest association for T2D in both analyzed samples (OR =
2.43, 95% CI 1.12-5.26 and 2.64, 95% CI 1.37-5.10, respectively). In addition, an
association of two SNPs of the TCF7L2 gene with T2D was observed in both cities: 
rs7903146, (for Guerrero OR = 1.98 CI95% 1.02-3.89 and for Mexico OR = 1.94 CI95%
1.31-2.88) and rs12255372 (OR = 1.79 CI95% 1.08-2.97, OR = 1.78 CI95% 1.17-2.71
respectively). We suggest that our results provide strong evidence that variation
in the IRS1 and TCF7L2 genes confers susceptibility to T2D in our studied
populations.

© 2011 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2011 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 21834909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021518. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

TCF7L2 polymorphism, weight loss and proinsulin:insulin ratio in the diabetes
prevention program.

McCaffery JM(1), Jablonski KA, Franks PW, Dagogo-Jack S, Wing RR, Knowler WC,
Delahanty L, Dabelea D, Hamman R, Shuldiner AR, Florez JC; Diabetes Prevention
Program Research Group.

Collaborators: Bray GA, Culbert IW, Champagne CM, Eberhardt B, Greenway F,
Guillory FG, Herbert AA, Jeffirs ML, Kennedy BM, Lovejoy JC, Morris LH, Melancon 
LE, Ryan D, Sanford DA, Smith KG, Smith LL, St Amant JA, Tulley RT, Vicknair PC, 
Williamson D, Zachwieja JJ, Polonsky KS, Tobian J, Ehrmann D, Matulik MJ, Clark
B, Czech K, DeSandre C, Hilbrich R, McNabb W, Semenske AR, Caro JF, Watson PG,
Goldstein BJ, Smith KA, Mendoza J, Liberoni R, Pepe C, Spandorfer J, Donahue RP, 
Goldberg RB, Prineas R, Rowe P, Calles J, Cassanova-Romero P, Florez HJ,
Giannella A, Kirby L, Larreal C, McLymont V, Mendez J, Ojito J, Perry A, Saab P, 
Haffner SM, Montez MG, Lorenzo C, Martinez A, Hamman RF, Nash PV, Testaverde L,
Anderson DR, Ballonoff LB, Bouffard A, Calonge BN, Delve L, Farago M, Hill JO,
Hoyer SR, Jortberg BT, Lenz D, Miller M, Price DW, Regensteiner JG, Seagle H,
Smith CM, Steinke SC, VanDorsten B, Horton ES, Lawton KE, Arky RA, Bryant M,
Burke JP, Caballero E, Callaphan KM, Ganda OP, Franklin T, Jackson SD, Jacobsen
AM, Kula LM, Kocal M, Malloy MA, Nicosia M, Oldmixon CF, Pan J, Quitingon M,
Rubtchinsky S, Seely EW, Schweizer D, Simonson D, Smith F, Solomon CG, Warram J, 
Kahn SE, Montgomery BK, Fujimoto W, Knopp RH, Lipkin EW, Marr M, Trence D,
Kitabchi AE, Murphy ME, Applegate WB, Bryer-Ash M, Frieson SL, Imseis R, Lambeth 
H, Lichtermann LC, Oktaei H, Rutledge LM, Sherman AR, Smith CM, Soberman JE,
Williams-Cleaves B, Metzger BE, Johnson MK, Behrends C, Cook M, Fitzgibbon M,
Giles MM, Heard D, Johnson CK, Larsen D, Lowe A, Lyman M, McPherson D, Molitch
ME, Pitts T, Reinhart R, Roston S, Schinleber PA, Nathan DM, McKitrick C, Turgeon
H, Abbott K, Anderson E, Bissett L, Cagliero E, Florez JC, Delahanty L, Goldman
V, Poulos A, Olefsky JM, Carrion-Petersen ML, Barrett-Connor E, Edelman SV, Henry
RR, Horne J, Janesch SS, Leos D, Mudaliar S, Polonsky W, Smith J, Vejvoda K,
Pi-Sunyer FX, Lee JE, Allison DB, Aronoff NJ, Crandall JP, Foo ST, Pal C, Parkes 
K, Pena MB, Rooney ES, Van Wye GE, Viscovich KA, Marrero DG, Prince MJ, Kelly SM,
Dotson YF, Fineberg ES, Guare JC, Hadden AM, Ignaut JM, Jackson ML, Kirkman MS,
Mather KJ, Porter BD, Roach PJ, Rowland ND, Wheeler ML, Ratner RE, Youssef G,
Shapiro S, Bavido-Arrage C, Boggs G, Bronsord M, Brown E, Cheatham WW, Cola S,
Evans C, Gibbs P, Kellum T, Levatan C, Nair AK, Passaro M, Uwaifo G, Saad MF,
Budget M, Jinagouda S, Akbar K, Conzues C, Magpuri P, Ngo K, Rassam A, Waters D, 
Xapthalamous K, Santiago JV, Dagogo-Jack S, White NH, Das S, Santiago A, Brown A,
Fisher E, Hurt E, Jones T, Kerr M, Ryder L, Wernimont C, Saudek CD, Bradley V,
Sullivan E, Whittington T, Abbas C, Brancati FL, Clark JM, Charleston JB, Freel
J, Horak K, Jiggetts D, Johnson D, Joseph H, Loman K, Mosley H, Rubin RR, Samuels
A, Stewart KJ, Williamson P, Schade DS, Adams KS, Johannes C, Atler LF, Boyle PJ,
Burge MR, Canady JL, Chai L, Gonzales Y, Hernandez-McGinnis DA, Katz P, King C,
Rassam A, Rubinchik S, Senter W, Waters D, Shamoon H, Brown JO, Adorno E, Cox L, 
Crandall J, Duffy H, Engel S, Friedler A, Howard-Century CJ, Kloiber S, Longchamp
N, Martinez H, Pompi D, Scheindlin J, Violino E, Walker E, Wylie-Rosett J,
Zimmerman E, Zonszein J, Orchard T, Wing RR, Koenning G, Kramer MK, Barr S, Boraz
M, Clifford L, Culyba R, Frazier M, Gilligan R, Harrier S, Harris L, Jeffries S, 
Kriska A, Manjoo Q, Mullen M, Noel A, Otto A, Semler L, Smith CF, Smith M,
Venditti E, Weinzierl V, Williams KV, Wilson T, Arakaki RF, Latimer RW,
Baker-Ladao NK, Beddow R, Dias L, Inouye J, Mau MK, Mikami K, Mohideen P, Odom
SK, Perry RU, Knowler WC, Cooeyate N, Hoskin MA, Percy CA, Acton KJ, Andre VL,
Barber R, Begay S, Bennett PH, Benson MB, Bird EC, Broussard BA, Chavez M,
Dacawyma T, Doughty MS, Duncan R, Edgerton C, Ghahate JM, Glass J, Glass M,
Gohdes D, Grant W, Hanson RL, Horse E, Ingraham LE, Jackson M, Jay P, Kaskalla
RS, Kessler D, Kobus KM, Krakoff J, Manus C, Michaels S, Morgan T, Nashboo Y,
Nelson JA, Poirier S, Polczynski E, Reidy M, Roumain J, Rowse D, Sangster S,
Sewenemewa J, Tonemah D, Wilson C, Yazzie M, Bain R, Fowler S, Brenneman T, Abebe
S, Bamdad J, Callaghan J, Edelstein SL, Gao Y, Grimes KL, Grover N, Haffner L,
Jones S, Jones TL, Katz R, Lachin JM, Mucik P, Orlosky R, Rochon J, Sapozhnikova 
A, Sherif H, Stimpson C, Temprosa M, Walker-Murray F, Marcovina S, Strylewicz G, 
Aldrich FA, O'Leary D, Stamm E, Rautaharju P, Prineas RJ, Alexander T, Campbell
C, Hall S, Li Y, Mills M, Pemberton N, Rautaharju F, Zhang Z, Mayer-Davis E,
Moran RR, Ganiats T, David K, Sarkin AJ, Eastman R, Fradkin J, Garfield S, Gregg 
E, Zhang P, Herman W, Florez JC, Altshuler D, de Bakker PI, Franks PW, Hanson RL,
Jablonski K, Knowler WC, McAteer JB, Pollin TI, Shuldiner AR.

AIMS: TCF7L2 variants have been associated with type 2 diabetes, body mass index 
(BMI), and deficits in proinsulin processing and insulin secretion. Here we
sought to test whether these effects were apparent in high-risk individuals and
modify treatment responses.
METHODS: We examined the potential role of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant in
predicting resistance to weight loss or a lack of improvement of proinsulin
processing during 2.5-years of follow-up participants (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,994) from the
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), a randomized controlled trial designed to
prevent or delay diabetes in high-risk adults.
RESULTS: We observed no difference in the degree of weight loss by rs7903146
genotypes. However, the T allele (conferring higher risk of diabetes) at
rs7903146 was associated with higher fasting proinsulin at baseline (P<0.001),
higher baseline proinsulin:insulin ratio (p<0.0001) and increased
proinsulin:insulin ratio over a median of 2.5 years of follow-up (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003).
Effects were comparable across treatment arms.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of a lack of impact of the TCF7L2 genotypes on the
ability to lose weight, but the presence of a consistent effect on the
proinsulin:insulin ratio over the course of DPP, suggests that high-risk genotype
carriers at this locus can successfully lose weight to counter diabetes risk
despite persistent deficits in insulin production.

PMCID: PMC3144193
PMID: 21814547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3711-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.068270. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Tcf/Lef repressors differentially regulate Shh-Gli target gene activation
thresholds to generate progenitor patterning in the developing CNS.

Wang H(1), Lei Q, Oosterveen T, Ericson J, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

During neural tube development, Shh signaling through Gli transcription factors
is necessary to establish five distinct ventral progenitor domains that give rise
to unique classes of neurons and glia that arise in specific positions along the 
dorsoventral axis. These cells are generated from progenitors that display
distinct transcription factor gene expression profiles in specific domains in the
ventricular zone. However, the molecular genetic mechanisms that control the
differential spatiotemporal transcriptional responses of progenitor target genes 
to graded Shh-Gli signaling remain unclear. The current study demonstrates a role
for Tcf/Lef repressor activity in this process. We show that Tcf3 and Tcf7L2
(Tcf4) are required for proper ventral patterning and function by independently
regulating two Shh-Gli target genes, Nkx2.2 and Olig2, which are initially
induced in a common pool of progenitors that ultimately segregate into unique
territories giving rise to distinct progeny. Genetic and functional studies in
vivo show that Tcf transcriptional repressors selectively elevate the strength
and duration of Gli activity necessary to induce Nkx2.2, but have no effect on
Olig2, and thereby contribute to the establishment of their distinct expression
domains in cooperation with graded Shh signaling. Together, our data reveal a
Shh-Gli-independent transcriptional input that is required to shape the precise
spatial and temporal response to extracellular morphogen signaling information
during lineage segregation in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3152926
PMID: 21775418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Nov;301(5):E864-72. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00144.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Exendin-4 upregulates the expression of Wnt-4, a novel regulator of pancreatic
ß-cell proliferation.

Heller C(1), Kühn MC, Mülders-Opgenoorth B, Schott M, Willenberg HS, Scherbaum
WA, Schinner S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Rheumatology, University Hospital
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The Wnt-signaling pathway regulates ß-cell functions. It is not known how the
expression of endogenous Wnt-signaling molecules is regulated in ß-cells.
Therefore, we investigated the effect of antidiabetic drugs and glucose on the
expression of Wnt-signaling molecules in ß-cells. Primary islets were isolated
and cultured. The expression of Wnt-signaling molecules (Wnt-4, Wnt-10b,
Frizzled-4, LRP5, TCF7L2) and TNFa was analyzed by semiquantitative PCR and
Western blotting. Transient transfections were carried out and proliferation
assays of INS-1 ß-cells performed using [(3)H]thymidine uptake and BrdU ELISA.
Insulin secretion was quantified. A knockdown (siRNA) of Wnt-4 in ß-cells was
carried out. Exendin-4 significantly increased the expression of Wnt-4 in ß-cells
on the mRNA level (2.8-fold) and the protein level (3-fold) (P < 0.001). The
effect was dose dependent, with strongest stimulation at 10 nM, and it was
maintained after long-term stimulation over 4 wk. Addition of exd-(9-39), a GLP-1
receptor antagonist, abolished the effect of exendin-4. Treatment with glucose,
insulin, or other antidiabetic drugs had no effect on the expression of any of
the examined Wnt-signaling molecules. Functionally, Wnt-4 antagonized the
activation of canonical Wnt-signaling in ß-cells. Wnt-4 had no effect on
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion or insulin gene expression. Knocking down
Wnt-4 decreased ß-cell proliferation to 45% of controls (P < 0.05). In addition, 
Wnt-4 and exendin-4 treatment decreased the expression of TNFaa mRNA in primary
ß-cells. These data demonstrate that stimulation with exendin-4 increases the
expression of Wnt-4 in ß-cells. Wnt-4 modulates canonical Wnt signaling and acts 
as regulator of ß-cell proliferation and inflammatory cytokine release. This
suggests a novel mechanism through which GLP-1 can regulate ß-cell proliferation.

PMID: 21771967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Jun;23(6):646-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.03.009. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Capsaicin represses transcriptional activity of ß-catenin in human colorectal
cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Richardson RL, Dashwood RH, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-4542, USA. slee27@utk.edu

Capsaicin is a pungent ingredient in chili red peppers and has been linked to
suppression of growth in various cancer cells. However, the underlying
mechanism(s) by which capsaicin induces growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer
cells is not completely understood. In the present study, we investigated whether
capsaicin alters ß-catenin-dependent signaling in human colorectal cancer cells
in vitro. Exposure of SW480, LoVo and HCT-116 cells to capsaicin suppressed cell 
proliferation. Transient transfection with a ß-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF)-responsive reporter indicated that capsaicin suppressed the transcriptional
activity of ß-catenin/TCF. Capsaicin treatment resulted in a decrease of
intracellular ß-catenin levels and a reduction of transcripts from the ß-catenin 
gene (CTNNB1). These results were confirmed by a reduced luciferase reporter
activity driven by promoter-reporter construct containing the promoter region of 
the Catnb gene. In addition, capsaicin destabilized ß-catenin through enhancement
of proteosomal-dependent degradation. Western blot and immunoprecipitation
studies indicated that capsaicin treatment suppressed TCF-4 expression and
disrupted the interaction of TCF-4 and ß-catenin. This study identifies a role
for the ß-catenin/TCF-dependent pathway that potentially contributes to the
anticancer activity of capsaicin in human colorectal cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3197951
PMID: 21764279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Obes Rev. 2011 Nov;12(11):952-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2011.00907.x. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Genetic variants and the metabolic syndrome: a systematic review.

Povel CM(1), Boer JM, Reiling E, Feskens EJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven,
the Netherlands. cecile.povel@rivm.nl

Several candidate gene studies on the metabolic syndrome (MetS) have been
conducted. However, for most single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) no systematic
review on their association with MetS exists. A systematic electronic literature 
search was conducted until the 2nd of June 2010, using HuGE Navigator. English
language articles were selected. Only genes of which at least one SNP-MetS
association was studied in an accumulative total population = 4000 subjects were 
included. Meta-analyses were conducted on SNPs with three or more studies
available in a generally healthy population. In total 88 studies on 25 genes were
reviewed. Additionally, for nine SNPs in seven genes (GNB3, PPARG, TCF7L2, APOA5,
APOC3, APOE, CETP) a meta-analysis was conducted. The minor allele of rs9939609
(FTO), rs7903146 (TCF7L2), C56G (APOA5), T1131C (APOA5), C482T (APOC3), C455T
(APOC3) and 174G>C (IL6) were more prevalent in subjects with MetS, whereas the
minor allele of Taq-1B (CETP) was less prevalent in subjects with the MetS. After
having systematically reviewed the most studied SNP-MetS associations, we found
evidence for an association with the MetS for eight SNPs, mostly located in genes
involved in lipid metabolism.

© 2011 The Authors. obesity reviews © 2011 International Association for the
Study of Obesity.

PMID: 21749608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 16;31(7):842-57. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.287. Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 promotes hepatocarcinogenesis through
activation of a novel EGR1/ß-catenin signaling axis.

Lu D(1), Han C, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) is a key enzyme that couples with
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) for the production of PGE(2). Although COX-2 is known to
mediate the growth and progression of several human cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the role of mPGES-1 in hepatocarcinogenesis is
not well established. This study provides novel evidence for a key role of
mPGES-1 in HCC growth and progression. Forced overexpression of mPGES-1 in two
HCC cell lines (Hep3B and Huh7) increased tumor cell growth, clonogenic
formation, migration and invasion, whereas knockdown of mPGES-1 inhibited these
parameters, in vitro. In a mouse tumor xenograft model, mPGES-1-overexpressed
cells formed palpable tumors at earlier time points and developed larger tumors
when compared with the control (P<0.01); in contrast, mPGES-1 knockdown delayed
tumor development and reduced tumor size (P<0.01). Mechanistically,
mPGES-1-induced HCC cell proliferation, invasion and migration involve PGE(2)
production and activation of early growth response 1 (EGR1) and ß-catenin.
Specifically, mPGES-1-derived PGE(2) induces the formation of EGR1-ß-catenin
complex, which interacts with T-cell factor 4/lymphoid enhancer factor 1
transcription factors and activates the expression of ß-catenin downstream genes.
Our findings depict a novel crosstalk between mPGES-1/PGE(2) and EGR1/ß-catenin
signaling that is critical for hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3193853
PMID: 21743491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cancer Sci. 2011 Oct;102(10):1808-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02022.x. Epub
2011 Aug 2.

Interference of E2-2-mediated effect in endothelial cells by FAM96B through its
limited expression of E2-2.

Yang W(1), Itoh F, Ohya H, Kishimoto F, Tanaka A, Nakano N, Itoh S, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The basic helixloophelix protein E2-2 is known to play a role in quiescence of 
endothelial cells (ECs). However, it is unclear how the activity of E2-2 is
controlled in the cells. In this study, we identified FAM96B as an interaction
partner of E2-2. FAM96B interfered with E2-2-mediated effects on luciferase
reporter activities. Furthermore, the suppression of vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor 2 promoter activity by E2-2 was rescued by the expression of
FAM96B in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, FAM96B decreased the expression
of ectopic and endogenous E2-2 proteins. Mutational analysis revealed that the
middle region of FAM96B is required for the limited expression of E2-2 protein.
When FAM96B was expressed in ECs, the EC migration, proliferation, and tube
formation were potentiated. Taken together, these findings suggest that FAM96B
acts as a regulator of E2-2 through the control of its protein expression.

PMID: 21722264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Diabetologia. 2011 Sep;54(9):2217-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2222-5. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Type 2 diabetes: unravelling the interaction between genetic predisposition and
lifestyle.

Rathmann W(1), Kowall B, Giani G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biometrics and Epidemiology, German Diabetes Centre, Auf'm
Hennekamp 65, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany. rathmann@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de

PMID: 21710289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Clin Transl Sci. 2011 Jun;4(3):183-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-8062.2011.00284.x.

Association of TCF7L2 allelic variations with gastric function, satiation, and
GLP-1 levels.

Vazquez-Roque MI(1), Camilleri M, Vella A, Carlson P, Laugen J, Zinsmeister AR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Enteric Neuroscience Translational and Epidemiological Research
(CENTER), Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), a
regulator of proglucagon processing, is reproducibly associated with type 2
diabetes. GLP-1 alters gastric function and increases satiation.
HYPOTHESIS: Genetic variation in TCF7L2 is associated with satiation, gastric
motor function, and GLP-1 concentrations.
METHODS: In 62 adults, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of TCF7L2
(rs7903146) was genotyped and associations with gastric emptying (GE) of solids
and liquids, gastric volume (GV), and satiation (maximum tolerated volume and
symptoms after nutrient drink test) were explored using a dominant genetic model,
with gender and BMI as covariates. In 50 of the participants, we also measured
plasma GLP-1 during fasting and after ingestion of a nutrient drink.
RESULTS: Presence of the T allele compared to CC genotype in rs7903146 SNP of the
TCF7L2 gene was associated with reduced fasting GV (246.3 ± 11.4 mL for CC group,
compared to 215.7 ± 11.4 mL for CT/TT group, p= 0.05) and accelerated GE t(1/2)
of liquids (26.3 ± 2.0 minutes for CC compared to 17.7 ± 1.4 for CT/TT, p <
0.005). There was no significant association of rs7903146 SNP with GE of solids, 
gastric accommodation, satiation, fasting, or postprandial GLP-1.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest TCF7L2 is associated with altered gastric functions 
that may predispose to obesity.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3125688
PMID: 21707949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Sep 18;412(19-20):1831-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.06.014.
Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Effect of genetic polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics and efficacy of
glimepiride in a Korean population.

Cho HJ(1), Lee SY, Kim YG, Oh SY, Kim JW, Huh W, Ko JW, Kim HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Konyang University Hospital, College of
Medical Science Konyang University, Daejon, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Nov 20;412(23-24):2357. Huh, Woo-Seong [corrected to Huh,
Wooseong].

BACKGROUNDS: Glimepiride is a commonly used sulfonylurea hypoglycemic agent.
There is considerable interindividual variation in the response to sulfonylurea
for patients with type 2 diabetes. The purpose of this study was to investigate
whether genetic variations influence the efficacy of glimepiride in healthy
Korean subjects.
METHODS: A single 2-mg oral dose of glimepiride was administered to 46 healthy
volunteers. Serial blood sampling for 12h after oral dosing was performed for
determination of plasma glimepiride, glucose and insulin levels. We tested the
association of seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in four candidate
genes with the efficacy of glimepiride.
RESULTS: Pharmacodynamic profiles for plasma glucose and insulin showed no
statistically significant differences among genotype groups, and parameters were 
not different from one another. There were no association of the KCNJ11, NOS1AP, 
TCF7L2 and ABCC8 gene polymorphisms and the efficacy of glimepiride.
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of these polymorphisms provides no clinical useful
information for the pharmacogenetic therapeutic approach for Korean patients with
type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21704609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Clin Exp Med. 2012 Jun;12(2):115-9. doi: 10.1007/s10238-011-0144-7. Epub 2011 Jun
16.

Association of a common variant in TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus in a
Persian population.

Palizban A(1), Nikpour M, Salehi R, Maracy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Isfahan Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Centre, Isfahan University of 
Medical Sciences, Isfahan, I. R. Iran. palizban@pharm.mui.ac.ir

Diabetes is one of the most common and challenging health problems. Studies in
several nations show that polymorphisms within the transcription factor 7-like 2 
genes could be associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). Therefore, a case-control
study was conducted to find the association between SNP rs7903146 and T2D in our 
population. The study consists of 110 patients referring to clinic and 80 healthy
controls randomly selected based on WHO guideline. DNA was extracted from blood
and genotyped by PCR-RFLP with specific primers to amplify a fragment for
restriction enzyme (RsaI). A chi-square test was calculated to compare the
proportions of genotypes or alleles. Using a logistic regression model, the odds 
ratio for risk of developing T2D was calculated with and without adjustment for
age, sex, and BMI. The frequency of the T allele of rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism 
was significantly higher in diabetic subjects (47.3%) compared to that in normal 
subjects (34.4%). Logistic regression analysis of the rs7903146 polymorphism
showed that the odds ratio was 3.71(95% CI: 1.43-9.56; P: 0.008) for the TT
genotype and 1.26 (95% CI: 0.67-2.39; P: 0.516) for the CT genotype when compared
with the CC genotype. Odds ratio adjusted for age, sex, and BMI have shown
similar results. The results show that rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene is an important
susceptibility gene for T2D mellitus in the province of Isfahan, Iran. Our
results support the recent findings that rs7903146 of TCF7L2 gene is an important
genetic risk factor for the development of T2D in multiple ethnic groups.

PMID: 21678030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Genome Res. 2011 Sep;21(9):1417-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.123745.111. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Alterations in TCF7L2 expression define its role as a key regulator of glucose
metabolism.

Savic D(1), Ye H, Aneas I, Park SY, Bell GI, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
dsavic@uchicago.edu

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have consistently implicated noncoding
variation within the TCF7L2 locus with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk. While this
locus represents the strongest genetic determinant for T2D risk in humans, it
remains unclear how these noncoding variants affect disease etiology. To test the
hypothesis that the T2D-associated interval harbors cis-regulatory elements
controlling TCF7L2 expression, we conducted in vivo transgenic reporter assays to
characterize the TCF7L2 regulatory landscape. We found that the 92-kb genomic
interval associated with T2D harbors long-range enhancers regulating various
aspects of the spatial-temporal expression patterns of TCF7L2, including
expression in tissues involved in the control of glucose homeostasis. By
selectively deleting this interval, we establish a critical role for these
enhancers in robust TCF7L2 expression. To further determine whether variation in 
Tcf7l2 expression may lead to diabetes, we developed a Tcf7l2 copy-number allelic
series in mice. We show that a null Tcf7l2 allele leads, in a dose-dependent
manner, to lower glycemic profiles. Tcf7l2 null mice also display enhanced
glucose tolerance coupled to significantly lowered insulin levels, suggesting
that these mice are protected against T2D. Confirming these observations,
transgenic mice harboring multiple Tcf7l2 copies and overexpressing this gene
display reciprocal phenotypes, including glucose intolerance. These results
directly demonstrate that Tcf7l2 plays a role in regulating glucose tolerance,
suggesting that overexpression of this gene is associated with increased risk of 
T2D. These data highlight the role of enhancer elements as mediators of T2D risk 
in humans, strengthening the evidence that variation in cis-regulatory elements
may be a paradigm for genetic predispositions to common disease.

PMCID: PMC3166827
PMID: 21673050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1018-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2011.03359.x.

Gestational diabetes mellitus is associated with TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms
independent of HLA-DQB1*0602 genotypes and islet cell autoantibodies.

Papadopoulou A(1), Lynch KF, Shaat N, Håkansson R, Ivarsson SA, Berntorp K,
Agardh CD, Lernmark Å; DiPiS Study Group.

Collaborators: Carlsson A, Cederwall E, Cilio C, Jönsson B, Larsson H, Larsson K,
Lernmark B, Lindberg B, Neiderud J, Resic-Lindehammer S, Sjöblad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
Anastasia.Papadopoulou@med.lu.se

AIMS: To test whether the TCF7L2 gene was associated with gestational diabetes,
whether the association between TCF7L2 and gestational diabetes was independent
of HLA-DQB1*0602 and islet cell autoantibodies, as well as maternal age, number
of pregnancies, family history of diabetes and the HLA-DQB1 genotypes, and to
test whether the distribution of HLA-DQB1 alleles was affected by country of
birth.
METHODS: We genotyped the rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs7901695 single nucleotide
polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene in 826 mothers with gestational diabetes and in 
1185 healthy control subjects in the Diabetes Prediction in Skåne Study. The
mothers were also typed for HLA-DQB1 genotypes and tested for islet cell
autoantibodies against GAD65, insulinoma-associated antigen-2 and insulin.
RESULTS: The heterozygous genotypes CT, GT and TC of the rs7903146 (T is risk for
Type 2 diabetes), rs12255372 (T is risk for Type 2 diabetes) and rs7901695 (C is 
risk for Type 2 diabetes), respectively, as well as the homozygous genotypes TT, 
TT and CC of the rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs7901695, respectively, were strongly
associated with gestational diabetes (P < 0.0001). These associations remained
statistically significant after adjusting for maternal age, number of
pregnancies, family history of diabetes and HLA-DQ genotypes and were independent
of the presence of islet cell autoantibodies. No interaction was observed between
TCF7L2 and HLA-DQB1*0602, which was shown to be negatively associated with
gestational diabetes in mothers born in Sweden (P = 0.010).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 was associated with susceptibility for gestational
diabetes independently of the presence of HLA-DQB1*0602 and islet cell
autoantibodies and other factors such as maternal age, number of pregnancies,
family history of diabetes and other HLA-DQ genotypes. The HLA-DQB1*0602 was
negatively associated with gestational diabetes in mothers born in Sweden.

© 2011 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2011 Diabetes UK.

PMCID: PMC3170100
PMID: 21672010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Sep;93(3):390-5. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.05.017. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphism and
complication/comorbidity profile in type 2 diabetes patients.

Buraczynska M(1), Swatowski A, Markowska-Gosik D, Kuczmaszewska A, Ksiazek A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for DNA Analysis and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of
Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Dr K. Jaczewskiego 8, 20-954 Lublin,
Poland. monika.buraczynska@am.lublin.pl

Transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) has been associated with type 2
diabetes. We investigated the association of the rs7903146 SNP in this gene with 
clinical profile of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) patients. The study involved 980
patients with diabetic nephropathy (44%), diabetic retinopathy (42%), CVD (65%)
and early onset of diabetes (45%) and 924 healthy controls. Subjects were
genotyped for rs7903146 by PCR-RFLP. Genotype frequencies significantly differed 
between T2DM patients and controls (p<0.01, odds ratio (OR) for TT genotype 2.49 
(95% confidence interval (CI) 1.84-3.39). An association was observed between
rs7903146 and nephropathy (p<0.001), with 22% of TT homozygotes in this subgroup 
vs. 11% in patients without nephropathy (p=0.006, OR for TT 2.83, 95% CI
1.94-4.13). Association was stronger in patients with early onset of diabetes
(34% of TT vs. 12% in the late onset, p<0.001). In DN group 71% of TT homozygotes
had an early onset (OR 7.64, 95% CI 4.98-11.73 vs. controls). Our results confirm
association of rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene with increased risk of type 2
diabetes. The T allele is strongly associated with nephropathy, especially in
early onset of diabetes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21641671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Genet Mol Biol. 2010 Jul;33(3):449-51. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000056. Epub
2010 Sep 1.

Replication of TCF7L2 rs7903146 association with type 2 diabetes in an Iranian
population.

Amoli MM(1), Amiri P, Tavakkoly-Bazzaz J, Charmchi E, Hafeziyeh J, Keramatipour
M, Abiri M, Ranjbar SH, Larijani B.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Centre, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran Iran.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele is constantly 
associated with Type 2 diabetes in various populations and ethnic groups.
Nevertheless, this has not been observed in two studies involving Arab
populations. The aim of the present study was to investigate the association
between TCF7L2 rs7903146 in an Iranian population. Type 2 diabetes patients (N = 
258) and normal healthy control subjects (N = 168) from the same area, were
examined. The ARMS- PCR (Amplification Refractory Mutation System) technique,
subsequently validated by direct sequencing, was used for genotyping. Allele and 
genotype frequencies were significantly different between patients and controls
TT vs. CT + CC [p 0.0081 OR 3.4 95%CI (1.27-11.9)] and T vs. C allele [p 0.02 OR 
1.4 95%CI (1.03-1.9)]. Our data thus confirm the association between the
rs7903146 T allele and T2D in an Iranian population, contrary to previous reports
in Arab populations. This can possibly be attributed to differences in ethnic
background or the effects of environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC3036108
PMID: 21637413  [PubMed]


479. Nihon Rinsho. 2011 May;69(5):930-6.

[Association between polymorphisms of TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes with special
reference to incretin action].

[Article in Japanese]

Enya M(1), Horikawa Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu
University.

TCF7L2 is a Wnt signaling-associated transcription factor and is ubiquitously
expressed. Polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene exhibit the strongest association
with type 2 diabetes among approximately twenty susceptibility gene variants
identified to date. Although the mechanisms by which TCF7L2 affects
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes remain to be elucidated, several studies have
shown that decreased TCF7L2 protein inhibits the insulin secretory response to
oral glucose through impaired incretin action(GLP-1, GIP). In this review, we
discuss studies that investigate the association between polymorphisms of TCF7L2 
and the diabetic phenotype, especially in vitro beta cell function with special
reference to incretin action and the response to lifestyle intervention.

PMID: 21595284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Metabolism. 2011 Nov;60(11):1634-40. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.03.014. Epub
2011 May 6.

Genotype risk score of common susceptible variants for prediction of type 2
diabetes mellitus in Japanese: the Shimanami Health Promoting Program (J-SHIPP
study). Development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and genotype risk score.

Tabara Y(1), Osawa H, Kawamoto R, Onuma H, Shimizu I, Makino H, Kohara K, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research and Education, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon City, Ehime, Japan. tabara@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Recent genomewide association studies have successfully identified several
genotypes susceptible to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, only a few
studies have investigated whether these variations confer a risk of the future
development of T2DM. We conducted a longitudinal genetic epidemiological study to
clarify the prognostic significance of the T2DM-associated variants. The sample
population consisted of 2037 middle-aged to elderly community residents. Personal
health records were obtained from a clinical database administered by the local
government. Genotype risk score was calculated by the following variants, namely,
KCNQ1, TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2AB, SLC30A8, KCNJ11, PPARG, and GCKR. 
Susceptibility of these variants in Japanese has been confirmed by association
analysis. Among the 1824 subjects who did not have T2DM at baseline, 95 cases of 
T2DM were newly diagnosed during the 9.4-year follow-up period. Mean genotype
risk score in these subjects was significantly higher than that in the subjects
who remained nondiabetic (9.5 ± 1.8 vs 9.1 ± 2.0, P = .042). Although the initial
mean body mass index (24.7 ± 3.2 vs 23.0 ± 2.8, P < .001) and initial glucose
(106 ± 18 vs 90 ± 13, P < .001) were also significantly higher in those subjects 
who developed T2DM, the genotype risk score remained an independent determinant
of the development of T2DM even after adjustment for these parameters and
possible confounding factors. Per-allele odds ratio for the development of T2DM
was 1.12 (95% confidence interval, 1.00-1.25; P = .049). Type 2 diabetes
mellitus-susceptible genetic variants identified by a cross-sectional genomewide 
association study were significantly associated with the future development of
T2DM in a general population sample.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Mar;23(3):239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.11.020. Epub
2011 May 2.

Dietary saturated fat, gender and genetic variation at the TCF7L2 locus predict
the development of metabolic syndrome.

Phillips CM(1), Goumidi L, Bertrais S, Field MR, McManus R, Hercberg S, Lairon D,
Planells R, Roche HM.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrigenomics Research Group, UCD School of Public Health and Population
Science, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is the strongest genetic determinant of
type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and insulin-related phenotypes to date. Dietary fat is a
key environmental factor which may interact with genotype to affect risk of
metabolic syndrome (MetS) and T2DM. This study investigated the relationship
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism, insulin sensitivity/resistance and
MetS in the LIPGENE-SU.VI.MAX study of MetS cases and matched controls (n=1754)
and determined potential interactions with dietary fat intake. Female minor T
allele carriers of rs7903146 had increased MetS risk (odds ratio [OR] 1.66,
confidence interval [CI] 1.02-2.70, P=.04) and displayed elevated insulin
concentrations (P=.005), impaired insulin sensitivity (P=.011), increased
abdominal obesity (P=.008) and body mass index (P=.001) and higher blood pressure
(P<.05) compared to the CC homozygotes. Metabolic syndrome risk was also
modulated by dietary saturated fat (SFA) intake (P=.035 for interaction). High
dietary SFA intake (=15.5% energy) exacerbated MetS risk (OR 2.35, 95% CI
1.29-4.27, P=.005) and was associated with further impaired insulin sensitivity
in the T allele carriers relative to the CC homozygotes (P=.025) and particularly
to the T allele carriers with the lowest SFA intake (P=.008). No significant
genotype effect on MetS risk or insulin sensitivity was evident among low-SFA
consumers. In conclusion, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism influences MetS risk,
which is augmented by both gender and dietary SFA intake, suggesting novel
gene-diet-gender interactions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21543200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Jun;15(6):399-405. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0199.
Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Association of genetic variations in TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2
with Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Tunisia.

Kifagi C(1), Makni K, Boudawara M, Mnif F, Hamza N, Abid M, Granier C, Ayadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Targets for Diagnosis and Therapeutic in the Human Pathology Research Unit,
Center of Biotechnology of Sfax, route Sidi Mansour km 6, Sfax, Tunisia.

AIM: In recent genome-wide association studies, genetic variants in TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2 were associated with risk for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM). We aimed at investigating the association of these
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with T2DM and defining their corresponding
allelic and genotypic combinations in the Tunisian population. We also tried to
determine the effect of R325W of SLC30A8 on the modeled structural properties of 
the protein.
METHODS: Five SNPs were genotyped in 331 T2DM Tunisian patients and 403 healthy
subjects by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. A
model of residues 318-366 of the SLC30A8 protein was built by homology modeling.
RESULTS: LOC387761 provided the strongest evidence for replication, where
rs7480010 presented a risk of 2.41 with T2DM, followed by rs1111875 in HHEX (odds
ratio=1.95) and rs13266634 in SLC30A8 (odds ratio=1.59). None of the two other
SNPs previously reported was associated. The highest risk of T2DM was 3.1,
obtained by the genotype combination of the three associated SNPs. Modeling of
the cytoplasmic part of the SLC30A8 protein showed that the R325W change might
affect the electrostatic potential of the SLC30A8 protein.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that the SLC30A8, HHEX, and LOC387761 are more likely to
represent the genuine signals of T2DM in the Tunisian population.

PMID: 21510814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Front Neuroanat. 2011 Apr 5;5:23. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2011.00023. eCollection
2011.

Comparison of Pretectal Genoarchitectonic Pattern between Quail and Chicken
Embryos.

Merchán P(1), Bardet SM, Puelles L, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Centre for Biomedical Research 
on Rare Diseases (CIBERER 736), School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, 
Spain.

Regionalization of the central nervous system is controlled by local networks of 
transcription factors that establish and maintain the identities of
neuroepithelial progenitor areas and their neuronal derivatives. The conserved
cerebral Bauplan of vertebrates must result essentially from conserved patterns
of developmentally expressed transcription factors. We have previously produced
detailed molecular maps for the alar plate of prosomere 1 (the pretectal region) 
in chicken (Ferran et al., 2007, 2008, 2009). Here we compare the early molecular
signature of the pretectum of two closely related avian species of the family
Phasianidae, Coturnix japonica (Japanese quail) and Gallus gallus (chicken),
aiming to test conservation of the described pattern at a microevolutionary
level. We studied the developmental pretectal expression of Bhlhb4, Dbx1, Ebf1,
Gata3, Gbx2, Lim1, Meis1, Meis2, Pax3, Pax6, Six3, Tal2, and Tcf7l2 (Tcf4) mRNA, 
using in situ hybridization, and PAX7 immunohistochemistry. The genoarchitectonic
profile of individual pretectal domains and strata was produced, using comparable
section planes. Remarkable conservation of the combinatorial genoarchitectonic
code was observed, fundamented in a tripartite anteroposterior subdivision.
However, we found that at corresponding developmental stages the pretectal region
of G. gallus was approximately 30% larger than that of C. japonica, but seemed
relatively less mature. Altogether, our results on a conserved genoarchitectonic 
pattern highlight the importance of early developmental gene networks that
causally underlie the production of homologous derivatives in these two
evolutionarily closely related species. The shared patterns probably apply to
sauropsids in general, as well as to more distantly related vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC3074437
PMID: 21503155  [PubMed]


484. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 Apr;136(14):675-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1274562. Epub
2011 Mar 29.

[Recent advances in type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in German]

Barthel A(1), Rietzsch H, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik III, Universitätsklinikum Carl-Gustav-Carus
der technischen Universität Dresden, Bochum. Andreas.Barthel@endokrinologikum.com

Currently, the oral glucose tolerance test remains the "gold standard" for
diagnosing type 2 diabetes, HbA (1c) being of subordinate value because of its
limited diagnostic sensitivity. Fully evaluated risk scores and questionnaires
are helpful in determining individual type 2 diabetes risk profiles and may prove
valuable tools in preventing this type of diabetes. Genetic studies support our
current understanding of the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. In the near
future genetic data may become useful in optimizing individual preventative and
therapeutic strategies. Recent data suggest that it is reasonable to adjust
therapeutic aims on the specific situation of individual patients for achieving
optimal results. The present therapeutic armamentarium for the treatment of type 
2 diabetes has been rapidly extended over the recent years. To deal with this
situation, pharmacovigilance is an essential tool to ensure drug safety and
improve existing therapeutic standards.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21448825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Mar;133:294-9.

Screening with OGTT alone or in combination with the Indian diabetes risk score
or genotyping of TCF7L2 to detect undiagnosed type 2 diabetes in Asian Indians.

Mohan V(1), Goldhaber-Fiebert JD, Radha V, Gokulakrishnan K.

Author information: 
(1)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation & Dr Mohan's Diabetes Specialities Centre,
WHO Collaborating Centre for Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention & Control,
International Diabetes Federation Centre of Education, Chennai, India.
drmohans@vsnl.net

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: With increasing number of people with diabetes
worldwide, particularly in India, it is necessary to search for low cost
screening methods. We compared the effectiveness and costs of screening for
undiagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), using oral glucose tolerance testing
(OGTT) alone, or following a positive result from the Indian Diabetes Risk Score 
(IDRS) or following a positive result from genotyping of the TCF7L2 polymorphisms
in Asian Indians.
METHODS: In subjects without known diabetes (n=961) recruited from the Chennai
Urban Rural Epidemiology Study (CURES), OGTT, IDRS, and genotyping of rs12255372 
(G/T) and rs7903146(C/T) of TCF7L2 polymorphisms were done. IDRS includes four
parameters: age, abdominal obesity, family history of T2DM and physical activity.
RESULTS: OGTT identified 72 subjects with newly diagnosed diabetes (NDD),
according to the World Health Organization criteria of fasting plasma glucose =
126 mg/dl or a plasma glucose = 200 mg/dl, 2 h after 75 g oral glucose load. IDRS
screening (cut-off = 60) yielded 413 positive subjects, which included 54 (75%)
of the 72 NDD subjects identified by OGTT. Genotyping yielded 493 positive
subjects which only included 36 (50%) of the 72 NDD subjects showing less
discriminatory power. Screening with both SNPs missed 27 (37.5%) NDD subjects
identified by IDRS. In contrast, IDRS missed only 9 (12.5%) of the NDD subjects
identified by genotyping. Total screening cost for OGTT alone, or with IDRS were 
rs 384,400 and 182,810 respectively. Comparing OGTT alone to IDRS followed by
OGTT, the incremental cost per additional NDD subject detected by doing OGTT on
everyone was rs 11,199 (rs 201,590 for detecting additional 18 NDD subjects).
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: For screening a population of subjects without
diagnosed diabetes in India, a simple diabetes risk score is more effective and
less expensive than genotyping or doing OGTT on the whole population.

PMCID: PMC3103154
PMID: 21441683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jan;39(1):17-23. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0705-6. Epub 2011 Mar
25.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, PCSK1 and
PCSK2) and proinsulin conversion in a Chinese population.

Zheng X(1), Ren W, Zhang S, Liu J, Li S, Li J, Yang P, He J, Su S, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, China.

TCF7L2 and SLC30A8 have been found to be associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) as well as with impaired proinsulin processing recently, enzymes encoded
by PCSK1 and PCSK2 are reported to play an important role in the process of
proinsulin conversion. To investigate whether the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of TCF7L2, SLC30A8, PCSK1 and PCSK2 were associated with T2DM as well as
with proinsulin conversion in a Han Chinese population from Chongqing. A
case-control study was performed in Han Chinese subjects with normal control
(n=152) and T2DM (n=227), we genotyped rs7903146 and rs11196218 at TCF7L2,
rs13266634 at SLC30A8, rs3811951 at PCSK1 and rs2021785 at PCSK2. Plasma levels
of proinsulin were measured with an Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
Genotype distribution and associations with T2DM and fasting levels of proinsulin
and proinsulin/insulin ratios were analyzed. We confirmed the association of risk
allele of rs2021785 at PCSK2 with type 2 diabetes also existed in Han Chinese
population [OR=1.4489 with 95% CI (1.0285, 2.0412), P=0.0335]. Rs13266634 at
SLC30A8 had a tendency to be associated with fasting plasma levels of proinsulin 
(P=0.0639 in additive model). We did not find the significant association between
other SNPs and T2DM or fasting levels of proinsulin or proinsulin/insulin ratios.
Our results provide evidence that the association of PCSK2 and T2DM was also
existed in Han Chinese population in Chongqing. We were underpowered to detect
the association between other SNPs and T2DM or proinsulin conversion.

PMID: 21437630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Jul;338(1):2-11. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.179325. Epub
2011 Mar 23.

Celecoxib and 2,5-dimethyl-celecoxib prevent cardiac remodeling inhibiting
Akt-mediated signal transduction in an inherited dilated cardiomyopathy mouse
model.

Fan X(1), Takahashi-Yanaga F, Morimoto S, Zhan DY, Igawa K, Tomooka K, Sasaguri
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-selective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug, has been shown to inhibit Akt and prevent cardiac remodeling in aortic
banding-induced failing heart in mice. However, it may be difficult to use
celecoxib for the treatment of heart failure because of thromboembolic adverse
reactions. Since 2,5-dimethyl (DM)-celecoxib, a derivative unable to inhibit
COX-2, has been also reported to inhibit Akt, we attempted to examine whether
DM-celecoxib retains the ability to prevent cardiac remodeling and improve
cardiac functions using a mouse model of inherited dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). 
DM-celecoxib as well as celecoxib administered daily for 4 weeks inhibited Akt
and subsequent phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3ß and mammalian
target of rapamycin. Furthermore, both celecoxib and DM-celecoxib inhibited the
activities of nuclear factor of activated T cell and ß-catenin and the expression
of TCF7L2 (T-cell-specific transcriptional factor-7L2) and c-Myc, downstream
mediators related to cardiac hypertrophy. Functional and morphological
measurements showed that these compounds improved left ventricular systolic
functions (ejection fraction: vehicle, 34.7 ± 3.9%; 100 mg/kg celecoxib, 50.3 ±
1.1%, p < 0.01; 100 mg/kg DM-celecoxib, 49.8 ± 0.8%, p < 0.01), which was also
evidenced by the decrease in ß-myosin heavy chain and B-type natriuretic peptide,
and prevented hypertrophic cardiac remodeling (heart/body weight ratio: vehicle, 
10.4 ± 0.7 mg/g; 100 mg/kg celecoxib, 8.0 ± 0.3 mg/g, p < 0.01; 100 mg/kg
DM-celecoxib, 8.2 ± 0.1 mg/g, p < 0.05). As a consequence, both compounds
improved the survival rate (vehicle, 45%; 100 mg/kg celecoxib, 75%, p < 0.05; 100
mg/kg DM-celecoxib, 70%, p < 0.05). These results suggested that not only
celecoxib but also DM-celecoxib prevents cardiac remodeling and reduces mortality
in DCM through a COX-2-independent mechanism involving Akt and its downstream
mediators.

PMID: 21430081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 15;6(3):e17978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017978.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are linked to diabetic coronary
atherosclerosis.

Muendlein A(1), Saely CH, Geller-Rhomberg S, Sonderegger G, Rein P, Winder T,
Beer S, Vonbank A, Drexel H.

Author information: 
(1)Vorarlberg Institute for Vascular Investigation and Treatment, Feldkirch,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery disease (CAD) shares common risk factors with type 2 
diabetes (T2DM). Variations in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene,
particularly rs7903146, increase T2DM risk. Potential links between genetic
variants of the TCF7L2 locus and coronary atherosclerosis are uncertain. We
therefore investigated the association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and
angiographically determined CAD in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genotyped TCF7L2 variants rs7903146,
rs12255372, and rs11196205 in a cross-sectional study including 1,650 consecutive
patients undergoing coronary angiography for the evaluation of established or
suspected stable CAD. Significant CAD was diagnosed in the presence of coronary
stenoses =50%. Variant rs7903146 in the total study cohort was significantly
associated with significant CAD (adjusted additive OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29 [1.09-1.53];
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003). This association was strong and significant in T2DM patients
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>393; OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.91 [1.32-2.75]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) but not in non-diabetic subjects
(OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.09 [0.90-1.33]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.370). The interaction risk allele by T2DM was
significant (p(interaction)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002), indicating a significantly stronger impact 
of the polymorphism on CAD in T2DM patients than in non-diabetic subjects. TCF7L2
polymorphisms rs12255372 and rs11196205 were also significantly associated with
CAD in diabetic patients (adjusted additive OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.90 [1.31-2.74]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001 and 
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.75 [1.22-2.50]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002, respectively). Further, haplotype analysis
demonstrated that haplotypes including the rare alleles of all investigated
variants were significantly associated with CAD in the whole cohort as well as in
diabetic subjects (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.22 [1.04-1.43]; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.013 and OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.67 [1.19-2.22];
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that TCF7L2 variants rs7903146
rs12255372, and rs11196205 are significantly associated with angiographically
diagnosed CAD, specifically in patients with T2DM. TCF7L2 therefore appears as a 
genetic link between diabetes and atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3058059
PMID: 21423583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 1;70(1):59-63. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.01.031.
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

At-risk variant in TCF7L2 for type II diabetes increases risk of schizophrenia.

Hansen T(1), Ingason A, Djurovic S, Melle I, Fenger M, Gustafsson O, Jakobsen KD,
Rasmussen HB, Tosato S, Rietschel M, Frank J, Owen M, Bonetto C, Suvisaari J,
Thygesen JH, Pétursson H, Lönnqvist J, Sigurdsson E, Giegling I, Craddock N,
O'Donovan MC, Ruggeri M, Cichon S, Ophoff RA, Pietiläinen O, Peltonen L, Nöthen
MM, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Collier DA, Andreassen OA, Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans, Copenhagen University Hospital, Research
Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark; Copenhagen University,
Center for Pharmacogenomics, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is associated with increased risk of type II diabetes
and metabolic disorders. However, it is unclear whether this comorbidity reflects
shared genetic risk factors, at-risk lifestyle, or side effects of antipsychotic 
medication.
METHODS: Eleven known risk variants of type II diabetes were genotyped in
patients with schizophrenia in a sample of 410 Danish patients, each matched with
two healthy control subjects on sex, birth year, and month. Replication was
carried out in a large multinational European sample of 4089 patients with
schizophrenia and 17,597 controls (SGENE+) using Mantel-Haenszel test.
RESULTS: One type II diabetes at-risk allele located in TCF7L2, rs7903146 [T],
was associated with schizophrenia in the discovery sample (p = .0052) and in the 
replication with an odds ratio of 1.07 (95% confidence interval 1.01-1.14, p =
.033).
CONCLUSION: The association reported here with a well-known diabetes variant
suggests that the observed comorbidity is partially caused by genetic risk
variants. This study also demonstrates how genetic studies can successfully
examine an epidemiologically derived hypothesis of comorbidity.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21414605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2011 Mar;44(3):240-4. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and incident glucose
intolerance in Japanese-Brazilians.

Franco LF(1), Crispim F, Pereira AC, Moisés RS; Japanese-Brazilian Diabetes Study
Group.

Collaborators: Hirai A, Hirai AT, Harima H, Osiro K, Iunes M, Kikuchi M, Ferreira
SR, Gimeno SG, Franco LJ, Matsumura L, Moisés RS, Cardoso MA, de Barros N Jr,
Tomita N, Wakisaka K, Chaim R.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Common variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
found to be associated with type 2 diabetes in different ethnic groups. The
Japanese-Brazilian population has one of the highest prevalence rates of
diabetes. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to assess whether two
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF7L2, rs7903146 and rs12255372, could
predict the development of glucose intolerance in Japanese-Brazilians. In a
population-based 7-year prospective study, we genotyped 222 individuals (72 males
and 150 females, aged 56.2 ± 10.5 years) with normal glucose tolerance at
baseline. In the study population, we found that the minor allele frequency was
0.05 for SNP rs7903146 and 0.03 for SNP rs12255372. No significant allele or
genotype association with glucose intolerance incidence was found for either SNP.
Haplotypes were constructed with these two SNPs and three haplotypes were
defined: CG (frequency: 0.94), TT (frequency = 0.027) and TG (frequency = 0.026).
None of the haplotypes provided evidence for association with the incidence of
glucose intolerance. Despite no associations between incidence of glucose
intolerance and SNPs of the TCF7L2 gene in Japanese-Brazilians, we found that
carriers of the CT genotype for rs7903146 had significantly lower insulin levels 
2 h after a 75-g glucose load than carriers of the CC genotype. In conclusion, in
Japanese-Brazilians, a population with a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes,
common TCF7L2 variants did not make major contributions to the incidence of
glucose tolerance abnormalities.

PMID: 21399856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nature. 2011 Mar 10;471(7337):235-9. doi: 10.1038/nature09727.

CREBBP mutations in relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Mullighan CG(1), Zhang J, Kasper LH, Lerach S, Payne-Turner D, Phillips LA,
Heatley SL, Holmfeldt L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Buetow KH, Pui CH, Baker SD,
Brindle PK, Downing JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is a leading cause of death due to
disease in young people, but the biological determinants of treatment failure
remain poorly understood. Recent genome-wide profiling of structural DNA
alterations in ALL have identified multiple submicroscopic somatic mutations
targeting key cellular pathways, and have demonstrated substantial evolution in
genetic alterations from diagnosis to relapse. However, DNA sequence mutations in
ALL have not been analysed in detail. To identify novel mutations in relapsed
ALL, we resequenced 300 genes in matched diagnosis and relapse samples from 23
patients with ALL. This identified 52 somatic non-synonymous mutations in 32
genes, many of which were novel, including the transcriptional coactivators
CREBBP and NCOR1, the transcription factors ERG, SPI1, TCF4 and TCF7L2,
components of the Ras signalling pathway, histone genes, genes involved in
histone modification (CREBBP and CTCF), and genes previously shown to be targets 
of recurring DNA copy number alteration in ALL. Analysis of an extended cohort of
71 diagnosis-relapse cases and 270 acute leukaemia cases that did not relapse
found that 18.3% of relapse cases had sequence or deletion mutations of CREBBP,
which encodes the transcriptional coactivator and histone acetyltransferase
CREB-binding protein (CREBBP, also known as CBP). The mutations were either
present at diagnosis or acquired at relapse, and resulted in truncated alleles or
deleterious substitutions in conserved residues of the histone acetyltransferase 
domain. Functionally, the mutations impaired histone acetylation and
transcriptional regulation of CREBBP targets, including glucocorticoid responsive
genes. Several mutations acquired at relapse were detected in subclones at
diagnosis, suggesting that the mutations may confer resistance to therapy. These 
results extend the landscape of genetic alterations in leukaemia, and identify
mutations targeting transcriptional and epigenetic regulation as a mechanism of
resistance in ALL.

PMCID: PMC3076610
PMID: 21390130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Hum Hered. 2011;71(1):50-8. doi: 10.1159/000323567. Epub 2011 Mar 10.

A principal components-based clustering method to identify variants associated
with complex traits.

Black MH(1), Watanabe RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-9011, USA.

BACKGROUND: Multivariate methods ranging from joint SNP to principal components
analysis (PCA) have been developed for testing multiple markers in a region for
association with disease and disease-related traits. However, these methods
suffer from low power and/or the inability to identify the subset of markers
contributing to evidence for association under various scenarios.
METHODS: We introduce orthoblique principal components-based clustering (OPCC) as
an alternative approach to identify specific subsets of markers showing
association with a quantitative outcome of interest. We demonstrate the utility
of OPCC using simulation studies and an example from the literature on type 2
diabetes.
RESULTS: Compared to traditional methods, OPCC has similar or improved power
under various scenarios of linkage disequilibrium structure and genotype
availability. Most importantly, our simulations show how OPCC accurately parses
large numbers of markers to a subset containing the causal variant or its proxy.
CONCLUSION: OPCC is a powerful and efficient data reduction method for detecting 
associations between gene variants and disease-related traits. Unlike alternative
methodologies, OPCC has the ability to isolate the effect of causal SNP(s) from
among large sets of markers in a candidate region. Therefore, OPCC is an
improvement over PCA for testing multiple SNP associations with phenotypes of
interest.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3089426
PMID: 21389731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2011 Jul;27(5):499-505. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1194.

Association of TCF7L2 SNPs with age at onset of type 2 diabetes and
proinsulin/insulin ratio but not with glucagon-like peptide 1.

Silbernagel G(1), Renner W, Grammer TB, Hügl SR, Bertram J, Kleber ME, Hoffmann
MM, Winkelmann BR, März W, Boehm BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease, and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Variants in TCF7L2 have been associated with the age at onset of type
2 diabetes in Mexican Americans. However, there is a lack of data on this
relationship in Caucasians. Furthermore, risk alleles in TCF7L2 have been
suggested to account for decreased conversion of proinsulin to insulin and
decreased expression of GLP-1. We investigated the effect of the allelic variants
rs1225537 and rs7903146 in TCF7L2 on the age at onset of type 2 diabetes, the
plasma concentrations of proinsulin and GLP-1, and the ratio of proinsulin to
insulin in a German cohort.
METHODS: We studied 3185 participants of the LUdwigshafen RIsk and Cardiovascular
health (LURIC) study. Among these, 1021 subjects had type 2 diabetes. Data on age
at onset of diabetes were available in 925 subjects. OGTTs were performed in a
subgroup not previously known to have diabetes.
RESULTS: Carriers of the risk alleles in rs1225537 and rs7901346 had increased
risk of type 2 diabetes and elevated HbA(1c) (all p < 0.001). The risk alleles
were also associated with early onset of type 2 diabetes, decreased insulin
secretion and markedly increased proinsulin and proinsulin to insulin ratio (all 
p < 0.03). GLP-1 was not significantly related to the TCF7L2 genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that TCF7L2 variants are associated with an
early age of onset of type 2 diabetes in Caucasians and affects the conversion of
proinsulin to insulin. However, TCF7L2 is not consistently associated with
fasting GLP-1.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21384500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4914-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1102300108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

T-cell factor 4 functions as a tumor suppressor whose disruption modulates colon 
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Angus-Hill ML(1), Elbert KM, Hidalgo J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, and The Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway plays multiple and diverse roles in development by
regulating gene expression via T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor
(Tcf/Lef) DNA binding factors. Misregulation of this pathway is thought to
initiate colon adenoma formation. It is controversial whether Tcf4 (Tcf7L2)
functions as an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in colon carcinogenesis. We
show here that Tcf4 haploinsufficiency results in colon tumor formation in a
mouse tumor model that normally only develops small intestinal tumors. Further,
we show that loss of Tcf4 early in development and in adult colon results in
increased cell proliferation. These findings strongly suggest that Tcf4 normally 
modulates proliferation of the colonic epithelium and that disruption of Tcf4
activity increases proliferation, leading to colon tumorigenesis. Taken together,
our in vivo studies favor a tumor suppressor function for Tcf4.

PMCID: PMC3064334
PMID: 21383188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 2;31(9):3435-45. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4507-10.2011.

Changed histone acetylation patterns in normal-appearing white matter and early
multiple sclerosis lesions.

Pedre X(1), Mastronardi F, Bruck W, López-Rodas G, Kuhlmann T, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2011 Jun 1;31(22):8325.

The epigenetic identity of oligodendrocytes is modulated by posttranslational
modifications of histones. Acetylation of histone H3 results from the balance
between the activity of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone
deacetylases and modulates transcriptional activation. We have previously shown
that, in rodents, histone deacetylation favors oligodendrocyte differentiation,
whereas acetylation is associated with increased levels of transcriptional
inhibitors of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Here, we report, in humans brains,
a shift toward histone acetylation in the white matter of the frontal lobes of
aged subjects and in patients with chronic multiple sclerosis (MS). Increased
immunoreactivity for acetylated histone H3 was observed in the nuclei of NogoA+
oligodendrocytes in a subset of MS samples. These changes were associated with
high levels of transcriptional inhibitors of oligodendrocyte differentiation
(i.e., TCF7L2, ID2, and SOX2) and higher HAT transcript levels (i.e., CBP, P300) 
in female MS patients compared with non-neurological controls and correlated with
disease duration. Chromatin immunoprecipitation from samples of MS patients
revealed enrichment of acetyl-histone H3 at the promoter of the increased target 
genes (i.e., TCF7L2). The data in chronic lesions contrasted with findings in
early MS lesions, where a marked oligodendroglial histone deacetylation was
observed. Together, these data suggest that histone deacetylation is a process
that occurs at the early stages of the disease and whose efficiency decreases
with disease duration.

PMCID: PMC3081530
PMID: 21368055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;11:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-13.

An expression profile analysis of ES cell-derived definitive endodermal cells and
Pdx1-expressing cells.

Ogaki S(1), Harada S, Shiraki N, Kume K, Kume S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We developed an efficient in vitro method to differentiate mouse ES
cells into the definitive endoderm (DE) and then Pdx1-expressing pancreatic
lineages using mesodermal-derived supporting cells, M15. Using this method,
resulting ES cell-derived DE and Pdx1-expressing cells were isolated by cell
sorting, and their gene expression profiles were investigated with DNA
microarray. Genes that were specifically expressed in DE and/or in
Pdx1-expressing cells were extracted and their expression patterns in normal
embryonic development were studied.
RESULTS: Genes whose expression increased in DE and Pdx1 positive cells compared 
to the undifferentiated ES cells were chosen and in situ hybridizations were
performed. Out of 54 genes examined, 27 were expressed in the DE of E8.5 mouse
embryos and 15 genes were expressed in distinct domains in the pancreatic buds of
E14.5 embryos. Among those genes expressed were Foxq1, CpM, Foxp4, Pcdh1, and
Zmiz1, which were previously reported in other endodermal tissues. Genes, such as
Parm1, Tmem184a, Hipk2 and Sox4 were reported to be expressed during early
pancreatic development. Nptx2, C2cd4b, Tcf7l2 and Kiss1r were reported to be
associated with beta cell or pancreatic functions in the adult. Akr1c19, Aebp2,
Pbxip1 and Creb3l1, were novel and have not been described as being expressed
either in DE or the pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 27 genes, including 4 novel genes expressed in DE and 
pancreatic progenitor cells during normal development using an ES cell in vitro
differentiation system. These results showed that DE cells and
Pdx1/GFP-expressing cells obtained from our M15 based differentiation method
mimic cells during the normal developmental processes. Additionally, ES cells are
an excellent model for studies of early developmental processes.

PMCID: PMC3058101
PMID: 21362171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1906-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr072. Epub 2011 Feb
28.

TCF7L2 splice variants have distinct effects on beta-cell turnover and function.

Le Bacquer O(1), Shu L, Marchand M, Neve B, Paroni F, Kerr Conte J, Pattou F,
Froguel P, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Univ Lille Nord de France,
France.

Type 2 diabetes manifests when the ß-cell fails to secrete sufficient amounts of 
insulin to maintain normoglycemia and undergoes apoptosis. The disease
progression results from an interplay of environmental factors and genetic
predisposition. Polymorphisms in T-cell factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) strongly
correlate with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). While TCF7L2 mRNA is upregulated 
in islets in diabetes, protein levels are downregulated. The loss of TCF7L2
induces impaired function and apoptosis. By analyzing human isolated islets, we
provide three explanations for this opposite regulation and the mechanisms of
TCF7L2 on ß-cell function and survival. (i) We found TCF7L2 transcripts in the
human ß-cell, which had opposite effects on ß-cell survival, function and Wnt
signaling activation. While TCF7L2 clone B1, which lacks exons 13, 14, 15 and 16 
induced ß-cell apoptosis, impaired function and inhibited glucagon-like peptide 1
response and downstream targets of Wnt signaling, clones B3 and B7 which both
contain exon 13, improved ß-cell survival and function and activated Wnt
signaling. (ii) TCF7L2 mRNA is extremely unstable and is rapidly degraded under
pro-diabetic conditions and (iii) TCF7L2 depletion in islets induced activation
of glycogen synthase kinase 3-ß, but this was independent of endoplasmic
reticulum stress. We demonstrated function-specific transcripts of TCF7L2, which 
possessed distinct physiological and pathophysiological effects on the ß-cell.
The presence of deleterious TCF7L2 splice variants may be a mechanism of ß-cell
failure in T2DM.

PMID: 21357677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Diabetologia. 2011 Jun;54(6):1368-74. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2063-2. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Replication of 13 genome-wide association (GWA)-validated risk variants for type 
2 diabetes in Pakistani populations.

Rees SD(1), Hydrie MZ, Shera AS, Kumar S, O'Hare JP, Barnett AH, Basit A, Kelly
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratory, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. s.d.rees@bham.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies and subsequent
replication studies have greatly increased the number of validated type 2
diabetes susceptibility variants, but most of these have been conducted in
European populations. Despite the high prevalence of the disease in South Asians,
studies investigating GWA-validated type 2 diabetes risk variants in this ethnic 
group are limited. We investigated 30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
predominantly derived from recent GWA studies, to determine if and to what extent
these variants affect type 2 diabetes risk in two Punjabi populations,
originating predominantly from the District of Mirpur, Pakistan.
METHODS: Thirty SNPs were genotyped in 1,678 participants with type 2 diabetes
and 1,584 normoglycaemic control participants from two populations; one resident 
in the UK and one indigenous to the District of Mirpur.
RESULTS: SNPs in or near PPARG, TCF7L2, FTO, CDKN2A/2B, HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2,
SLC30A8, KCNQ1, JAZF1, IRS1, KLF14, CHCHD9 and DUSP9 displayed significant (p <
0.05) associations with type 2 diabetes, with similar effect sizes to those seen 
in European populations. A constructed genetic risk score was associated with
type 2 diabetes (p = 5.46 × 10(-12)), BMI (p = 2.25 × 10(-4)) and age at onset of
diabetes (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have demonstrated that 13 variants confer an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes in our Pakistani populations; to our knowledge 
this is the first time that SNPs in or near KCNQ1, JAZF1, IRS1, KLF14, CHCHD9 and
DUSP9 have been significantly associated with the disease in South Asians.
Large-scale studies and meta-analyses of South Asian populations are needed to
further confirm the effect of these variants in this ethnic group.

PMID: 21350842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Feb 24;12:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-30.

TCF7L2 and therapeutic response to sulfonylureas in patients with type 2
diabetes.

Holstein A(1), Hahn M, Körner A, Stumvoll M, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Variants in the TCF7L2 have been shown to be associated with an
increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Since the association with diabetes
could be explained by effects on insulin secretion, we investigated whether
patients with diabetes risk alleles at rs7903146 might have an altered
hypoglycaemic response to sulfonylureas (SUs).
METHODS: We recruited 189 patients with T2D being treated with SUs and determined
the rs7903146 diabetes risk genotype. We used a logistic regression with
secondary SU failure defined as an A1C =7.0% after 6 months of SU treatment.
RESULTS: In univariate regression analyses, TCF7L2 genotype was the only
predictor of SU treatment failure. The rs7903146 T allele was significantly more 
frequent in the group of patients who failed to respond to SU (36%) than in the
control group (26%) [P = 0.046; odds ratio (OR): 1.57 (1.01-2.45) in an additive 
mode of inheritance].
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that patients with diabetes risk alleles in TCF7L2 
have an altered hypoglycaemic response to SUs resulting in earlier secondary
failure.

PMCID: PMC3051886
PMID: 21349175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):411-7. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9837-8. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Genetic variations in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene: association of
TCF7L2 rs12255372(G/T) or rs7903146(C/T) with breast cancer risk and
clinico-pathological parameters.

Naidu R(1), Yip CH, Taib NA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University Sunway Campus, Jalan
Lagoon Selatan, 46150, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
kdrakeshna@hotmail.com

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the association between TCF7L2
rs12255372(G/T) or rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism and breast cancer risk, and
clinico-pathologic characteristics of the patients. Genotyping of these
polymorphisms was performed on 387 breast cancer patients and 252 normal and
healthy women who had no history of any malignancy using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method in a
hospital-based Malaysian population. The allele (P = 0.033) frequency of
rs7903146 (T) polymorphism was significantly higher in the cancer patients than
normal individuals. No significant association was demonstrated between CT
(OR(adj) = 1.386; 95% CI, 0.985-1.949) or TT (OR(adj) = 1.579; 95% CI,
0.869-2.870) genotype and breast cancer risk. However, women who were carriers of
T allele (OR(adj) = 1.316; 95% CI, 1.022-1.695) or T allele genotype (OR(adj) =
1.419; 95% CI, 1.027-1.960) showed significant increased risk of breast cancer.
Women who were GT heterozygotes (OR(adj) = 1.329; 95% CI, 0.948-1.862) or TT
homozygotes (OR(adj) = 1.574; 95% CI, 0.829-2.987), and carriers of T allele
genotype (OR(adj) = 1.365; 95% CI, 0.989-1.883) or T allele (OR(adj) = 1.284; 95%
CI, 0.995-1.657) were not associated with breast cancer risk. The rs7903146(T)
allele genotype was significantly associated with nodal involvement (P = 0.003)
but rs12255372 (T) allele genotype was not associated with the clinico-pathologic
characteristics. In conclusion, our findings suggest that rs7903146 (T) variant
may elevate the risk of breast cancer, thus could be a potential candidate for
breast cancer susceptibility. The variant may also increase the metastatic
potential of the tumor.

PMID: 21301999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jan 31;11:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-45.

Effects of EpCAM overexpression on human breast cancer cell lines.

Gostner JM(1), Fong D, Wrulich OA, Lehne F, Zitt M, Hermann M, Krobitsch S,
Martowicz A, Gastl G, Spizzo G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Oncology, Tyrolean Cancer Research Institute,
Innrain 66, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Recently, EpCAM has attracted major interest as a target for
antibody- and vaccine-based cancer immunotherapies. In breast cancer, the EpCAM
antigen is overexpressed in 30-40% of all cases and this increased expression
correlates with poor prognosis. The use of EpCAM-specific monoclonal antibodies
is a promising treatment approach in these patients.
METHODS: In order to explore molecular changes following EpCAM overexpression, we
investigated changes of the transcriptome upon EpCAM gene expression in
commercially available human breast cancer cells lines Hs578T and MDA-MB-231. To 
assess cell proliferation, a tetrazolium salt based assay was performed. A
TCF/LEF Reporter Kit was used to measure the transcriptional activity of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. To evaluate the accumulation of ß-catenin in the nucleus, 
a subcellular fractionation assay was performed.
RESULTS: For the first time we could show that expression profiling data of EpCAM
transfected cell lines Hs578TEpCAM and MDA-MB-231EpCAM indicate an association of
EpCAM overexpression with the downregulation of the Wnt signaling inhibitors
SFRP1 and TCF7L2. Confirmation of increased Wnt signaling was provided by a
TCF/LEF reporter kit and by the finding of the nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin 
for MDA-MB-231 EpCAM but not Hs578T EpCAM cells. In Hs578T cells, an increase of 
proliferation and chemosensitivity to Docetaxel was associated with EpCAM
overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show a cell type dependent modification of Wnt signaling 
components after EpCAM overexpression in breast cancer cell lines, which results 
in marginal functional changes. Further investigations on the interaction of
EpCAM with SFRP1 and TCF7L2 and on additional factors, which may be causal for
changes upon EpCAM overexpression, will help to characterize unique molecular
properties of EpCAM-positive breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3042418
PMID: 21281469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Apr 15;317(7):920-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.01.015. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Identification of T-cell factor-4 isoforms that contribute to the malignant
phenotype of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tsedensodnom O(1), Koga H, Rosenberg SA, Nambotin SB, Carroll JJ, Wands JR, Kim
M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital and The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is frequently activated in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Downstream signaling events involving the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade 
occur through T-cell factor (TCF) proteins. The human TCF-4 gene is composed of
17 exons with multiple alternative splicing sites. However, the role of different
TCF-4 isoforms in the pathogenesis of HCC is unknown. The purpose of this study
was to identify and characterize TCF-4 isoforms in HCC. We identified 14 novel
TCF-4 isoforms from four HCC cell lines. Functional analysis following
transfection and expression in HCC cells revealed distinct effects on the
phenotype. The TCF-4J isoform expression produced striking features of malignant 
transformation characterized by high cell proliferation rate, migration and
colony formation even though its transcriptional activity was low. In contrast,
the TCF-4K isoform displayed low TCF transcriptional activity; cell proliferation
rate and colony formation were reduced as well. Interestingly, TCF-4J and TCF-4K 
differed by only five amino acids (the SxxSS motif). Thus, these studies suggest 
that conserved splicing motifs may have a major influence on the transcriptional 
activity and functional properties of TCF-4 isoforms and alter the
characteristics of the malignant phenotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3066145
PMID: 21256126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2010 Dec 22;2011:936580. doi: 10.4061/2011/936580.

Increased mRNA Levels of TCF7L2 and MYC of the Wnt Pathway in Tg-ArcSwe Mice and 
Alzheimer's Disease Brain.

Blom ES(1), Wang Y, Skoglund L, Hansson AC, Ubaldi M, Lourdusamy A, Sommer WH,
Mielke M, Hyman BT, Heilig M, Lannfelt L, Nilsson LN, Ingelsson M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Geriatrics, Department of Public Health and Caring
Sciences, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Several components in the Wnt pathway, including ß-catenin and glycogen synthase 
kinase 3 beta, have been implied in AD pathogenesis. Here, mRNA brain levels from
five-month-old tg-ArcSwe and nontransgenic mice were compared using Affymetrix
microarray analysis. With surprisingly small overall changes, Wnt signaling was
the most affected pathway with altered expression of nine genes in tg-ArcSwe
mice. When analyzing mRNA levels of these genes in human brain, transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and v-myc myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (MYC),
were increased in Alzheimer's disease (AD) (P < .05). Furthermore, no clear
differences in TCF7L2 and MYC mRNA were found in brains with frontotemporal lobar
degeneration, suggesting that altered regulation of these Wnt-related genes could
be specific to AD. Finally, mRNA levels of three neurogenesis markers were
analyzed. Increased mRNA levels of dihydropyrimidinase-like 3 were observed in AD
brain, suggesting that altered Wnt pathway regulation may signify synaptic
rearrangement or neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3014771
PMID: 21234373  [PubMed]


4. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 30;5(12):e15647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015647.

Gene expression profiling reveals new aspects of PIK3CA mutation in
ERalpha-positive breast cancer: major implication of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Cizkova M(1), Cizeron-Clairac G, Vacher S, Susini A, Andrieu C, Lidereau R,
Bièche I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncogénétique, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche,
U745, Institut Curie/Hôpital René Huguenin, St-Cloud, France.

BACKGROUND: The PI3K/AKT pathway plays a pivotal role in breast cancer
development and maintenance. PIK3CA, encoding the PI3K catalytic subunit, is the 
oncogene exhibiting a high frequency of gain-of-function mutations leading to
PI3K/AKT pathway activation in breast cancer. PIK3CA mutations have been observed
in 30% to 40% of ERa-positive breast tumors. However the physiopathological role 
of PIK3CA mutations in breast tumorigenesis remains largely unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify relevant downstream target genes and 
signaling activated by aberrant PI3K/AKT pathway in breast tumors, we first
analyzed gene expression with a pangenomic oligonucleotide microarray in a series
of 43 ERa-positive tumors with and without PIK3CA mutations. Genes of interest
were then investigated in 249 ERa-positive breast tumors by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR. A robust collection of 19 genes was found to be differently 
expressed in PIK3CA-mutated tumors. PIK3CA mutations were associated with
over-expression of several genes involved in the Wnt signaling pathway (WNT5A,
TCF7L2, MSX2, TNFRSF11B), regulation of gene transcription (SEC14L2, MSX2,
TFAP2B, NRIP3) and metal ion binding (CYP4Z1, CYP4Z2P, SLC40A1, LTF, LIMCH1).
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This new gene set should help to understand the behavior
of PIK3CA-mutated cancers and detailed knowledge of Wnt signaling activation
could lead to novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3012715
PMID: 21209903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Annu Rev Nurs Res. 2011;29:227-60.

Shared genomics of type 2 and gestational diabetes mellitus.

Wung SF(1), Lin PC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, The University of Arizona, Tucson, USA.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most common complications of
pregnancy and the prevalence of GDM is increasing worldwide. Short- and long-term
complications of GDM on mothers and fetuses are well-recognized. These include
more than seven-fold higher risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) later in
life in women with GDM than those without. Evidence supports that GDM shares
several risk factors with T2DM, including genetic risks. This chapter reviewed
studies on candidate genes shared by T2DM and GDM published from 1990 to 2011. At
least 20 susceptible genes of T2DM have been studied in women with GDM in various
races. Results from current association studies on T2DM susceptible genes in GDM 
have shown significant heterogeneity There may be primary evidence that
polymorphisms of susceptible genes of T2DM such as transcription factor 7-like 2 
(TCF7L2) gene, potassium channel voltage-gate KQT-like subfamily member 1 (KCNQ1)
gene, and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 
1 (CDKAL1) gene, may increase risk of GDM. Associations between GDM and many
genetic variants have led to different findings across populations. Many genetic 
polymorphisms related to GDM were investigated in a single study or a single
population. Replication studies to verify contributions of both common and rare
genetic variants for GDM and T2DM in specific racial/ethnic groups are needed.

PMID: 22891507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):783-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-2002-7. Epub 2010 Dec
25.

Replication of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) loci for fasting plasma
glucose in African-Americans.

Ramos E(1), Chen G, Shriner D, Doumatey A, Gerry NP, Herbert A, Huang H, Zhou J, 
Christman MF, Adeyemo A, Rotimi C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 12 South Drive, MSC 5635,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Chronically elevated blood glucose (hyperglycaemia) is the
primary indicator of type 2 diabetes, which has a prevalence that varies
considerably by ethnicity in the USA, with African-Americans disproportionately
affected. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have significantly enhanced our
understanding of the genetic basis of diabetes and related traits, including
fasting plasma glucose (FPG). However, the majority of GWASs have been conducted 
in populations of European ancestry. Thus, it is important to conduct replication
analyses in populations with non-European ancestry to identify shared loci
associated with FPG across populations.
METHODS: We used data collected from non-diabetic unrelated African-American
individuals (n = 927) who participated in the Howard University Family Study to
attempt to replicate previously published GWASs of FPG. Of the 29 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously reported, we directly tested 20 in
this study. In addition to the direct test, we queried a 500 kb window centred on
all 29 reported SNPs for local replication of additional markers in linkage
disequilibrium (LD).
RESULTS: Using direct SNP and LD-based comparisons, we replicated multiple SNPs
previously associated with FPG and strongly associated with type 2 diabetes in
populations with European ancestry. The replicated SNPs included those in or near
TCF7L2, SLC30A8, G6PC2, MTNR1B, DGKB-TMEM195 and GCKR. We also replicated
additional variants in LD with the reported SNPs in ZMAT4 and adjacent to IRS1.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We identified multiple GWAS variants for FPG in our
cohort of African-Americans. Using an LD-based strategy we also identified SNPs
not previously reported, demonstrating the utility of using diverse populations
for replication analysis.

PMCID: PMC3052446
PMID: 21188353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 27;4:175. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-175.

Bio-informatics analysis of a gene co-expression module in adipose tissue
containing the diet-responsive gene Nnat.

Li X(1), Thomason PA, Withers DJ, Scott J.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Medicine Department, Imperial College
London, South Kensington, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
xinzhong.li@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Obesity causes insulin resistance in target tissues - skeletal
muscle, adipose tissue, liver and the brain. Insulin resistance predisposes to
type-2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Adipose tissue
inflammation is an essential characteristic of obesity and insulin resistance.
Neuronatin (Nnat) expression has been found to be altered in a number of
conditions related to inflammatory or metabolic disturbance, but its
physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms in adipose tissue, brain,
pancreatic islets and other tissues are not understood.
RESULTS: We identified transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) conserved in the
Nnat promoter, and transcription factors (TF) abundantly expressed in adipose
tissue. These include transcription factors concerned with the control of:
adipogenesis (Ppar<U+03B3>, Klf15, Irf1, Creb1, Egr2, Gata3); lipogenesis (Mlxipl,
Srebp1c); inflammation (Jun, Stat3); insulin signalling and diabetes
susceptibility (Foxo1, Tcf7l2). We also identified NeuroD1 the only documented TF
that controls Nnat expression. We identified KEGG pathways significantly
associated with Nnat expression, including positive correlations with
inflammation and negative correlations with metabolic pathways (most prominently 
oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism)
and protein turnover. 27 genes, including; Gstt1 and Sod3, concerned with
oxidative stress; Sncg and Cxcl9 concerned with inflammation; Ebf1, Lgals12 and
Fzd4 involved in adipogenesis; whose expression co-varies with Nnat were
identified, and conserved transcription factor binding sites identified on their 
promoters. Functional networks relating to each of these genes were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that Nnat is an acute diet-responsive gene in
white adipose tissue and hypothalamus; it may play an important role in
metabolism, adipogenesis, and resolution of oxidative stress and inflammation in 
response to dietary excess.

PMCID: PMC3022651
PMID: 21187013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):371-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.057463.

Connective tissue fibroblasts and Tcf4 regulate myogenesis.

Mathew SJ(1), Hansen JM, Merrell AJ, Murphy MM, Lawson JA, Hutcheson DA, Hansen
MS, Angus-Hill M, Kardon G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 North 2030 East, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Muscle and its connective tissue are intimately linked in the embryo and in the
adult, suggesting that interactions between these tissues are crucial for their
development. However, the study of muscle connective tissue has been hindered by 
the lack of molecular markers and genetic reagents to label connective tissue
fibroblasts. Here, we show that the transcription factor Tcf4 (transcription
factor 7-like 2; Tcf7l2) is strongly expressed in connective tissue fibroblasts
and that Tcf4(GFPCre) mice allow genetic manipulation of these fibroblasts. Using
this new reagent, we find that connective tissue fibroblasts critically regulate 
two aspects of myogenesis: muscle fiber type development and maturation.
Fibroblasts promote (via Tcf4-dependent signals) slow myogenesis by stimulating
the expression of slow myosin heavy chain. Also, fibroblasts promote the switch
from fetal to adult muscle by repressing (via Tcf4-dependent signals) the
expression of developmental embryonic myosin and promoting (via a
Tcf4-independent mechanism) the formation of large multinucleate myofibers. In
addition, our analysis of Tcf4 function unexpectedly reveals a novel mechanism of
intrinsic regulation of muscle fiber type development. Unlike other intrinsic
regulators of fiber type, low levels of Tcf4 in myogenic cells promote both slow 
and fast myogenesis, thereby promoting overall maturation of muscle fiber type.
Thus, we have identified novel extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms regulating
myogenesis. Most significantly, our data demonstrate for the first time that
connective tissue is important not only for adult muscle structure and function, 
but is a vital component of the niche within which muscle progenitors reside and 
is a critical regulator of myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3005608
PMID: 21177349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biochem. 2011 Feb;149(2):117-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq146. Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Roles of old players in the suppression of a new player: networks for the
transcriptional control of angiogenesis.

Watabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. t-watabe@umin.ac.jp

Comment on
    J Biochem. 2009 Feb;145(2):129-35.

During the formation of blood vessels, Id1, a member of the helix-loop-helix
(HLH) family, and TAL1/SCL, a basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factor, play
important roles in the activation of endothelial cells. Recent reports revealed
that E2-2, another bHLH transcription factor, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and 
in vivo by suppressing the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGFR2). Id1 and TAL1/SCL dimerize with E2-2 and relieve the
E2-2-mediated down-regulation of VEGFR2 expression, leading to the activation of 
endothelial cells. These findings reveal a novel interplay between HLH
transcription factors that regulate angiogenesis.

PMID: 21172954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Acta Pharm. 2010 Dec;60(4):387-406. doi: 10.2478/v10007-010-0040-9.

Genetic polymorphisms in diabetes: influence on therapy with oral antidiabetics.

Glamoclija U(1), Jevric-Cauevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Hercegovinalijek d.o.o., Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
una.glamoclija@hercegovinalijek.ba

Due to new genetic insights, etiologic classification of diabetes is under
constant scrutiny. Hundreds, or even thousands, of genes are linked with type 2
diabetes. Three common variants (Lys23 of KCNJ11, Pro12 of PPARG, and the T
allele at rs7903146 of TCF7L2) have been shown to be predisposed to type 2
diabetes mellitus across many large studies. Individually, each of these
polymorphisms is only moderately predisposed to type 2 diabetes. On the other
hand, monogenic forms of diabetes such as MODY and neonatal diabetes are
characterized by unique clinical features and the possibility of applying a
tailored treatment.Genetic polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing enzymes,
transporters, receptors, and other drug targets have been linked to
interindividual differences in the efficacy and toxicity of a number of
medications. Mutations in genes important in drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism and excretion (ADME) play a critical role in pharmacogenetics of
diabetes.There are currently five major classes of oral pharmacological agents
available to treat type 2 diabetes: sulfonylureas, meglitinides, metformin (a
biguanide), thiazolidinediones, and a-glucosidase inhibitors. Other classes are
also mentioned in literature.In this work, different types of genetic mutations
(mutations of the gene for glucokinase, HNF 1a, HNF1ß and Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunit
of KATP channel, PPAR-<U+03B3>, OCT1 and OCT2, cytochromes, direct drug-receptor
(KCNJ11), as well as the factors that influence the development of the disease
(TCF7L2) and variants of genes that lead to hepatosteatosis caused by
thiazolidinediones) and their influence on the response to therapy with oral
antidiabetics will be reviewed.

PMID: 21169132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E389-93. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1677. Epub 
2010 Dec 15.

Variants and haplotypes of TCF7L2 are associated with ß-cell function in patients
with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: the Verona Newly Diagnosed Type 2 Diabetes 
Study (VNDS) 1.

Bonetti S(1), Trombetta M, Malerba G, Boselli L, Trabetti E, Muggeo M, Stoico V, 
Negri C, Pignatti PF, Bonora E, Bonadonna RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

CONTEXT: Intronic variants of TCF7L2 are confirmed genetic risk factors for type 
2 diabetes and are associated to alterations in beta cell function in nondiabetic
individuals.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to test whether TCF7L2 variability may 
affect ß-cell function also in patients with type 2 diabetes.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional association study.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a university hospital referral center for
diabetes.
PATIENTS: Patients included 464 (315 males and 149 females) glutamic acid
decarboxylase-negative patients [age: median 59 yr (interquartile range: 52-65); 
body mass index: 29.3 kg/m(2) (26.5-32.9); fasting plasma glucose: 7.0 mmol/liter
(6.1-8.0)] with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes.
INTERVENTION(S): Interventions included frequently sampled oral glucose tolerance
test and euglycemic insulin clamp.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): ß-Cell function (derivative control and proportional
control); insulin sensitivity; genotypes of the following TCF7L2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms: rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205, and
rs12255372.
RESULTS: Both rs7901695 and rs7903146 diabetes risk alleles were associated with 
reduced proportional control of ß-cell function (P = 0.019 and P = 0.022,
respectively). Two low-frequency haplotypes were associated with extreme (best
and worst) phenotypes of ß-cell function (P < 0.01). No associations between
TCF7L2 genotypes and insulin sensitivity were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 diabetes risk variants, either as single-nucleotide
polymorphisms or as haplotypes, detrimentally influence ß-cell function and might
play a role in determining the metabolic phenotype of patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 21159844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):563-71. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1977-4. Epub 2010
Dec 12.

Association of indices of liver and adipocyte insulin resistance with 19
confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes in 6,733 non-diabetic Finnish
men.

Vangipurapu J(1), Stancáková A, Pihlajamäki J, Kuulasmaa TM, Kuulasmaa T,
Paananen J, Kuusisto J, Ferrannini E, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio University
Hospital, 70210, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Of the confirmed type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci only a few 
are known to affect insulin sensitivity. We examined the association of indices
of hepatic and adipocyte insulin resistance (IR) with 19 confirmed type 2
diabetes risk loci in a large population-based study.
METHODS: Non-diabetic participants (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8,460, age 57.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.0 years, BMI
26.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.8 kg/m(2); mean ± SD) from a population-based cohort underwent an OGTT. 
Of them, 6,733 non-diabetic men were genotyped for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near PPARG2 (also known as PPARG), KCNJ11, TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8,
THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, MTNR1B and SNP rs7480010. We investigated hepatic 
IR with a new index of liver IR. The adipocyte IR index was defined as a product 
of fasting NEFA and plasma insulin levels.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetes risk SNPs in or near KCNJ11 and HHEX were significantly 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0013), and those in or near CDKN2B, NOTCH2 and MTNR1B were nominally
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), associated with decreased liver IR index. The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 
was significantly associated with a high adipocyte IR index and nominally
associated with high liver IR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 seems to impair insulin's 
antilipolytic effect, leading to high NEFA release in the fasting state and IR.
In addition, the type 2 diabetes risk alleles of KCNJ11 and HHEX, which are known
to impair insulin secretion, were associated with increased hepatic insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 21153532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e15092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015092.

Efficient double fragmentation ChIP-seq provides nucleotide resolution
protein-DNA binding profiles.

Mokry M(1), Hatzis P, de Bruijn E, Koster J, Versteeg R, Schuijers J, van de
Wetering M, Guryev V, Clevers H, Cuppen E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Hubrecht Institute and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Immunoprecipitated crosslinked protein-DNA fragments typically range in size from
several hundred to several thousand base pairs, with a significant part of
chromatin being much longer than the optimal length for next-generation
sequencing (NGS) procedures. Because these larger fragments may be non-random and
represent relevant biology that may otherwise be missed, but also because they
represent a significant fraction of the immunoprecipitated material, we designed 
a double-fragmentation ChIP-seq procedure. After conventional crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation, chromatin is de-crosslinked and sheared a second time to
concentrate fragments in the optimal size range for NGS. Besides the benefits of 
increased chromatin yields, the procedure also eliminates a laborious
size-selection step. We show that the double-fragmentation ChIP-seq approach
allows for the generation of biologically relevant genome-wide protein-DNA
binding profiles from sub-nanogram amounts of TCF7L2/TCF4, TBP and H3K4me3
immunoprecipitated material. Although optimized for the AB/SOLiD platform, the
same approach may be applied to other platforms.

PMCID: PMC2994895
PMID: 21152096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;19(3):341-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.178. Epub 2010 Dec 
8.

Replication of genetic variants from genome-wide association studies with
metabolic traits in an island population of the Adriatic coast of Croatia.

Karns R(1), Zhang G, Jeran N, Havas-Augustin D, Missoni S, Niu W, Indugula SR,
Sun G, Durakovic Z, Narancic NS, Rudan P, Chakraborty R, Deka R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

Twenty-two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 gene regions previously
identified in obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) were evaluated for association with metabolic traits in a sample from an
island population of European descent. We performed a population-based study
using 18 anthropometric and biochemical traits considered as continuous variables
in a sample of 843 unrelated subjects (360 men and 483 women) aged 18-80 years
old from the island of Hvar on the eastern Adriatic coast of Croatia. All eight
GWAS SNPs in FTO were significantly associated with weight, body mass index,
waist circumference and hip circumference; 20 of the 32 nominal P-values remained
significant after permutation testing for multiple corrections. The strongest
associations were found between the two TCF7L2 GWAS SNPs with fasting plasma
glucose and HbA1c levels, all four P-values remained significant after
permutation tests. Nominally significant associations were found between several 
SNPs and other metabolic traits; however, the significance did not hold after
permutation tests. Although the sample size was modest, our study strongly
replicated the association of FTO variants with obesity-related measures and
TCF7L2 variants with T2D-related traits. The estimated effect sizes of these
variants were larger or comparable to published studies. This is likely
attributable to the homogenous genetic background of the relatively isolated
study population.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1018-4813/11

PMCID: PMC3061997
PMID: 21150882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;75(1):10-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00629.x. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

Genome-wide association scan allowing for epistasis in type 2 diabetes.

Bell JT(1), Timpson NJ, Rayner NW, Zeggini E, Frayling TM, Hattersley AT, Morris 
AP, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, UK.
jordana@well.ox.ac.uk

In the presence of epistasis multilocus association tests of human complex traits
can provide powerful methods to detect susceptibility variants. We undertook
multilocus analyses in 1924 type 2 diabetes cases and 2938 controls from the
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC). We performed a two-dimensional
genome-wide association (GWA) scan using joint two-locus tests of association
including main and epistatic effects in 70,236 markers tagging common variants.
We found two-locus association at 79 SNP-pairs at a Bonferroni-corrected P-value 
= 0.05 (uncorrected P-value = 2.14 × 10<U+207B>¹¹). The 79 pair-wise results always
contained rs11196205 in TCF7L2 paired with 79 variants including confirmed
variants in FTO, TSPAN8, and CDKAL1, which are associated in the absence of
epistasis. However, the majority (82%) of the 79 variants did not have compelling
single-locus association signals (P-value = 5 × 10<U+207B>4). Analyses conditional on
the single-locus effects at TCF7L2 established that the joint two-locus results
could be attributed to single-locus association at TCF7L2 alone. Interaction
analyses among the peak 80 regions and among 23 previously established diabetes
candidate genes identified five SNP-pairs with case-control and case-only
epistatic signals. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of systematic scans in
GWA data, but confirm that single-locus association can underlie and obscure
multilocus findings.

© 2010 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2010 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMCID: PMC3430851
PMID: 21133856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Crohns Colitis. 2010 Nov;4(5):523-31. doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2010.05.010. Epub
2010 Jul 6.

Paneth's disease.

Wehkamp J(1), Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus Stuttgart, Auerbachstr 110, 7076 Stuttgart, Germany. 
jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

In about 70% of patients Crohn's disease (CD) affects the small intestine. This
disease location is stable over time and associated with a genetic background
different from isolated colonic disease. A characteristic feature of small
intestinal host defense is the presence of Paneth cells at the bottom of the
crypts of Lieberkühn. These cells produce different broad spectrum antimicrobial 
peptides (AMPs) most abundantly the a-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und DEFA6). In
small intestinal Crohn's disease both these PC products are specifically reduced.
As a functional consequence, ileal extracts from Crohn's disease patients are
compromised in clearing bacteria and enteroadherent E. coli colonize the mucosa. 
Mechanisms for defective antimicrobial Paneth cell function are complex and
include an association with a NOD2 loss of function mutation, a disturbance of
the Wnt pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4), the autophagy
factor ATG16L1, the endosomal stress protein XBP1, the toll-like receptor TLR9,
the calcium mediated potassium channel KCNN4 as well as mutations or inactivation
of HD5. Thus we conclude that small intestinal Crohn's disease is most likely a
complex disease of the Paneth cell: Paneth's disease.

Copyright © 2010 European Crohn's and Colitis Organisation. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21122555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Jan;214(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.10.027. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Pleiotropic effects of TCF7L2 gene variants and its modulation in the metabolic
syndrome: from the LIPGENE study.

Delgado-Lista J(1), Perez-Martinez P, García-Rios A, Phillips CM, Williams CM,
Gulseth HL, Helal O, Blaak EE, Kiec-Wilk B, Basu S, Drevon CA, Defoort C, Saris
WH, Wybranska I, Riserus U, Lovegrove JA, Roche HM, Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Universidad de Córdoba and CIBER
Fisiopatología Obesidad y Nutrición CIBEROBN, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
14004 Córdoba, Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variants of the TCF7L2 gene predict the development of type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). We investigated the associations between gene variants 
of TCF7L2 and clinical features of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) (an entity often
preceding T2DM), and their interaction with non-genetic factors, including plasma
saturated fatty acids (SFA) concentration and insulin resistance (IR).
METHODS: Fasting lipid profiles, insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion,
anthropometrics, blood pressure and 10 gene variations of the TCF7L2 gene were
determined in 450 subjects with MetS.
RESULTS: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) showed phenotypic
associations independent of SFA or IR. Carriers of the rare T allele of
rs7903146, and of three other SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with rs7903146, had 
lower blood pressure and insulin secretion. High IR and the presence of the
T-allele of rs7903146 acted synergistically to define those with reduced insulin 
secretion. Carriers of the minor allele of rs290481 exhibited an altered lipid
profile, with increased plasma levels of apolipoprotein B, non-esterified fatty
acids, cholesterol and apolipoprotein B in triglyceride rich lipoproteins, and
LDL cholesterol. Carriers of the minor allele of rs11196224 that had higher
plasma SFA levels showed elevated procoagulant/proinflammatory biomarkers,
impaired insulin secretion and increased IR, whereas carriers of the minor allele
of rs17685538 with high plasma SFA levels exhibited higher blood pressure.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: SNP in the TCF7L2 gene are associated with
differences in insulin secretion, blood pressure, blood lipids and coagulation in
MetS patients, and may be modulated by SFA in plasma or IR.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21115178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Jan;13(1):89-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01324.x.

Effect of sulphonylurea treatment on glycaemic control is related to TCF7L2
genotype in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Schroner Z(1), Javorsky M, Tkacova R, Klimcakova L, Dobrikova M, Habalova V,
Kozarova M, Zidzik J, Rudikova M, Tkac I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Safarik University, L. Pasteur University
Hospital, Kosice, Slovakia.

The aim of the present study was to analyse effects of sulphonylurea treatment on
parameters of glycaemic control in relation to transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) genotypes. In 87 patients with type 2 diabetes who failed to achieve
glycaemic control on metformin monotherapy, effects of 6-month sulphonylurea in
addition to metformin on reductions in haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) and fasting plasma
glucose (FPG) levels were evaluated. Reduction in HbA1c and FPG in response to
6-month sulphonylurea treatment was significantly higher in patients with CC
genotype compared to those with the CT+TT genotype (1.16 ± 0.07 vs. 0.86 ± 0.07%,
p = 0.003; 1.57 ± 0.12 vs. 1.14 ± 0.14 mmol/l, p = 0.031, respectively). In the
multivariate analysis, baseline HbA1c and the TCF7L2 genotype were the only
significant predictors of HbA1c reduction. In conclusion, the magnitude of HbA1c 
and FPG reductions after 6-month sulphonylurea treatment in addition to metformin
is related to the TCF7L2 gene polymorphism.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21114608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):535-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1982-7. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

Association testing of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in multi-ethnic 
youth.

Dabelea D(1), Dolan LM, D'Agostino R Jr, Hernandez AM, McAteer JB, Hamman RF,
Mayer-Davis EJ, Marcovina S, Lawrence JM, Pihoker C, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of
Colorado Denver, 13001 17th Place, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
dana.dabelea@ucdenver.edu

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene have been associated with type 2 diabetes in adults. However, it is not
known whether TCF7L2 variation increases the risk of early onset type 2 diabetes.
Using a case-control design, we examined whether the reported variants
[rs12255372 (T/G) and rs7903146 (T/C)] are associated with type 2 diabetes in
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study participants.
METHODS: Variants were genotyped in 694 non-Hispanic white (NHW) youth (86 cases,
mean age 15.5 years, mean BMI 34.8; and 608 controls, mean age 14.4 years, mean
BMI 22.3) and 545 African-American (AA) youth (154 cases, mean age 15.9, mean BMI
37; and 391 controls, mean age 14.8, mean BMI 23.8). Logistic regression adjusted
for age, sex, BMI and West African ancestry.
RESULTS: The association of the risk T allele with case/control status was
different in AA and NHW youth (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). Among AA youth, each copy of the T
allele (rs7903146) was associated with a 1.97-fold (1.37, 2.82) increased odds
for type 2 diabetes (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), after adjustment for age, sex, BMI and African 
ancestry. No significant association was detected in NHW youth (adjusted OR,
1.14; 0.73, 1.79).
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: TCF7L2 variation is associated with an increased risk 
of early-onset type 2 diabetes among AA youth, and the association appears to be 
stronger in AA than NHW youth. This suggests potential different contributions of
genetic and environmental factors to early-onset type 2 diabetes by race.

PMCID: PMC3766323
PMID: 21109996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 17;5(11):e15542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015542.

Variants from GIPR, TCF7L2, DGKB, MADD, CRY2, GLIS3, PROX1, SLC30A8 and IGF1 are 
associated with glucose metabolism in the Chinese.

Hu C(1), Zhang R, Wang C, Wang J, Ma X, Hou X, Lu J, Yu W, Jiang F, Bao Y, Xiang 
K, Jia W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Recent meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in European
descent samples identified novel loci influencing glucose and insulin related
traits. In the current study, we aimed to evaluate the association between these 
loci and traits related to glucose metabolism in the Chinese.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genotyped seventeen single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from fifteen loci including GIPR, ADCY5, TCF7L2, VPS13C,
DGKB, MADD, ADRA2A, FADS1, CRY2, SLC2A2, GLIS3, PROX1, C2CD4B, SLC30A8 and IGF1
in 6,822 Shanghai Chinese Hans comprising 3,410 type 2 diabetic patients and
3,412 normal glucose regulation subjects. MADD rs7944584 showed strong
association to type 2 diabetes (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.5×10(-6), empirical p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0002) which was
not observed in the European descent populations. SNPs from GIPR, TCF7L2, CRY2,
GLIS3 and SLC30A8 were also associated with type 2 diabetes
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0487~2.0×10(-8)). Further adjusting age, gender and BMI as confounders
found PROX1 rs340874 was associated with type 2 diabetes (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0391). SNPs from 
DGKB, MADD and SLC30A8 were associated with fasting glucose while PROX1 rs340874 
was significantly associated with OGTT 2-h glucose (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0392~0.0014, adjusted
for age, gender and BMI), the glucose-raising allele also showed association to
lower insulin secretion. IGF1 rs35767 showed significant association to both
fasting and 2-h insulin levels as well as insulin secretion and sensitivity
indices (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0160~0.0035, adjusted for age, gender and BMI).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicated that SNPs from GIPR, TCF7L2,
DGKB, MADD, CRY2, GLIS3, PROX1, SLC30A8 and IGF1 were associated with traits
related to glucose metabolism in the Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC2984505
PMID: 21103350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Vitam Horm. 2010;84:355-87. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381517-0.00014-X.

Wnt and incretin connections.

García-Jiménez C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud (Health Science Faculty), Universidad Rey
Juan Carlos, Alcorcon, Madrid, Spain.

WNT signaling is emerging as a global regulator of metabolism, targeting multiple
tissues. This is achieved either directly through Wnt receptors, or indirectly
through the action of incretins, hormones that enhance glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion and target extrapancreatic organs that cooperatively control whole body
energy balance. WNT increases expression of incretins through evolutionarily
conserved elements located within their proximal promoters. Wnt-responsive
elements at the Incretin promoters may exhibit a high degree of selectivity for
specific WNT effectors. Additionally, Incretins may modulate Wnt signaling and
vice versa. Wnt-dependent modulation of incretin action in ß-pancreatic cells is 
suspected because the expression levels of Incretin receptors correlate with
those of the Wnt effector TCF7L2. Conversely, Wnt signaling is enhanced by
Incretin binding to their receptors which induces cAMP accumulation followed by
stabilization of the Wnt effector: ß-catenin. High glucose and/or lipids control 
the number of Incretin receptors exhibited by ß cells. Whether these nutrients
and/or the Incretins control Wnt receptors (either their expression or signaling)
remains to be further elucidated. Thus, Wnt controls the expression of incretins 
and modulate their signaling at pancreatic cells. Signaling by Wnt and incretins 
appears to be interconnected at multiple levels. The in vivo significance of
incretin induction by Wnt is unknown as it is the nature and origin of Wnt
signals in enteroendocrine cells but opens an intense research that promises many
surprises; in vitro approaches may be used for mechanistic studies and animal
models for physiological perspectives.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21094908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;9:290. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-290.

The two most common histological subtypes of malignant germ cell tumour are
distinguished by global microRNA profiles, associated with differential
transcription factor expression.

Murray MJ(1), Saini HK, van Dongen S, Palmer RD, Muralidhar B, Pett MR, Piipari
M, Thornton CM, Nicholson JC, Enright AJ, Coleman N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK.
mjm16@hutchison-mrc.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: We hypothesised that differences in microRNA expression profiles
contribute to the contrasting natural history and clinical outcome of the two
most common types of malignant germ cell tumour (GCT), yolk sac tumours (YSTs)
and germinomas.
RESULTS: By direct comparison, using microarray data for paediatric GCT samples
and published qRT-PCR data for adult samples, we identified microRNAs
significantly up-regulated in YSTs (n = 29 paediatric, 26 adult, 11 overlapping) 
or germinomas (n = 37 paediatric). By Taqman qRT-PCR we confirmed differential
expression of 15 of 16 selected microRNAs and further validated six of these
(miR-302b, miR-375, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-122, miR-205) in an independent
sample set. Interestingly, the miR-302 cluster, which is over-expressed in all
malignant GCTs, showed further over-expression in YSTs versus germinomas,
representing six of the top eight microRNAs over-expressed in paediatric YSTs and
seven of the top 11 in adult YSTs. To explain this observation, we used mRNA
expression profiles of paediatric and adult malignant GCTs to identify 10
transcription factors (TFs) consistently over-expressed in YSTs versus
germinomas, followed by linear regression to confirm associations between TF and 
miR-302 cluster expression levels. Using the sequence motif analysis environment 
iMotifs, we identified predicted binding sites for four of the 10 TFs (GATA6,
GATA3, TCF7L2 and MAF) in the miR-302 cluster promoter region. Finally, we showed
that miR-302 family over-expression in YST is likely to be functionally
significant, as mRNAs down-regulated in YSTs were enriched for 3' untranslated
region sequences complementary to the common seed of miR-302a~miR-302d. Such
mRNAs included mediators of key cancer-associated processes, including tumour
suppressor genes, apoptosis regulators and TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential microRNA expression is likely to contribute to the
relatively aggressive behaviour of YSTs and may enable future improvements in
clinical diagnosis and/or treatment.

PMCID: PMC2993676
PMID: 21059207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Diabetes. 2011 Feb;60(2):662-8. doi: 10.2337/db10-0134. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Resequencing and analysis of variation in the TCF7L2 gene in African Americans
suggests that SNP rs7903146 is the causal diabetes susceptibility variant.

Palmer ND(1), Hester JM, An SS, Adeyemo A, Rotimi C, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI,
Ng MC, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston Salem, North
Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) locus is
associated with type 2 diabetes across multiple ethnicities. The aim of this
study was to elucidate which variant in TCF7L2 confers diabetes susceptibility in
African Americans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Through the evaluation of tagging single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), type 2 diabetes susceptibility was limited to a 4.3-kb
interval, which contains the YRI (African) linkage disequilibrium (LD) block
containing rs7903146. To better define the relationship between type 2 diabetes
risk and genetic variation we resequenced this 4.3-kb region in 96 African
American DNAs. Thirty-three novel and 13 known SNPs were identified: 20 with
minor allele frequencies (MAF) >0.05 and 12 with MAF >0.10. These polymorphisms
and the previously identified DG10S478 microsatellite were evaluated in African
American type 2 diabetic cases (n = 1,033) and controls (n = 1,106).
RESULTS: Variants identified from direct sequencing and databases were genotyped 
or imputed. Fifteen SNPs showed association with type 2 diabetes (P < 0.05) with 
rs7903146 being the most significant (P = 6.32 × 10(-6)). Results of imputation, 
haplotype, and conditional analysis of SNPs were consistent with rs7903146 being 
the trait-defining SNP. Analysis of the DG10S478 microsatellite, which is outside
the 4.3-kb LD block, revealed consistent association of risk allele 8 with type 2
diabetes (odds ratio [OR] = 1.33; P = 0.022) as reported in European populations;
however, allele 16 (MAF = 0.016 cases and 0.032 controls) was strongly associated
with reduced risk (OR = 0.39; P = 5.02 × 10(-5)) in contrast with previous
studies.
CONCLUSIONS: In African Americans, these observations suggest that rs7903146 is
the trait-defining polymorphism associated with type 2 diabetes risk.
Collectively, these results support ethnic differences in type 2 diabetes
associations.

PMCID: PMC3028368
PMID: 20980453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Dec;14(6):781-5. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0095.
Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Population structure of Aggarwals of north India as revealed by molecular
markers.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease (SANCD), Public Health Foundation of
India, New Delhi, India.

Using molecular genetic data on Aggarwals (Vaish/Vysya), an endogamous population
group of north India, we provide evidence of its homogeneous unstratified
population structure. We found the mean average heterozygosity value of 0.33 for 
14 single nucleotide polymorphisms belonging to four genes (TCF7L2-, HHEX-,
KCNJ11-, and ADIPOQ-) in the Aggarwal population (sample of 184 individuals) and 
tried to evaluate the genomic efficiency of endogamy in this population with the 
help of clan-based stratified analysis. We concluded that the sociocultural
identity of the endogamous population groups could act as a robust proxy maker
for inferring their homogeneity and population structure in India, which is ideal
also for population selection for future genome-wide association studies in the
country.

PMCID: PMC3490109
PMID: 20979565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genet Mol Res. 2010 Oct 19;9(4):2060-8. doi: 10.4238/vol9-4gmr883.

Metagenomic study of single-nucleotide polymorphism within candidate genes
associated with type 2 diabetes in an Indian population.

Mukhopadhyaya PN(1), Acharya A, Chavan Y, Purohit SS, Mutha A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Division, geneOmbio Technologies, Pashan, Pune, Maharashtra, 
India. pnm6619@gmail.com

A population-based study was undertaken to evaluate linkage between
single-nucleotide polymorphisms known as risk factors and type 2 diabetes in an
Indian population. The study population was comprised of 40 normal
glucose-tolerant individuals (21 males and 19 females) and 40 type 2 diabetes
patients (21 males and 19 females). The genes and their corresponding
single-nucleotide polymorphisms that we screened were VDR (rs 731236 and rs
1544410), IL-6 (rs 1800795), TCF7L2 (rs 7903146) and TNF-a (rs 1800629). The risk
alleles were more frequent in the subjects with type 2 diabetes, except for the
TNF-a gene, which was very infrequent in the population; the normal allele
occurred at high and similar frequencies in both normal and diabetic individuals.

PMID: 20967696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2010 Jun 10;56 Suppl:OL1299-317.

Characterization of HuH6, Hep3B, HepG2 and HLE liver cancer cell lines by WNT/ß -
catenin pathway, microRNA expression and protein expression profile.

Di Masi A(1), Viganotti M, Antoccia A, Magrelli A, Salvatore M, Azzalin G, Tosto 
F, Lorenzetti S, Maranghi F, Mantovani A, Macino G, Tanzarella C, Taruscio D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi 446,
Rome Italy. dimasi@uniroma3.it

Somatic mutations in the genes members of WNT/ß-catenin pathway, especially in
CTNNB1 codifying for ß-catenin, have been found to play an important role in
hepatocarcinogenesis. The purpose of this work is to characterize alterations of 
the WNT/ß-catenin signalling pathway, and to study the expression pattern of a
panel of microRNAs and proteins potentially involved in the pathogenesis of liver
cancer. In this respect, the molecular characterization of the most used liver
cancer cell lines HuH6, Hep3B, HepG2, and HLE, could represent a useful tool to
identify novel molecular markers for hepatic tumour. A significant modulation of 
FZD7, NLK, RHOU, SOX17, TCF7L2, TLE1, SLC9A3R1 and WNT10A transcripts was
observed in all the four liver cancer cell lines. The analysis of selected
microRNAs showed that miR-122a, miR-125a and miR-150 could be suitable candidates
to discriminate tumoural versus normal human primary hepatocytes. Finally, Grb-2 
protein expression resulted to be increased more than two-fold in liver cancer
cell lines in comparison to normal human primary hepatocytes. These advances in
the knowledge of molecular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of liver
cancer may provide new potential biomarkers and molecular targets for the
diagnosis and therapy.

PMID: 20937217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):103-10. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1940-4. Epub 2010
Oct 19.

Carriers of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 TT genotype have elevated levels of plasma
glucose, serum proinsulin and plasma gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) during 
a meal test.

Gjesing AP(1), Kjems LL, Vestmar MA, Grarup N, Linneberg A, Deacon CF, Holst JJ, 
Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.
apri@hagedorn.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele
associates with type 2 diabetes in several populations, possibly mediated via
decreased incretin secretion and/or action and altered beta and alpha cell
function. We aimed to study circulating levels of glucose, proinsulin, insulin,
C-peptide, glucagon, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucagon-like peptide-2
(GLP-2) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) among individuals carrying the
high-risk rs7903146 TT genotype and low-risk CC genotype following a meal test.
METHODS: A meal challenge was performed in 31 glucose-tolerant men (age 54<U+2009>±<U+2009>7
years and BMI 26<U+2009>±<U+2009>3 kg/m²) with rs7903146 TT genotype and 31 glucose-tolerant
age- and BMI-matched men with CC genotype (age 53<U+2009>±<U+2009>6 years and BMI 26<U+2009>±<U+2009>3
kg/m²). Serum proinsulin, insulin, C-peptide and plasma glucose, glucagon, GLP-1,
GLP-2 and GIP were obtained 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 120, 135, 150, 180,
210, and 240 min after ingestion of a standardised breakfast meal.
RESULTS: An elevated incremental AUC for plasma glucose was observed among TT
genotype carriers (CC carriers 21.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>101.9 mmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers
97.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>89.2 mmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). TT carriers also had increased AUCs for
proinsulin (CC carriers 6,030<U+2009>±<U+2009>3,001 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers 6,917<U+2009>±<U+2009>4,820
pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03), C-peptide (CC carriers 397.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>131.9 nmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT 
carriers 417.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>109.3 nmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04) and GIP (CC carriers
12,310<U+2009>±<U+2009>3,840 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min vs TT carriers 14,590<U+2009>±<U+2009>5,910 pmol/l<U+2009>×<U+2009>min,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Middle-aged normoglycaemic individuals carrying the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 risk TT genotype show early signs of dysregulated glucose
metabolism, decreased processing of proinsulin and elevated GIP secretion
following a meal challenge.

PMID: 20957343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 8;11:140. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-140.

The longitudinal association of common susceptibility variants for type 2
diabetes and obesity with fasting glucose level and BMI.

Webster RJ(1), Warrington NM, Beilby JP, Frayling TM, Palmer LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Variation in the effects of genetic variants on physiological traits 
over time or with age may alter the trajectories of these traits. However, few
studies have investigated this possibility for variants associated with type 2
diabetes or obesity, and these show little consensus. We aimed to characterise
the possible longitudinal associations of common diabetes-susceptibility variants
in the KCNJ11, PPARG, TCF7L2, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8 and HHEX gene loci, with
fasting glucose level; and of an obesity-associated variant in the FTO gene, with
body mass index (BMI).
METHODS: The study analysed data from the Busselton Health Study (n = 4,554).
Cross-sectional association analyses included family data and used the total
association test. Longitudinal association analyses of unrelated participant data
(n = 2,864) used linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: In cross-sectional analyses, we observed associations of the T allele at
the IGF2BP2 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4402960 with raised fasting
glucose (p = 0.045), and the A allele at the FTO SNP rs9939609 with raised BMI (p
= 0.003). Longitudinal analyses showed no significant associations between SNPs
and changes in fasting glucose or BMI in the same individuals, either over mean
follow-up times of 18.7 and 21.8 years respectively, or with age during
adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no indication that the effects of common type 2 diabetes
variants on fasting glucose varied with age during adulthood or over time.

PMCID: PMC2958899
PMID: 20929593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Invest Clin. 2010 Jun;51(2):145-58.

[Fifty years studying hiperlipidemias: the case of familial combined
hyperlipidemia].

[Article in Spanish]

Aguilar-Salinas C(1), Gómez-Díaz R, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Endocrinología y Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición, México. caguilarsalinas@yahoo.com

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) is the most frequent primary
dyslipidemia. Its manifestations include hypercholesterolemia,
hypertriglyceridemia or the combination of both abnormalities. In spite of its
high frequency, the proper diagnosis is rarely done. For this purpose, the
measurement of a lipid profile is required in at least three first-degree
relatives. A critical review of the current literature in this field is presented
in this paper. Prospective studies have confirmed the atherogenicity of the
disease. It is possible to identify the FCHL causal genes with the current
methodology because it is an oligogenic disease. Based on the use of new
technologies, several loci that regulate apolipoprotein B concentrations have
been identified. In addition it was demostrated that variations of the activity
or the expression of various nuclear factors (USF1, TCF7L2, HNF4alfa) have a
major role in the pathophysiology of FCHL. These nuclear factors regulate the
expression of multiple genes involved in the metabolism of lipids or
carbohydrates.

PMID: 20928976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Diabetes. 2009 Dec;1(4):255-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-0407.2009.00040.x. Epub
2009 Jul 2.

Ethnic difference in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in inter-East Asian
populations: a systematic review and meta-analysis focusing on gene polymorphism.

Takeuchi M(1), Okamoto K, Takagi T, Ishii H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Information Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. takema@gen-info.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that the fasting serum insulin level was
significantly lower in Japanese patients than in Korean and Chinese patients, and
showed evidence that a difference in the dietary component would be one of the
most influential factors for the ethnic difference. However, it is well known
that type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) results from the interaction between genetic
predispositions and environmental risk factors. Therefore, we investigated ethnic
differences by focusing on gene polymorphism, possibly related to T2DM in
Japanese, Korean, and Chinese subjects.
METHODS: Data sources included MEDLINE and EMBASE between January 2001 and
October 2008. We conducted a search for articles containing minor allele
frequency (MAF) in the gene polymorphisms of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPARG), inward-rectifying potassium channel Kir6.2 (KCNJ11), Calpain 
10 (CAPN10), and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2). The pooled odds ratio
was calculated by using a fixed-effects model with the Mantel-Haenszel method
after confirming statistical evidence of homogeneity across the ethnicities using
the Breslow-Day test.
RESULTS: The Breslow-Day test revealed that there were no statistically
significant differences between ethnicities in pooled odds ratios for the gene
polymorphisms in PPARG (P = 0.828), KCNJ11 (P = 0.194), CAPN10 (P = 0.090), and
TCF7L2 (P = 0.376). Also, pooled odds ratios of each gene polymorphism in East
Asians were 0.645 for PPARG (P = 0.000), 1.168 for KCNJ11 (P = 0.000), 0.967 for 
CAPN10 (P = 0.759), and 1.386 for TCF7L2 (P = 0.000).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study and our previous studies suggest that
behavioral and environmental risk factors have a more significant impact on
ethnic difference in East Asian patients with T2DM compared with genetic
predispositions.

© 2009 Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 20923526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 May;29(3):291-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-010-0222-z. Epub
2010 Oct 2.

Regulation of Tcf7 by Runx2 in chondrocyte maturation and proliferation.

Mikasa M(1), Rokutanda S, Komori H, Ito K, Tsang YS, Date Y, Yoshida CA, Komori
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8588, Japan.

Runx2 plays important roles in the regulation of chondrocyte differentiation and 
proliferation; however, the Runx2 target molecules still remain to be
investigated. We searched the genes upregulated by the introduction of Runx2 into
Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes using microarray and found that Tcf7 is upregulated by
Runx2. Thus, we examined the functions of Runx2 in the regulation of the Tcf/Lef 
family of transcription factors. Runx2 induced Tcf7 and Lef1 strongly, but Tcf7l1
and Tcf7l2 only slightly in Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes; the expressions of Tcf7 and 
Tcf7l2 were reduced in Runx2(-/-) cartilaginous skeletons and calvaria, and Tcf7 
showed a similar expression pattern to Runx2. In reporter assays, Runx2 mildly
activated the 8.6 and 1.8 kb Tcf7 promoter constructs. The reporter assays using 
the deletion constructs of the 1.8-kb fragment showed that the 0.3-kb promoter
region is responsible for the Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. To
investigate the function of Tcf7 in skeletal development, we generated
dominant-negative (dn) Tcf7 transgenic mice using the Col2a1 promoter. Dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos showed dwarfism, and mineralization was retarded in limbs,
ribs, and vertebrae in a manner dependent on the expression levels of the
transgene. In situ hybridization analysis showed that endochondral ossification
is retarded in dn-Tcf7 transgenic embryos due to the decelerated chondrocyte
maturation. Further, BrdU labeling showed a reduction in chondrocyte
proliferation in the proliferating layer of the growth plate in dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos. These findings indicate that Runx2 regulates chondrocyte
maturation and proliferation at least partly through the induction of Tcf7.

PMID: 20890621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 3;285(49):38023-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.132209. Epub 2010
Sep 30.

Requirement of TCF7L2 for TGF-beta-dependent transcriptional activation of the
TMEPAI gene.

Nakano N(1), Itoh S, Watanabe Y, Maeyama K, Itoh F, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

The TGF-ß and Wnt pathways are involved in cell fate and tumorigenicity. A recent
report indicated that a TGF-ß target gene, TMEPAI (transmembrane prostate
androgen-induced RNA), is possibly also a downstream target of Wnt signaling.
Although TMEPAI was believed to be involved in tumorigenicity because of its
blockage of TGF-ß signaling, how TGF-ß and Wnt signals affect the activation of
the TMEPAI gene is not well understood. Herein, we show that the TMEPAI promoter 
is regulated synergistically by TGF-ß/Smad and Wnt/ß-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) 
7L2. The critical cis-element for dual signals, termed TGF-ß-responsive
TCF7L2-binding element (TTE), is located in intron 1 of the TMEPAI gene. TCF7L2, 
but not Smad proteins, bound to TTE, whereas the disruption of TTE by mutagenesis
remarkably counteracted both TGF-ß and TCF7L2 responses. The introduction of
mutations in critical Smad-binding elements blocked the activation of the TMEPAI 
promoter by TCF7L2. Furthermore, our DNA-protein interaction experiments revealed
the indirect binding of TCF7L2 to Smad-binding elements via Smad3 upon TGF-ß
stimulation as well as its TGF-ß-dependent association with TTE. We demonstrate
that the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway is preferentially able to alter the
transcriptional regulation of the TGF-ß-target gene, TMEPAI.

PMCID: PMC2992236
PMID: 20889500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Animal. 2010 Oct;4(10):1619-27. doi: 10.1017/S175173111000087X.

The Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha ( HNF1A) gene is associated with fatness
and loin muscle area in the pig.

Fan B(1), Du ZQ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa 
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The significance of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) in ß-cell development and
function has been generally recognized in humans, as evidenced by their
associations with cases of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Common
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A), Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
(HNF1B) and Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A) mutations could lead to
monogenic forms 3, 5 and 1 of diabetes mellitus, respectively, and were
characterized by MODY in humans. In this study, multiple variants were discovered
in the porcine HNF1A and HNF4A genes, and one single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) was detected in the HNF1B gene. Using the Iowa State University Berkshire ×
Yorkshire pig resource population, the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes were mapped
on chromosomes 14, 12 and 17, respectively. The linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analyses indicated that most of the HNF1A variants were not in strong LD with
each other; however, nearly all of them were highly significantly (P < 0.01)
associated with loin muscle area (LMA). The SNPs c.327-19G>T and c.1768+40_23del 
were significantly (P < 0.05) associated with backfat and total lipid percentage,
and the latter was also associated with muscle glycogen metabolism measures. Four
major haplotypes were observed and the association analyses suggested that
haplotype 3 (-CGCGD-, I indicates Insertion and D indicates Deletion) was
favorable for reduced backfat, while haplotype 1 (-CACGI-) was unfavorably
associated with backfat and LMA. There was no significant interaction effect on
backfat among the SNPs c.327-19G>T, c.1768+40_23del of the HNF1A gene and
c.646C>T of the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene. These findings
suggest that the HNF1A gene has significant effects on both fatness- and meat
production-related traits. No significant associations with production traits
with the SNPs from the HNF1B and HNF4A genes were observed in the study.

PMID: 22445113  [PubMed]


34. Curr Diab Rep. 2010 Dec;10(6):444-51. doi: 10.1007/s11892-010-0149-8.

Molecular function of TCF7L2: Consequences of TCF7L2 splicing for molecular
function and risk for type 2 diabetes.

Hansson O(1), Zhou Y, Renström E, Osmark P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC, Malmö University Hospital, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden. Ola.Hansson@med.lu.se

TCF7L2 harbors the variant with the strongest effect on type 2 diabetes (T2D)
identified to date, yet the molecular mechanism as to how variation in the gene
increases the risk for developing T2D remains elusive. The phenotypic changes
associated with the risk genotype suggest that T2D arises as a consequence of
reduced islet mass and/or impaired function, and it has become clear that TCF7L2 
plays an important role for several vital functions in the pancreatic islet.
TCF7L2 comprises 17 exons, five of which are alternative (ie, exons 4 and 13-16).
In pancreatic islets four splice variants of TCF7L2 are predominantly expressed. 
The regulation of these variants and the functional consequences at the protein
level are still poorly understood. A clear picture of the molecular mechanism
will be necessary to understand how an intronic variation in TCF7L2 can influence
islet function.

PMID: 20878273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Diab Rep. 2010 Dec;10(6):452-66. doi: 10.1007/s11892-010-0150-2.

From genetic association to molecular mechanism.

van de Bunt M(1), Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratories, Oxford Centre for Diabetes Endocrinology &
Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, OX3
7LJ, UK. martijn.vandebunt@ocdem.ox.ac.uk

Over the past 3 years, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of
confirmed type 2 diabetes (T2D) susceptibility loci, most arising through the
implementation of genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, progress
toward the understanding of disease mechanisms has been slowed by modest effect
sizes and the fact that most GWAS signals map away from coding sequence: the
presumption is that their effects are mediated through regulation of nearby
transcripts, but the identities of the genes concerned are often far from clear. 
In this review we describe the progress that has been made to date in translating
association signals into molecular mechanisms with a focus on the most tractable 
signals (eg, KCNJ11/ABCC8, SLC30A8, GCKR) and those in which human, animal, and
cellular models (FTO, TCF7L2, G6PC2) have provided insights into the role in T2D 
pathogenesis. Finally, the challenges for the field with the advent of
genome-scale next-generation resequencing efforts are discussed.

PMID: 20878272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genetika. 2010 Aug;46(8):1123-31.

[Polymorphic markers TCF7L2 rs12255372 and SLC30A8 rs13266634 confer
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in a Russian population].

[Article in Russian]

Potapov VA, Shamkhalova MN, Smetanina SA, Bel'chikova LN, Suplotova LA,
Shestakova MV, Nosikov VV.

Genes 7CF7L2 and SLC30A8, encoding transcription factor-4 and transmembrane zinc 
transporter-8, respectively, play an important role in the regulation of
development, proliferation, and pancreatic beta cell function. In the present
study we examined polymorphic markers of genes rs12255372 [NT_03359.12:g33557428G
--> T] of 7CF7L2 gene and rs13266634 [NP_776250.2:p.R325W] of SLC30A8 in groups
of Russians with type 2 diabetes (T2D) (n = 588) and healthy normoglycemic
controles (n = 597). Significant association of allele T(rs12255372) and allele R
(rs13266634) with a higher risk of T2D development has been found (OR = 1.37 and 
1.22, respectively). Adjustment for the effect of potential nongenetic risk
factors resulted in a further increase in the OR values, from 1.54 (P = 0.24) to 
1.89 (P = 0.046) for homozygous carriers of the T allele and from 1.29 (P =
0.035) to 1.35 (P = 0.019) in the individuals homozygous for the R allele. The
patients homozygous for predisposing allele T (rs12255372) or R (rs13266634) had 
significantly lower insulin concentrations in the blood 2 h after glucose
tolerance test (GTT) as well as lower values of HOMA-beta, beta cell homeostasis 
indicator compared to the carriers of other genotypes. Thus, we have shown that
the rs12255372 and rs13266634 markers are independent genetic T2D risk factors in
a Russian population.

PMID: 20873210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Brain Res. 2010 Dec 2;1363:20-39. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.024. Epub 2010 
Sep 16.

Developmental changes of gene expression after spinal cord injury in neonatal
opossums.

Mladinic M(1), Lefèvre C, Del Bel E, Nicholls J, Digby M.

Author information: 
(1)SISSA, Department of Neurobiology, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy.
mladinic@sissa.it

Changes in gene expression have been measured 24h after injury to mammalian
spinal cords that can and cannot regenerate. In opossums there is a critical
period of development when regeneration stops being possible: at 9 days postnatal
cervical spinal cords regenerate, at 12 days they do not. By the use of marsupial
cDNA microarrays, we detected 158 genes that respond differentially to injury at 
the two ages critical for regeneration. For selected candidates additional
measurements were made by real-time PCR and sites of their expression were shown 
by immunostaining. Candidate genes have been classified so as to select those
that promote or prevent regeneration. Up-regulated by injury at 8 days and/or
down-regulated by injury at 13 days were genes known to promote growth, such as
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 or transcription factor TCF7L2. By
contrast, at 13 days, up-regulation occurred of inhibitory molecules, including
annexins, ephrins, and genes related to apoptosis and neurodegenerative diseases.
Certain genes such as calmodulin 1 and NOGO, changed expression similarly in
animals that could and could not regenerate without any additional changes in
response to injury. These findings confirmed and extended changes of gene
expression found in earlier screens on 9 and 12 ay preparations without lesions
and provide a comprehensive list of genes that serve as a basis for testing how
identified molecules, singly or in combination, promote and prevent central
nervous system regeneration.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20849836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Nov;74(6):471-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00607.x. Epub 
2010 Sep 16.

The TCF7L2 diabetes risk variant is associated with HbA1(C) levels: a genome-wide
association meta-analysis.

Franklin CS(1), Aulchenko YS, Huffman JE, Vitart V, Hayward C, Polaek O, Knott
S, Zgaga L, Zemunik T, Rudan I, Campbell H, Wright AF, Wild SH, Wilson JF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified around 20 common genetic
variants influencing the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Likewise, a number of
variants have been associated with diabetes-related quantitative glycaemic
traits, but to date the overlap between these genes and variants has been low.
The majority of genetic studies have focused on fasting plasma glucose levels;
however, this measure is highly variable. We have conducted a GWA meta-analysis
of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1(C) ) levels within three healthy nondiabetic
populations. This phenotype provides an estimate of mean glucose levels over 2-3 
months and is a more stable predictor of future diabetes risk. Participants were 
from three isolated populations: the Orkney Isles in the north of Scotland, the
Dalmatian islands of Vis, and Korcula in Croatia (total of 1782 nondiabetic
subjects). Association was tested in each population and results combined by
meta-analysis. The strongest association was with the TCF7L2 gene (rs7903146, P= 
1.48 × 10<U+207B>7). This is also the strongest common genetic risk factor for T2D but
it has not been identified in previous genome-wide studies of glycated
haemoglobin.

© 2010 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2010 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 20849430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1072-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1007495. Epub 2010 Aug
25.

Major progress in Fuchs's corneal dystrophy.

Wright AF, Dhillon B.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1016-24.

PMID: 20825321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1016-24. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1007064. Epub 2010
Aug 25.

E2-2 protein and Fuchs's corneal dystrophy.

Baratz KH(1), Tosakulwong N, Ryu E, Brown WL, Branham K, Chen W, Tran KD,
Schmid-Kubista KE, Heckenlively JR, Swaroop A, Abecasis G, Bailey KR, Edwards AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 9;363(11):1072-5.

BACKGROUND: Fuchs's corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a leading cause of corneal
transplantation and affects 5% of persons in the United States who are over the
age of 40 years. Clinically visible deposits called guttae develop under the
corneal endothelium in patients with FCD. A loss of endothelial cells and
deposition of an abnormal extracellular matrix are observed microscopically. In
advanced disease, the cornea swells and becomes cloudy because the remaining
endothelial cells are not sufficient to keep the cornea dehydrated and clear.
Although rare genetic variation that contributes to both early-onset and typical 
late-onset forms of FCD has been identified, to our knowledge, no common variants
have been reported.
METHODS: We performed a genomewide association study and replicated the most
significant observations in a second, independent group of subjects.
RESULTS: Alleles in the transcription factor 4 gene (TCF4), encoding a member of 
the E-protein family (E2-2), were associated with typical FCD (P=2.3x10(-26)).
The association increased the odds of having FCD by a factor of 30 for persons
with two copies of the disease variants (homozygotes) and discriminated between
case subjects and control subjects with about 76% accuracy. At least two regions 
of the TCF4 locus were associated independently with FCD. Alleles in the gene
encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type G (PTPRG) were associated
with FCD (P=4.0x10(-7)), but the association did not reach genomewide
significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in TCF4 contributes to the development of FCD.
(Funded by the National Eye Institute and others.)

PMID: 20825314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Diabetes. 2010 Sep;59(9):e15; author reply e16. doi: 10.2337/db10-0748.

Comment on: Chauhan et al. (2010) Impact of common variants of PPARG, KCNJ11,
TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A, IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 on the risk of type 2 diabetes
in 5,164 Indians. Diabetes;59:2068-2074.

Gupta V, Ebrahim S.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2068-74.

PMID: 20805377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cells. 2010 Sep;30(3):209-18. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0109-9. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) regulates activin receptor-like kinase 1
(ALK1)/Smad1 pathway for development of diabetic nephropathy.

Araoka T(1), Abe H, Tominaga T, Mima A, Matsubara T, Murakami T, Kishi S, Nagai
K, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Deapartment of Nephrology, Graduate School of Medicine, Institute of
Health-Bio-Science, University of Tokushima, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.

Smad1 has previously been shown to play a key role in the development of diabetic
nephropathy (DN), by increasing synthesis of extracellular matrix. However, the
regulatory mechanism of Smad1 in DN is still unclear. This study aims to
elucidate molecular interactions between activin receptor-like kinase 1
(ALK1)/Smad1 signaling pathway and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in the 
progression of DN in vitro and in vivo. The expressions of TCF7L2 and ALK1 were
induced by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in parallel with Smad1,
phosphorylated Smad1 (pSmad1), and alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) through
TGF-ß1 in cultured mesangial cells. Constitutively active ALK1 increased pSmad1
and a-SMA expressions. The binding of TCF7L2 to ALK1 promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, TCF7L2 induced promoter
activity of ALK1. AGEs and TGF-ß1 induced a marked increase in TCF7L2 expression 
in parallel with ALK1. Overexpression of TCF7L2 increased the expressions of ALK1
and Smad1. Inversely, TCF7L2 knockdown by siRNA suppressed a-SMA expression as
well as ALK1 and Smad1. The iNOS transgenic mice (iNOS-Tgm), which developed
diabetic glomerulosclerosis resembling human diabetic nephropathy, exhibited
markedly increased expressions of ALK1, TCF7L2, Smad1, pSmad1, and a-SMA in
glomeruli in association with mesangial matrix expansion. These results provide a
new evidence that the TCF7L2/ALK1/Smad1 pathway plays a key role in the
development of DN.

PMID: 20803090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Diabetes. 2010 Dec;59(12):3247-52. doi: 10.2337/db10-0674. Epub 2010 Aug 29.

Glycemia determines the effect of type 2 diabetes risk genes on insulin
secretion.

Heni M(1), Ketterer C, Thamer C, Herzberg-Schäfer SA, Guthoff M, Stefan N,
Machicao F, Staiger H, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in diabetes risk genes 
reduce glucose- and/or incretin-induced insulin secretion. Here, we investigated 
interactions between glycemia and such diabetes risk polymorphisms.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Insulin secretion was assessed by insulinogenic
index and areas under the curve of C-peptide/glucose in 1,576 subjects using an
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Participants were genotyped for 10 diabetes
risk SNPs associated with ß-cell dysfunction: rs5215 (KCNJ11), rs13266634
(SLC30A8), rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs10830963 (MTNR1B),
rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs10010131 (WFS1), rs7923837 (HHEX), rs151290 (KCNQ1), and
rs4402960 (IGF2BP2). Furthermore, the impact of the interaction between genetic
variation in TCF7L2 and glycemia on changes in insulin secretion was tested in
315 individuals taking part in a lifestyle intervention study.
RESULTS: For the SNPs in TCF7L2 and WFS1, we found a significant interaction
between glucose control and insulin secretion (all P = 0.0018 for glucose ×
genotype). When plotting insulin secretion against glucose at 120 min OGTT, the
compromising SNP effects on insulin secretion are most apparent under high
glucose. In the longitudinal study, rs7903146 in TCF7L2 showed a significant
interaction with baseline glucose tolerance upon change in insulin secretion (P =
0.0027). Increased glucose levels at baseline predicted an increase in insulin
secretion upon improvement of glycemia by lifestyle intervention only in carriers
of the risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: For the diabetes risk genes TCF7L2 and WFS1, which are associated
with impaired incretin signaling, the level of glycemia determines SNP effects on
insulin secretion. This indicates the increasing relevance of these SNPs during
the progression of prediabetes stages toward clinically overt type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2992789
PMID: 20802253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2011 Jul-Aug;53(1):113-9. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2010.06.017. Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Revision of the ADA-classification of diabetes mellitus type 2 (DMT2): the
importance of maturity onset diabetes (MOD), and senile diabetes (DS).

Vacante M(1), Malaguarnera M, Motta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Senescence, Urological and Neurological Sciences, University of 
Catania, Ospedale Cannizzaro, Viale Messina, 829, I-95125 Catania, Italy.

The changing social and economic conditions and the increase of the life span
induced a progressive increase of the general prevalence of DMT2, particularly in
the elderly population of the highly evoluted countries. Up to now 18 genetic
loci have been identified, each of them consisting of several single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). The evidence that the DMT2 is regulated by a high number of
genes, demonstrate the pathogenetic complexity of this disease. The onset of
diabetes mellitus (DM) in medium age is a consequence of the breakdown of the
glycemic homeostasis in correlation with the genetic factors, such as the
variants of the TCF7L2, obesity, etc., and the environmental factors, such as the
life-style, the evolution of chronic-degenerative diseases, etc. In case of DM
that onsets in old age we have to add the deterioration of the anti-aging defense
mechanisms, characterized by the antagonistic action of the genes of longevity
and aging. One can observe several clinical and therapeutic differences;
therefore, the authors of this review propose the reinsertion of three forms into
the DMT2 correlated with the age of onset and with the actual age of the
subjects: the maturity onset diabetes (MOD), the maturity onset diabetes in
elderly (MODE), and the senile diabetes (DS).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Obes. 2010;2010. pii: 651903. doi: 10.1155/2010/651903. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Role of BMI in the Association of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 Variant with Coronary
Heart Disease: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study.

Kucharska-Newton AM(1), Monda KL, Bielinski SJ, Boerwinkle E, Rea TD, Rosamond
WD, Pankow JS, Köttgen A, Heiss G, North KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA.

We examined the association of variation in the type 2 diabetes risk-conferring
TCF7L2 gene with the risk of incident coronary heart disease (CHD) among the
lean, overweight, and obese members of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
(ARIC) Study cohort. Cox proportional hazard regression analyses were performed
using a general model, with the major homozygote as the reference category. For
9,865 whites, a significant increase in the risk of CHD was seen only among lean 
( BMI < 25 kg/m(2)) individuals homozygous for the T allele of the TCF7L2
rs7903146 gene risk variant (hazard ratio 1.42; 95% CI 1.03,1.97; P = .01). No
association was found among 3,631 blacks, regardless of BMI status. An attenuated
hazard ratio was observed among the nondiabetic ARIC cohort members. This study
suggests that body mass modifies the association of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele
with CHD risk.

PMCID: PMC2925094
PMID: 20798759  [PubMed]


46. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 12;5(8):e12109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012109.

Positive feedback regulation between phospholipase D and Wnt signaling promotes
Wnt-driven anchorage-independent growth of colorectal cancer cells.

Kang DW(1), Min do S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway occurs 
in almost all colorectal cancers and contributes to their growth, invasion and
survival. Phopholipase D (PLD) has been implicated in progression of colorectal
carcinoma However, an understanding of the targets and regulation of this
important pathway remains incomplete and besides, relationship between Wnt
signaling and PLD is not known.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we demonstrate that PLD isozymes, PLD1 and 
PLD2 are direct targets and positive feedback regulators of the Wnt/beta-catenin 
signaling. Wnt3a and Wnt mimetics significantly enhanced the expression of PLDs
at a transcriptional level in HCT116 colorectal cancer cells, whereas silencing
of beta-catenin gene expression or utilization of a dominant negative form of T
cell factor-4 (TCF-4) inhibited expression of PLDs. Moreover, both PLD1 and PLD2 
were highly induced in colon, liver and stomach tissues of mice after injection
of LiCl, a Wnt mimetic. Wnt3a stimulated formation of the beta-catenin/TCF
complexes to two functional TCF-4-binding elements within the PLD2 promoter as
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Suppressing PLD using gene
silencing or selective inhibitor blocked the ability of beta-catenin to
transcriptionally activate PLD and other Wnt target genes by preventing formation
of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex, whereas tactics to elevate intracellular
levels of phosphatidic acid, the product of PLD activity, enhanced these effects.
Here we show that PLD is necessary for Wnt3a-driven invasion and
anchorage-independent growth of colon cancer cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: PLD isozyme acts as a novel transcriptional target and
positive feedback regulator of Wnt signaling, and then promotes Wnt-driven
anchorage-independent growth of colorectal cancer cells. We propose that
therapeutic interventions targeting PLD may confer a clinical benefit in
Wnt/beta-catenin-driven malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2920823
PMID: 20711340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2334-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1861-2. Epub 2010
Aug 12.

Expression analysis of loci associated with type 2 diabetes in human tissues.

Cotsapas C(1), Prokunina-Olsson L, Welch C, Saxena R, Weaver C, Usher N, Guiducci
C, Bonakdar S, Turner N, LaCroix B, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):209.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic mapping has identified over 20 loci contributing to
genetic risk of type 2 diabetes. The next step is to identify the genes and
mechanisms regulating the contributions of genetic risk to disease. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the effect of age, height, weight and risk alleles on 
expression of candidate genes in diabetes-associated regions in three relevant
human tissues.
METHODS: We measured transcript abundance for WFS1, KCNJ11, TCF2 (also known as
HNF1B), PPARG, HHEX, IDE, CDKAL1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 by 
quantitative RT-PCR in human pancreas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50), colon (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>195) and liver
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50). Tissue samples were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes. The effects of age, height, weight,
tissue and SNP on RNA expression were tested by linear modelling.
RESULTS: Expression of all genes exhibited tissue bias. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed the findings for HHEX, IDE and SLC30A8, which showed strongest
tissue-specific mRNA expression bias. Neither age, height nor weight were
associated with gene expression. We found no evidence that type 2
diabetes-associated SNPs affect neighbouring gene expression (cis-expression
quantitative trait loci) in colon, pancreas and liver.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides new evidence that tissue-type,
but not age, height, weight or SNPs in or near candidate genes associated with
increased risk of type 2 diabetes are strong contributors to differential gene
expression in the genes and tissues examined.

PMID: 20703447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Diabetes. 2010 Oct;59(10):2682-9. doi: 10.2337/db10-0177. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study: common genetic variants
in GCK and TCF7L2 are associated with fasting and postchallenge glucose levels in
pregnancy and with the new consensus definition of gestational diabetes mellitus 
from the International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups.

Freathy RM(1), Hayes MG, Urbanek M, Lowe LP, Lee H, Ackerman C, Frayling TM, Cox 
NJ, Dunger DB, Dyer AR, Hattersley AT, Metzger BE, Lowe WL Jr; HAPO Study
Cooperative Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Common genetic variants in GCK and TCF7L2 are associated with higher
fasting glucose and type 2 diabetes in nonpregnant populations. However, their
associations with glucose levels from oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs) in
pregnancy have not been assessed in a large sample. We hypothesized that these
variants are associated with quantitative measures of glycemia in pregnancy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the associations between variants
rs1799884 (GCK) and rs7903146 (TCF7L2) and OGTT outcomes at 24-32 weeks'
gestation in 3,811 mothers of European (U.K. and Australia) and 1,706 mothers of 
Asian (Thailand) ancestry from the HAPO cohort. We also tested associations with 
offspring birth anthropometrics.
RESULTS: The maternal GCK variant was associated with higher fasting glucose in
Europeans (P = 0.001) and Thais (P < 0.0001), 1-h glucose in Europeans (P =
0.001), and 2-h glucose in Thais (P = 0.005). It was also associated with higher 
European offspring birth weight, fat mass, and skinfold thicknesses (P < 0.05).
The TCF7L2 variant was associated with all three maternal glucose outcomes (P =
0.03, P < 0.0001, and P < 0.0001 for fasting and 1-h and 2-h glucose,
respectively) in the Europeans but not in the Thais (P > 0.05). In both
populations, both variants were associated with higher odds of gestational
diabetes mellitus according to the new International Association of Diabetes and 
Pregnancy Study Groups recommendations (P = 0.001-0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal GCK and TCF7L2 variants are associated with glucose levels 
known to carry an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcome in women without
overt diabetes. Further studies will be important to determine the variance in
maternal glucose explained by all known genetic variants.

PMCID: PMC3083839
PMID: 20682688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;207(1):77-86. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0044. Epub 2010 Jul 30.

Insulin treatment and high-fat diet feeding reduces the expression of three Tcf
genes in rodent pancreas.

Columbus J(1), Chiang Y, Shao W, Zhang N, Wang D, Gaisano HY, Wang Q, Irwin DM,
Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms in intronic regions of human TCF7L2 are 
associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Whether Tcf7l2 is
expressed in pancreatic islets of rodent species at a considerable level,
however, remains controversial. We used RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR to examine
Tcf7l2 expression in rodent gut, pancreas, isolated pancreatic islets, and
cultured cell lines. The expression level of Tcf7l2 was relatively lower in the
pancreas compared to the gut or the pancreatic ß-cell line Ins-1. Immunostaining 
did not detect a Tcf7l2 signal in mouse pancreatic islets. Endogenous canonical
Wnt activity was not appreciable in the pancreas of TOPGAL transgenic mice. Both 
Tcf7 and Tcf7l1, but not Lef1, were expressed in the pancreas. The expression of 
the three Tcf genes (Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and Tcf7l2) in the pancreas was reduced by
treatment with insulin or high-fat diet feeding, in contrast to the stimulation
of Tcf7l2 expression by insulin in the gut. We suggest that hyperinsulinemia
represses Tcf gene expression in the pancreas. Whether and how this reduction
alters the function of pancreatic ß cells during hyperinsulinemia deserves
further investigation.

PMID: 20675304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 20;399(2):245-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.062. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

The balance of TCF7L2 variants with differential activities in Wnt-signaling is
regulated by lithium in a GSK3beta-independent manner.

Struewing I(1), Boyechko T, Barnett C, Beildeck M, Byers SW, Mao CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.

TCF7L2 transcription factor is a downstream effector of the canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which controls cell fate and homeostasis. However,
the complexity of TCF7L2 expression with numerous mRNA isoforms coding for
proteins with distinct N- and C-termini allows variability in TCF7L2 functions
and regulations. Here, we show that although TCF7L2 mRNA isoforms distinguish
fetal, immortalized and adult differentiated endothelial cells (EC), they cannot 
explain the lack of significant beta-catenin/TCF7 activities in ECs. Lithium, a
Wnt-signaling activator, increases TCF7L2 mRNA levels and induces an RNA isoform 
switch favoring the expression of TCF7L2-short forms lacking the C-termini
domains. Although the latter occurs in different cell types, its extent depends
on the overall increase of TCF7L2 transcription, which correlates with cell
responsiveness to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. While GSK3beta down-regulation
increases TCF7L2 expression, there is no concomitant change in TCF7L2 mRNA
isoforms, which demonstrate the dual effects of lithium on TCF7L2 expression via 
a GSK3beta-dependent up-regulation and a GSK3beta-independent modulation of RNA
splicing. TCF7L2E-long forms display a repressor activity on TCF7L2-promoter
reporters and lithium induces a decrease of the endogenous TCF7L2 forms bound to 
native TCF7L2-promoter chromatin at two novel distal TCF7-binding sites.
Altogether our data reveal a lithium-induced RNA switch favoring the expression
of TCF7L2-short forms, which results in a transcriptional de-repression of
lithium target genes negatively regulated by TCF7L2-long forms, like TCF7L2, and 
thus to an amplification of Wnt-signaling in responsive cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2926262
PMID: 20654575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec;18(12):1333-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.117. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Potential role of TCF7L2 gene variants on cardiac sympathetic/parasympathetic
activity.

Boccardi V(1), Ambrosino I, Papa M, Fiore D, Rizzo MR, Paolisso G, Barbieri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Second University of 
Naples, Naples, Italy.

Variants in transcription factor 7-like 2
(266096218TCF7L2266096218USuser266096218Gene names have been italicized per house
style. Please check and confirm whether there are other instances that need to be
italicized or instances where italics have been inappropriately applied.) gene
have been found strongly associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes, as
well as with an impairment of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) signalling chain.
In rats, stimulation of central GLP-1 receptors increases heart rate and
activates autonomic regulatory neurons. We aimed to evaluate the potential role
of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms on sympathovagal response in relation to changes in 
plasma insulin and/or GLP-1 concentration after glucose ingestion. Genotyping was
performed for rs12255372 and rs7903146 TCF7L2 gene variants in 250 non-related
healthy volunteers (mean age 27±3 years). Consistent with previous reports, both 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were in strong linkage disequilibrium (D'=0.87,
r(2)=0.76). A subset of 167 patients underwent an oral glucose tolerance test
while a continuous recording of heart rate variability was performed. At
baseline, no differences in fasting plasma insulin, in GLP-1 levels and in LF/HF 
(low frequency/high frequency) ratio between the three genotypes were found.
Along with glucose ingestion TT subjects had lower INS(AUC) (insulin area under
curve), as well as higher LF/HF(AUC) (LF/HF area under curve) values. No
difference in GLP-1(AUC) (GLP-1 area under curve) between TCF7L2 gene variants
was found. A multivariate analysis including multiple covariates showed that only
INS(AUC,) GLP-1(AUC) and TCF7L2 gene variants were independently associated with 
LF/HF(AUC). In conclusion, TT genotype of rs12255372 and rs7903146 TCF7L2 gene
variants is associated with lower insulin secretion and higher cardiosympathetic 
activity. Moreover, such effect is independent of GLP-1 and insulin plasma
concentrations suggesting a potential role of such gene variants in increasing
cardiovascular risk through enhanced sympathetic nervous system activity.

PMCID: PMC3002850
PMID: 20648057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2340-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1852-3. Epub 2010
Jul 17.

Disease-associated loci are significantly over-represented among genes bound by
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) in vivo.

Zhao J(1), Schug J, Li M, Kaestner KH, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been strongly
implicated in type 2 diabetes and cancer. Our goal was to identify the DNA
sequences bound by this transcription factor in vivo.
METHODS: We applied chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing to globally
identify and map human DNA sequences bound by TCF7L2 in the colorectal carcinoma 
cell line, HCT116, where it is abundantly expressed.
RESULTS: We identified 1,095 discrete binding sites across the genome, of which a
subset were within 5 kb of 548 annotated NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq) genes. 
Despite using a cancer cell line, the most significant functions represented
using pathway analysis software were related to diabetes, genetic disorders and
coronary artery disease. As one of the enriched categories was related to genetic
disorders, we queried our results against all published genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) and found a highly significant over-representation of reported
loci from among the genes bound by TCF7L2 within 5 kb (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.50<U+2009>×<U+2009>10<U+207B>¹5). This
observation was primarily driven by excess loci revealed from GWAS of metabolic
and cardiovascular traits; however, there was no or only minor enrichment of
GWAS-derived loci for cancer, and inflammatory or neurological diseases. Of the
specific traits, the most enriched loci were for type 2 diabetes and height. When
defining the distance from genes at 50 kb or 500 kb, this enrichment pattern
persisted, with some additional evidence for enrichment of cancer-related loci.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: A highly significant proportion of genes bound by
TCF7L2 are known disease-associated loci. These findings suggest that TCF7L2 is a
central node in the regulation of human diabetes and other disease-associated
genes.

PMID: 20640398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2013-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902572. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Beta-catenin signaling mediates CD4 expression on mature CD8+ T cells.

Schenkel JM(1), Zloza A, Li W, Narasipura SD, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Upon activation, a subset of mature human CD8(+) T cells re-expresses CD4 dimly. 
This CD4(dim)CD8(bright) T cell population is genuine and enriched in antiviral
CD8(+) T cell responses. The signaling pathway that leads to CD4 re-expression on
mature CD8(+) T cells is not clear. Given that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays a
critical role in the transition of CD4(-)CD8(-) to CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, we
determined whether beta-catenin mediates CD4 expression on mature CD8(+) T cells.
We demonstrate that active beta-catenin expression is 20-fold higher on
CD4(dim)CD8(bright) than CD4(-)CD8(+) T cells. Activation of beta-catenin
signaling, through LiCl or transfection with a constitutively active construct of
beta-catenin, induced CD4 on CD8(+) T cells by approximately 10-fold. Conversely,
inhibition of beta-catenin signaling through transfection with a
dominant-negative construct for T cell factor-4, a downstream effector of
beta-catenin signaling, diminished CD4 expression on CD8(+) T cells by 50% in
response to T cell activation. Beta-catenin-mediated induction of CD4 on CD8(+) T
cells is transcriptionally regulated, as it induced CD4 mRNA, and T cell
factor/lymphoid enhancer factor sites were identified within the human CD4
promoter. Further, beta-catenin expression induced the antiapoptotic factor
BcL-xL, suggesting that beta-catenin may mediate protection against
activation-induced cell death. Collectively, these data demonstrate that
beta-catenin is critical in inducing CD4 expression on mature CD8(+) T cells,
suggesting that it is a common pathway for CD4 upregulation among thymocytes and 
mature CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC3963465
PMID: 20631314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Sep;30(9):1867-72. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.208496. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

Coronary artery calcification and its relationship to validated genetic variants 
for diabetes mellitus assessed in the Heinz Nixdorf recall cohort.

Pechlivanis S(1), Scherag A, Mühleisen TW, Möhlenkamp S, Horsthemke B, Boes T,
Bröcker-Preuss M, Mann K, Erbel R, Jöckel KH, Nöthen MM, Moebus S; Heinz Nixdorf 
Recall Study Group.

Collaborators: Roggenbuck U, Slomiany S, Beck EM, Offner A, Münkel S, Bauer M,
Schrader S, Peter R, Hirche H, Meinertz T, Bode C, de Feyter PJ, Güntert B, Hall 
i T, Gutzwiller F, Heinen H, Hess O, Kline B, Löwel H, Reiser M, Schmidt G,
Schwaige M, Steinmüller C, Theorell T, Willich SN, Bode C, Berge K, Figulla HR,
Hamm C, Hanrath P, Köpcke W, Weimar C, Zeiher A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, University
Hospital of Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
sonali.pechlivanis@uk-essen.de

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between genomewide association study-based 
diabetes mellitus-related single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and coronary
artery calcification (CAC), a valid risk factor for coronary heart disease, in a 
large, unselected, population-based cohort.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We genotyped 11 validated genomewide association study-based
diabetes SNPs in 4459 participants of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. We applied 
generalized linear regression models to explore the impact of the diabetes SNPs
on CAC and to jointly model the effect of the SNPs and CAC on diabetes status. We
observed a significant association between cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
2A/2B (CDKN2A/2B) variant rs564398 and quantitative CAC (P=1.81 x 10(-5) and
adjusted P=4.02 x 10(-4); odds ratio for the presence of CAC, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.02 
to 1.25]). Moreover, we observed no strong impact of CAC on diabetes risk in the 
presence of the other genetic variants.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that a genetic variant near CDKN2A/2B that has been reported
to be strongly associated with diabetes is strongly associated with CAC. In
contrast, variants near insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (IGFBP2),
CDK5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1), solute carreir
family 30 (zinc transporter), member 8 (SLC30A8), hematopoietically-expressed
homeobox (HHEX), and transcription factor 7-like2 (TCF7L2) were clearly
associated with diabetes; no evidence for an association to CAC was observable.
This differential association pattern underlines the potential of endophenotypes,
such as CAC, to extend the scope of disease outcome associations.

PMID: 20616309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;74(4):361-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00580.x.

A validation study of type 2 diabetes-related variants of the TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ genes in one endogamous ethnic group of north India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Aggarwal A, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
Delhi-110016.

The aim of this study was to validate the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of four candidate genes (TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ) related to type 2
diabetes (T2D) in an endogamous population of north India; the Aggarwal
population, having 18-clans. This endogamous population model was heavily
supported by recent land mark work and we also verified the homogeneity of this
population by clan-based stratification analysis. Two SNPs (rs4506565; rs7903146)
in TCF7L2 were found to be significant (p-value = 0.00191; p-value = 0.00179,
respectively), and odds ratios of 2.1 (dominant-model) and 2.0 (recessive-model) 
respectively, were obtained for this population. The TTT haplotype in the TCF7L2 
gene was significantly associated with T2D. Waist-Hip ratio (WHR), systolic blood
pressure (SBP), and age were significant covariates for increasing risk of T2D.
Single-SNP, combined-SNPs and haplotype analysis provides clear evidence that the
causal mutation is near to or within the significant haplotype (TTT) of the
TCF7L2 gene. In spite of a culturally-learned sedentary lifestyle and
fat-enriched dietary habits, WHR rather than body-mass-index emerged as a robust 
predictor of risk for T2D in this population.

PMID: 20597906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Am Stat Assoc. 2010 Jul-Aug;2010:3971-3979.

A novel method for testing association of multiple genetic markers with a
multinomial trait.

Kwon S(1), Goodarzi MO(1), Taylor KD(1), Cui J(1), Chen YD(1), Rotter JI(1),
Hsueh W(2), Guo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX.

We developed a multinomial probit model with singular value decomposition for
testing a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) simultaneously, 
using maximum likelihood estimation and permutation. The method was validated by 
simulation. We simulated 1000 SNPs, including 9 associated with disease states,
and 8 of the 9 were successfully identified. Applying the method to study 32
genes in our Mexican-American samples for association with prediabetes through
either impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or impaired fasting glucose (IFG), we
found 3 genes (SORCS1, AMPD1, PPAR) associated with both IGT and IFG, while 5
genes (AMPD2, PRKAA2, C5, TCF7L2, ITR) with the IGT mechanism only and 6 genes
(CAPN10, IL4,NOS3, CD14, GCG, SORT1) with the IFG mechanism only. These data
suggest that IGT and IFG may indicate different physiological mechanism to
prediabetes, via different genetic determinants.

PMCID: PMC4439253
PMID: 26005397  [PubMed]


57. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2010 Jul;26(5):371-7. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1087.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and context-specific risk of 
impaired fasting glucose in African American and Caucasian adults: the
atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study.

Yan Y(1), North KE, Heiss G, Klein R, Girman CJ, Lange EM, Pankow JS, Brancati
FL, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-8050, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene 
are consistently associated with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) in Caucasians,
data from large population-based studies of African Americans are lacking.
Moreover, few studies have investigated the effects of TCF7L2 on IFG in the
context of metabolic risk factors for diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated the association between the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and incident IFG defined as fasting serum glucose levels of 100-125 
mg/dL (5.6-6.9 mmol/L) in 1377 African American and 5152 Caucasian participants
without diabetes and IFG at intake who participated in the Atherosclerosis Risk
in Communities (ARIC) Study from 1987 to 1989 and were followed for 9 years.
RESULTS: Incident IFG was identified in 810 (58.8%) African American and 2652
(51.5%) Caucasian participants. Compared to homozygous CC Caucasian individuals, 
heterozygous CT [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.09 (95% CI = 1.03-1.15)] and homozygous TT
[1.18 (1.05-1.33)] individuals had significantly higher risk of developing IFG
over 9-year follow-up. The association between rs7903146 and IFG risk was
stronger in Caucasians with obesity [HR(CTvs.CC) = 1.28 (1.12, 1.47); HR(TTvs.CC)
= 1.65 (1.25, 2.17)] or high triglycerides [HR(CTvs.CC) = 1.31(1.10, 1.56);
HR(TTvs.CC) = 1.72 (1.21, 2.43)]. No association of the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and incident IFG was noted in African Americans.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicates the association between rs7903146 and IFG risk 
in a population-based, longitudinal cohort of Caucasians but not in African
Americans. For the first time, our study provides evidence for interactions
between TCF7L2 and metabolic risk factors on the occurrence of IFG in Caucasians.

Copyright (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2990965
PMID: 20578204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jun 15;11:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-97.

Association study of genetic variants in eight genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in
a Han Chinese population.

Lin Y(1), Li P, Cai L, Zhang B, Tang X, Zhang X, Li Y, Xian Y, Yang Y, Wang L, Lu
F, Liu X, Rao S, Chen M, Ma S, Shi Y, Bao M, Wu J, Yang Y, Yang J, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Molecular Biology & Genetics, Sichuan Academy of Medical
Sciences & Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: At least twenty genes/loci were shown to be associated with type
2diabetes in European original populations. Five of these genes were shown to be 
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Chinese populations. The purpose of this
study was to replicate the association of genetic vairants in the eight
diabetes-related genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in a Han Chinese cohort from
western part of China. Nineteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the
eight genes/loci including TCF7L2, HHEX, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, PPARG, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
and CDKN2A/CDKN2B were genotyped in 1,529 cases and 1,439 controls in a Han
Chinese population using the ABI SNaPshot method. The meta-analysis of the
association between rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene and T2D in the Han Chinese was
performed.
RESULTS: Among the eight genes/loci examined, we found that four were
significantly associated with T2D. Although previous studies showed that the
association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D was
controversial within the Han Chinese population, we have confirmed the
significant association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D in
both this study and the meta-analysis in the population. In addition, we also
confirmed that three SNPs (rs1111875, rs7923837 and rs5015480) in HHEX , one SNP 
(rs10946398) in CDKAL1, and three SNPs (rs13266634, rs3802177 and rs11558471) in 
SLC30A8 were significantly associated with T2D in the population being studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and
SLC30A8 genes are associated with T2D in a Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC2894791
PMID: 20550665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 10;5(6):e11053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011053.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene expression in normal or diabetic sorted human
alpha and beta cells: correlations with age or BMI of islet donors.

Kirkpatrick CL(1), Marchetti P, Purrello F, Piro S, Bugliani M, Bosco D, de
Koning EJ, Engelse MA, Kerr-Conte J, Pattou F, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have identified susceptibility genes 
for development of type 2 diabetes. We aimed to examine whether a subset of these
(comprising FTO, IDE, KCNJ11, PPARG and TCF7L2) were transcriptionally restricted
to or enriched in human beta cells by sorting islet cells into alpha and beta -
specific fractions. We also aimed to correlate expression of these transcripts in
both alpha and beta cell types with phenotypic traits of the islet donors and to 
compare diabetic and non-diabetic cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Islet cells were sorted using a previously
published method and RNA was extracted, reverse transcribed and used as the
template for quantitative PCR. Sorted cells were also analysed for insulin and
glucagon immunostaining and insulin secretion from the beta cells as well as
insulin, glucagon and GLP-1 content. All five genes were expressed in both alpha 
and beta cells, with significant enrichment of KCNJ11 in the beta cells and of
TCF7L2 in the alpha cells. The ratio of KCNJ11 in beta to alpha cells was
negatively correlated with BMI, while KCNJ11 expression in alpha cells was
negatively correlated with age but not associated with BMI. Beta cell expression 
of glucagon, TCF7L2 and IDE was increased in cells from islets that had spent
more time in culture prior to cell sorting. In beta cells, KCNJ11, FTO and
insulin were positively correlated with each other. Diabetic alpha and beta cells
had decreased expression of insulin, glucagon and FTO.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study has identified novel patterns of expression 
of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes within sorted islet cells and suggested
interactions of gene expression with age or BMI of the islet donors. However,
expression of these genes in islets is less associated with BMI than has been
found for other tissues.

PMCID: PMC2883550
PMID: 20548773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Diabet Med. 2010 Jun;27(6):701-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.02997.x.

Association of TCF7L2 gene variants with low GAD autoantibody titre in LADA
subjects (NIRAD Study 5).

Zampetti S(1), Spoletini M, Petrone A, Capizzi M, Arpi ML, Tiberti C, Di Pietro
S, Bosi E, Pozzilli P, Giorgino F, Buzzetti R; Nirad Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

AIMS: We previously demonstrated the presence of two different populations among 
adult-onset autoimmune diabetes (latent autoimmume diabetes of adults; LADA)
having high or low titre of antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GADA). The
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been recognized as the major gene
associated with Type 2 diabetes. The aim of the present study was to evaluate
whether the phenotypic heterogeneity of LADA based on GADA titre is associated
with TCF7L2 polymorphisms.
METHODS: Two hundred and fifty patients identified as LADA, divided into two
subgroups with low (< or = 32 arbitrary units) or high (> 32 units) GADA titre,
620 subjects with Type 2 diabetes [from the Non-Insulin Requiring Autoimmune
Diabetes (NIRAD) study cohort of 5330 subjects] in addition to 551 consecutive
cases of Type 1 diabetes and 545 normoglycaemic subjects were analysed for the
rs12255372 and rs7903146 polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene using Taqman.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele distributions of the two polymorphisms revealed 
similar frequencies in subjects with low GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes. High
GADA titre, Type 1 diabetes and controls also showed comparable frequencies. A
significant increase of GT/TT genotypes of the rs12255372 single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) and CT/TT genotypes of the rs7903146 SNP was observed in low
GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes compared with high GADA titre, Type 1 diabetes and
controls (P < or = 0.04 for both comparisons). The risk alleles of both variants 
were increased in low GADA titre and Type 2 diabetes compared with high GADA
titre, Type 1 diabetes and control subjects (P < 0.02 for all comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 common genetic variants of susceptibility are associated only
with low GADA antibody titre in LADA patients.

PMID: 20546291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;27(4):267-72. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2010.490609.
Epub 2010 Jun 14.

Gestational diabetes mellitus shares polymorphisms of genes associated with
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in the Greek population.

Pappa KI(1), Gazouli M, Economou K, Daskalakis G, Anastasiou E, Anagnou NP,
Antsaklis A.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, School of
Medicine, Athens, Greece. kpappa@med.uoa.gr

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) share common
pathophysiological features, including ß-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance.
In this study, we investigated the association between GDM and five recently
identified T2D susceptibility loci, in a Greek population. We studied 148 women
with GDM and 107 non-diabetic unrelated pregnant Greek women, for polymorphisms
in the TCF7L2 gene (rs7903146 C/T), the PPARG gene (Pro12Ala), the KCNJ11 gene
(E23K), the IRS1 gene (G972R) and in the FOXC2 gene (-512C>T). The T-allele of
the TCF7L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism was found to be significantly associated 
with an increased risk of GDM [p = 0.0003; odds ratio (OR) 2.04 (95%CI
1.38-3.00)]. Additionally, CT and TT genotypes were significantly overrepresented
in women with GDM compared to controls (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.0148, respectively).
Analysis of the IRS1 G972R polymorphism showed that the R-allele frequency was
increased in women with GDM [(p = 0.009; OR 1.67 (95%CI 1.14-2.47)]. The
genotypes and allele frequencies of the other polymorphisms studied did not
statistically differ between the GDM and the control women. Thus, our data
suggest that the common T2D susceptibility polymorphism of TCF7L2 (rs7903146 C/T)
gene, and the G972R polymorphism of the IRS1 gene, seem to predispose to GDM in
Greek women.

PMID: 20540670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2010 Aug;25(8):931-9. doi: 10.1007/s00384-010-0959-9. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

TCF-3, 4 protein expression correlates with beta-catenin expression in MSS and
MSI-H colorectal cancer from HNPCC patients but not in sporadic colorectal
cancers.

Balaz P(1), Plaschke J, Krüger S, Görgens H, Schackert HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Research, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

PURPOSE: The beta-catenin-T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) complex is the main control
switch of cell proliferation and differentiation of normal and malignant
intestinal cells. The aim of our study was to analyze the protein expression of
components of the Wnt pathway in microsatellite stable (MSS) and highly unstable 
(MSI-H) sporadic and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) in human
colorectal cancers.
METHODS: Sixty seven colorectal tumors comprising of 15 sporadic MSS, 12 sporadic
microsatellite instability colorectal tumors and 40 tumors from HNPCC patients,
of which 20 were MSS and 20 MSI-H, were analyzed for the expression of APC,
beta-catenin, and TCF-3, 4 proteins by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in cytoplasmic APC expression
frequency between sporadic MSS (52%) and HNPCC tumors (78%), whereas no
difference was detected between MSI-H and MSS or HNPCC tumors. All tumor groups
showed a similar pattern of decreased membranous staining and increased
cytoplasmic and nuclear staining for beta-catenin compared to normal cells.
Moreover, the TCF-3, 4 protein expression was higher (43%) in HNPCC-associated
MSS tumors compared to sporadic tumors (14%; analysis of variance (ANOVA) p <
0.05). For HNPCC tumors, the subcellular beta-catenin expression (membranous,
cytoplasmic, and nuclear) correlated with the nuclear TCF-3, 4 signal in MSS
tumors (Spearman correlation p < 0.0007) and MSI-H tumors (Spearman correlation p
< 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: We have shown a previously unknown difference in TCF-3, 4 protein
expression between sporadic and HNPCC MSS tumors. In addition, we found no
difference in nuclear beta-catenin signal intensity, which may be caused by an
alteration in Wnt pathway in MSS sporadic tumors by unknown mechanisms leading to
lower TCF-3, 4 protein expression. This hypothesis has to be tested in future
investigations.

PMID: 20532534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Diabetes. 2010 Jun;59(6):e4; author reply e5-6. doi: 10.2337/db10-0236.

Comment on: Villareal et al. (2009) TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 affects the risk of 
type 2 diabetes by modulating incretin action. Diabetes;59:479-485.

Knop FK.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):479-85.

PMID: 20508220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2010 May;26(4):261-70. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1082.

Candidate gene association study conditioning on individual ancestry in patients 
with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome from Mexico City.

Cruz M(1), Valladares-Salgado A, Garcia-Mena J, Ross K, Edwards M,
Angeles-Martinez J, Ortega-Camarillo C, de la Peña JE, Burguete-Garcia AI,
Wacher-Rodarte N, Ambriz R, Rivera R, D'artote AL, Peralta J, Parra EJ, Kumate J.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigacion Medica en Bioquimica, Hospital de Especialidades,
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, CMN Siglo XXI, Mexico, DF, Mexico.
mcruzl@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is influenced by diverse environmental and
genetic risk factors. Metabolic syndrome (MS) increases the risk of
cardiovascular disease and diabetes. We analysed 14 cases of polymorphisms
located in 10 candidate loci, in a sample of patients with T2D and controls from 
Mexico City.
METHODS: We analysed the association of 14 polymorphisms located within 10 genes 
(TCF7L2, ENPP1, ADRB3, KCNJ11, LEPR, PPARgamma, FTO, CDKAL1, SIRT1 and HHEX) with
T2D and MS. The analysis included 519 subjects with T2D defined according to the 
ADA criteria, 389 with MS defined according to the AHA/NHLBI criteria and 547
controls. Association was tested with the program ADMIXMAP including individual
ancestry, age, sex, education and in some cases body mass index (BMI), in a
logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The two markers located within the TCF7L2 gene showed strong
associations with T2D (rs7903146, T allele, odd ratio (OR) = 1.76, p = 0.001 and 
rs12255372, T allele, OR = 1.78, p = 0.002), but did not show significant
association with MS. The non-synonymous rs4994 polymorphism of the ADRB3 gene was
associated with T2D (Trp allele, OR = 0.62, p = 0.001) and MS (Trp allele, OR =
0.74, p = 0.018). Nominally significant associations were also observed between
T2D and the SIRT1 rs3758391 SNP and MS and the HHEX rs5015480 polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants located within the gene TCF7L2 are strongly associated with
T2D but not with MS, providing support to previous evidence indicating that
polymorphisms at the TCF7L2 gene increase T2D risk. In contrast, the
non-synonymous ADRB3 rs4994 polymorphism is associated with T2D and MS.

PMID: 20503258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 23;11:320. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-320.

A deep investigation into the adipogenesis mechanism: profile of microRNAs
regulating adipogenesis by modulating the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway.

Qin L(1), Chen Y, Niu Y, Chen W, Wang Q, Xiao S, Li A, Xie Y, Li J, Zhao X, He Z,
Mo D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Science, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a large class of tiny non-coding RNAs
(approximately 22-24 nt) that regulate diverse biological processes at the
posttranscriptional level by controlling mRNA stability or translation. As a
molecular switch, the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway should be
suppressed during the adipogenesis; However, activation of this pathway leads to 
the inhibition of lipid depots formation. The aim of our studies was to identify 
miRNAs that might be involved in adipogenesis by modulating WNT signaling
pathway. Here we established two types of cell model, activation and repression
of WNT signaling, and investigated the expression profile of microRNAs using
microarray assay.
RESULTS: The high throughput microarray data revealed 18 miRNAs that might
promote adipogenesis by repressing WNT signaling: miR-210, miR-148a, miR-194,
miR-322 etc. Meanwhile, we also identified 29 miRNAs that might have negative
effect on adipogenesis by activating WNT signaling: miR-344, miR-27 and miR-181
etc. The targets of these miRNAs were also analysed by bioinformatics. To
validate the predicted targets and the potential functions of these identified
miRNAs, the mimics of miR-210 were transfected into 3T3-L1 cells and enlarged
cells with distinct lipid droplets were observed; Meanwhile, transfection with
the inhibitor of miR-210 could markedly decrease differentiation-specific factors
at the transcription level, which suggested the specific role of miR-210 in
promoting adipogenesis. Tcf7l2, the predicted target of miR-210, is a
transcription factor triggering the downstream responsive genes of WNT signaling,
was blocked at transcription level. Furthermore, the activity of luciferase
reporter bearing Tcf7l2 mRNA 3' UTR was decreased after co-transfection with
miR-210 in HEK-293FT cells. Last but not least, the protein expression level of
beta-catenin was increased in the lithium (LiCl) treated 3T3-L1 cells after
transfection with miR-210. These findings suggested that miR-210 could promote
adipogenesis by repressing WNT signaling through targeting Tcf7l2.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest the presence of miRNAs in two cell models,
providing insights into WNT pathway-specific miRNAs that can be further
characterized for their potential roles in adipogenesis. To our knowledge,
present study represents the first attempt to unveil the profile of miRNAs
involved in adipogenesis by modulating WNT signaling pathway, which contributed
to deeper investigation of the mechanism of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2895628
PMID: 20492721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010 Jul;32(5):383-9. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181dccc0b.

Impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance in survivors of childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: prevalence and risk factors.

Surapolchai P(1), Hongeng S, Mahachoklertwattana P, Pakakasama S, Winaichatsak A,
Wisanuyothin N, Pasomsub E, Mahasirimongkol S, Sirachainan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

AIM/PURPOSE: Survivors of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are at increased
risks of impaired glucose metabolism, insulin resistance, and metabolic syndrome.
The aim of our study was to determine the prevalence of alterations in glucose
metabolism and the predisposing factors of these disturbances in survivors of
childhood ALL.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 131 ALL survivors, an oral glucose tolerance test was
conducted to determine beta-cell function/insulin sensitivity. The particular
risk factors were analyzed and 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms of diabetic
predisposing genes: PAX4 and TCF7L2 were genotyped to evaluate the association
between these factors and beta-cell function/insulin sensitivity.
RESULTS: Ten out of 131 survivors (7.6%) had impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
whereas 40 out of 131 (30.5%) had insulin resistance (IR) and showed
characteristics of the metabolic syndrome (hyperinsulinemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, and low HDL-C). In the logistic regression analysis, the
most important factor predicting IGT and IR was older age of survivors (P=0.014
and P<0.001, respectively) whereas the PAX4 R192H mutation (rs2233580) was
significantly associated with IGT after adjustment for age (P=0.043) (adjusted OR
5.28, 95% CI 1.06-26.40).
CONCLUSIONS: Existing evidence suggests that older age is an independent risk
factor for developing IGT and IR in childhood ALL survivors, emphasizing the need
for life-long metabolic screening. The PAX4 variant might impact individual
susceptibility against IGT and diabetes. However, an identification of underlying
risk(s) is the rational for future studies.

PMID: 20485196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Endocr Disord. 2010 May 17;10:9. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-10-9.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism may be associated with
focal arteriolar narrowing in Caucasians with hypertension or without diabetes:
the ARIC Study.

Yan Y(1), Klein R, Heiss G, Girman CJ, Lange EM, Klein BE, Rose KM, Boerwinkle E,
Pankow JS, Brancati FL, Ballantyne CM, Köttgen A, North KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA. knorth@email.unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has emerged as a consistently 
replicated susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes, however, whether the TCF7L2
gene also has similar effects on the retinal microvasculature is less clear. We
therefore aimed to investigate the association between the transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 polymorphism and retinal microvascular phenotypes in 
the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study (1993-1995).
METHODS: This was a population-based, cross-sectional study of 10,320 middle-aged
African American (n = 2,199) and Caucasian (n = 8,121) men and women selected
from four United States communities to examine the association between TCF7L2
rs7903146 polymorphism and retinal microvascular signs (retinopathy, focal
arteriolar narrowing, arteriovenous nicking, arteriolar and venular calibers).
Photographs on one randomly selected eye were graded for presence of retinal
microvascular signs and used to measure retinal vessel calibres.
RESULTS: After adjusting for age, sex, study center, mean arterial blood
pressure, total serum cholesterol, triglycerides, and other covariates, few
associations of TCF7L2 rs7903146 and retinal microvascular signs were noted.
TCF7L2 rs7903146 T risk allele was significantly associated with focal arteriolar
narrowing in Caucasians with hypertension [odds ratio (OR)CT vs. CC (95% CI) =
1.25 (1.09-1.44); ORTT vs. CC = 1.56 (1.18-2.06); P = 0.002] and in Caucasians
without diabetes [OR CT vs. CC = 1.18 (1.06-1.32); OR TT vs. CC = 1.40 (1.12,
1.75); P = 0.003]. No significant association of the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism and retinal vascular signs was noted among African American
individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 rs7903146 is not consistently associated with retinal
microvascular signs. However, we report an association between the TCF7L2
rs7903146 polymorphism and focal arteriolar narrowing in Caucasians with
hypertension or without diabetes. Further research in other large,
population-based studies is needed to replicate these findings.

PMCID: PMC2879252
PMID: 20478041  [PubMed]


68. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 11;9:104. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-104.

The promoter for intestinal cell kinase is head-to-head with F-Box 9 and contains
functional sites for TCF7L2 and FOXA factors.

Sturgill TW(1), Stoddard PB, Cohn SM, Mayo MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, University of Virginia,
1300 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
tws7w@virginia.edu

BACKGROUND: Intestinal cell kinase (ICK; GeneID 22858) is a conserved MAPK and
CDK-like kinase that is widely expressed in human tissues. Data from the Cancer
Genome Anatomy Project indicated ICK mRNA is increased in cancer, and that its
expression correlated with expression of mRNA for an uncharacterized F-box
protein, FBX9 (GeneID: 26268). ICK and FBX9 genes are arranged head-to-head on
opposite strands, with start sites for transcription separated by approximately
3.3 kb. We hypothesized ICK and FBX9 are potentially important genes in cancer
controlled by a bidirectional promoter.
RESULTS: We assessed promoter activity of the intergenic region in both
orientations in cancer cell lines derived from breast (AU565, SKBR3), colon
(HCT-15, KM12), and stomach (AGS) cancers, as well as in embryonic human kidney
(HEK293T) cells. The intergenic segment was active in both orientations in all of
these lines, and ICK promoter activity was greater than FBX9 promoter activity.
Results from deletions and truncations defined a minimal promoter for ICK, and
revealed that repressors and enhancers differentially regulate ICK versus FBX9
promoter activity. The ICK promoter contains consensus motifs for several
FOX-family transcription factors that align when mouse and human are compared
using EMBOSS. FOXA1 and FOXA2 increase luciferase activity of a minimal promoter 
10-20 fold in HEK293T cells. Consensus sites for TCF7L2 (TCF4) (Gene Id: 6934)
are also present in both mouse and human. The expression of beta-catenin
increased activity of the minimal promoter approximately 10 fold. ICK reference
mRNAs (NM_014920.3, NM_016513) are expressed in low copy number and increased in 
some breast cancers, using a ten base tag 5'-TCAACCTTAT-3' specific for both ICK 
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: ICK and FBX9 are divergently transcribed from a bidirectional
promoter that is GC-rich and contains a CpG island. A minimal promoter for ICK
contains functional sites for beta-catenin/TCF7L2 and FOXA. These data are
consistent with functions that have been proposed for ICK in development and in
proliferation or survival of some breast and colon cancers.

PMCID: PMC2876993
PMID: 20459822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Bratisl Lek Listy. 2010;111(3):150-2.

Relationship of five type 2 diabetes candidate gene polymorphisms to the age at
diagnosis of diabetes in the Slovakian population.

Kozarova M(1), Javorsky M, Stancakova A, Dobrikova M, Habalova V, Klimcakova L,
Zidzik J, Haluskova J, Salagovic J, Tkac I.

Author information: 
(1)4th Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, PJ Safarik
University, Kosice, Slovakia.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the relationship between polymorphisms of five candidate
genes for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and the age at diagnosis of T2DM.
METHODS: 538 Slovakian patients with T2DM were included and their age at
diagnosis of T2DM retrieved from their medical records. Polymorphisms of genes
encoding peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPARG),
PPARG-coactivator-1 (PGC1), insulin-receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), the subunit Kir 
6.2 of the ATP-dependent potassium-channel (KCNJ11) and transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) were detected by PCR-RFLP methods.
RESULTS: No significant relationship between the risk alleles of the examined
gene polymorphisms to the lower mean age at diagnosis of T2DM was observed. The
carriers of the TT-genotype of TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism had significantly
increased odds ratio for diagnosis of diabetes before the age of 40 years [OR
3.02 (1.34, 6.81), p = 0.008], in comparison with the CC/CT genotype carriers.
CONCLUSION: No significant association of PPARG, PGC1, IRS1, KCNJ11 and TCF7L2
gene polymorphisms and the age at diagnosis of T2DM was observed in the present
study. Homozygotes for the risk allele of TCF7L2 had more frequently early onset 
of T2DM, before age of 40 years (Tab. 4, Ref. 15).

PMID: 20437825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Atheroscler Suppl. 2010 Jun;11(1):39-43. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosissup.2010.03.002.

Update on genetics of postprandial lipemia.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Delgado-Lista J, Perez-Jimenez F, Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information: 
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Instituto Maimonides de
Investigacion Biomedica de Cordoba/Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia/Universidad
de Cordoba and CIBER Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutricion, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Spain.

The relationship between alimentary lipemia and coronary disease is of great
interest in view of the epidemiological and experimental evidence that underlies 
it. The modulation of such phenomena is influenced by both genetic and
environmental factors, thus explaining their extraordinary individual variance.
Over the last two decades there has been an explosion of research in this area,
with often conflicting findings reported in the literature. In this study we have
presented the current evidence linking a number of candidate genes
(APOA1/C3/A4/A5 cluster, ABCA1, CETP, GCKR, HL, IL-6, LPL, PLIN, and TCF7L2) to
the modulation of the postprandial lipid metabolism. Increased knowledge of how
these and other genes influence postprandial response should increase the
understanding of personalised nutrition.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20434407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2068-74. doi: 10.2337/db09-1386. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Impact of common variants of PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 on the risk of type 2 diabetes in 5,164 Indians.

Chauhan G(1), Spurgeon CJ, Tabassum R, Bhaskar S, Kulkarni SR, Mahajan A, Chavali
S, Kumar MV, Prakash S, Dwivedi OP, Ghosh S, Yajnik CS, Tandon N, Bharadwaj D,
Chandak GR.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
(CSIR), Delhi, India.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Sep;59(9):e15; author reply e16.

OBJECTIVE: Common variants in PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 genes have been shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes
in European populations by genome-wide association studies. We have studied the
association of common variants in these eight genes with type 2 diabetes and
related traits in Indians by combining the data from two independent case-control
studies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped eight single nucleotide polymorphisms
(PPARG-rs1801282, KCNJ11-rs5219, TCF7L2-rs7903146, SLC30A8-rs13266634,
HHEX-rs1111875, CDKN2A-rs10811661, IGF2BP2-rs4402960, and CDKAL1-rs10946398) in
5,164 unrelated Indians of Indo-European ethnicity, including 2,486 type 2
diabetic patients and 2,678 ethnically matched control subjects.
RESULTS: We confirmed the association of all eight loci with type 2 diabetes with
odds ratio (OR) ranging from 1.18 to 1.89 (P = 1.6 x 10(-3) to 4.6 x 10(-34)).
The strongest association with the highest effect size was observed for TCF7L2
(OR 1.89 [95% CI 1.71-2.09], P = 4.6 x 10(-34)). We also found significant
association of PPARG and TCF7L2 with homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell
function (P = 6.9 x 10(-8) and 3 x 10(-4), respectively), which looked consistent
with recessive and under-dominant models, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicates the association of well-established common
variants with type 2 diabetes in Indians and shows larger effect size for most of
them than those reported in Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2911051
PMID: 20424228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Meat Sci. 2010 Apr;84(4):645-50. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.10.025. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Identification of genetic markers associated with residual feed intake and meat
quality traits in the pig.

Fan B(1), Lkhagvadorj S, Cai W, Young J, Smith RM, Dekkers JC, Huff-Lonergan E,
Lonergan SM, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Residual feed intake (RFI) has become increasingly important and is being
considered as a more reasonable approach to evaluate feed efficiency in
livestock. However, the cost and technical difficulties in measuring this trait
restrict the extensive adoption of RFI selection, and this makes marker assisted 
selection (MAS) a feasible tool. In addition, the effects on meat quality caused 
by low RFI selection have yet to be clarified. In this study, 11 SNPs from eight 
candidate genes were evaluated in a Yorkshire pig experimental population (n=169)
consisting of a low RFI selection line and a randomly selected control line.
Associations of these SNPs with RFI, growth rate, carcass composition, and meat
quality measures including water holding capacity, pH at 2d postmortem, meat
color and sensory traits were analyzed. The SNPs FTO p.Ala198Ala and TCF7L2
c.646+514A>G showed significant (P<0.05) and suggestively significant (P<0.1)
associations with RFI, respectively. The MC4R SNP p.Asp298Asn was associated with
backfat but it was not with ADG and meat quality attributes. Both SNPs within
HNF1A were associated with intramuscular lipid content and sensory juiciness. The
SNPs ACC1 c(*)384C>T and TCF7L2 c.646+514A>G were significantly (P<0.05)
associated with ADG. The SNPs CTSZ p.Arg64Lys and TCF7L2 c.646+514A>G were
associated with both visual scoring of meat color and the objective L-value
measure of meat color. This study has identified potential genetic markers
suitable for MAS in improving RFI, ADG, and meat color traits, but these
associations need to be validated in other larger populations.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20374837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 26;5(3):e9903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009903.

Gene-gene interactions lead to higher risk for development of type 2 diabetes in 
an Ashkenazi Jewish population.

Neuman RJ(1), Wasson J, Atzmon G, Wainstein J, Yerushalmi Y, Cohen J, Barzilai N,
Blech I, Glaser B, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America. rneuman@wustl.edu

BACKGROUND: Evidence has accumulated that multiple genetic and environmental
factors play important roles in determining susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
(T2D). Although variants from candidate genes have become prime targets for
genetic analysis, few studies have considered their interplay. Our goal was to
evaluate interactions among SNPs within genes frequently identified as associated
with T2D.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Logistic regression was used to study interactions
among 4 SNPs, one each from HNF4A[rs1884613], TCF7L2[rs12255372],
WFS1[rs10010131], and KCNJ11[rs5219] in a case-control Ashkenazi sample of 974
diabetic subjects and 896 controls. Nonparametric multifactor dimensionality
reduction (MDR) and generalized MDR (GMDR) were used to confirm findings from the
logistic regression analysis. HNF4A and WFS1 SNPs were associated with T2D in
logistic regression analyses [P<0.0001, P<0.0002, respectively]. Interaction
between these SNPs were also strong using parametric or nonparametric methods:
the unadjusted odds of being affected with T2D was 3 times greater in subjects
with the HNF4A and WFS1 risk alleles than those without either (95% CI =
[1.7-5.3]; P<or=0.0001). Although the univariate association between the TCF7L2
SNP and T2D was relatively modest [P = 0.02], when paired with the HNF4A SNP, the
OR for subjects with risk alleles in both SNPs was 2.4 [95% CI = 1.7-3.4;
P<or=0.0001]. The KCNJ11 variant reached significance only when paired with
either the HNF4A or WFSI SNPs: unadjusted ORs were 2.0 [95% CI = 1.4-2.8;
P<or=0.0001] and 2.3 [95% CI = 1.2-4.4; P<or=0.0001], respectively. MDR and GMDR 
results were consistent with the parametric findings.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence of strong independent associations
between T2D and SNPs in HNF4A and WFS1 and their interaction in our Ashkenazi
sample. We also observed an interaction in the nonparametric analysis between the
HNF4A and KCNJ11 SNPs (P<or=0.001), demonstrating that an independently
non-significant variant may interact with another variant resulting in an
increased disease risk.

PMCID: PMC2845632
PMID: 20361036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diabetes Care. 2010 Jun;33(6):1233-5. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1690. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and hyperglycemia in an adult
Italian population-based cohort.

Gambino R(1), Bo S, Gentile L, Musso G, Pagano G, Cavallo-Perin P, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.
roberto.gambino@unito.it

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether TCF7L2 polymorphism has a role in the deterioration 
of glycemic control.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Metabolic variables were evaluated at baseline and
after 6-year follow-up in 1,480 Caucasian subjects from a population-based
cohort.
RESULTS: At baseline, T-allele carriers showed significantly lower BMI and
homeostasis model assessment for beta-cell function (HOMA-B) values and higher
fasting glycemia and diabetes prevalence. At follow-up, fasting glucose and
HOMA-B index were increased and reduced, respectively, in carriers of the
T-allele. Incident impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and incident diabetes were 5.7,
10.7, 16.9% and 1.6, 1.7, 3.0% in the CC, CT, and TT genotypes, respectively. In 
a multiple logistic regression model, the association between incident IFG and
the T-allele was significant (odds ratio [OR] 2.08 [95% CI 1.35-3.20] and 3.56
[2.11-5.98] in CT and TT genotypes, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was independently
associated with increasing fasting glucose values toward hyperglycemia in the
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC2875429
PMID: 20299486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood. 2010 May 20;115(20):4138-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-223057. Epub 2010 
Mar 15.

Inhibition of endothelial cell activation by bHLH protein E2-2 and its impairment
of angiogenesis.

Tanaka A(1), Itoh F, Nishiyama K, Takezawa T, Kurihara H, Itoh S, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba;

E2-2 belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription
factors. E2-2 associates with inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) 1, which is involved 
in angiogenesis. In this paper, we demonstrate that E2-2 interacts with Id1 and
provide evidence that this interaction potentiates angiogenesis. Mutational
analysis revealed that the HLH domain of E2-2 is required for the interaction
with Id1 and vice versa. In addition, Id1 interfered with E2-2-mediated effects
on luciferase reporter activities. Interestingly, injection of E2-2-expressing
adenoviruses into Matrigel plugs implanted under the skin blocked in vivo
angiogenesis. In contrast, the injection of Id1-expressing adenoviruses rescued
E2-2-mediated inhibition of in vivo angiogenic reaction. Consistent with the
results of the Matrigel plug assay, E2-2 could inhibit endothelial cell (EC)
migration, network formation, and proliferation. On the other hand, knockdown of 
E2-2 in ECs increased EC migration. The blockade of EC migration by E2-2 was
relieved by exogenous expression of Id1. We also demonstrated that E2-2 can
perturb VEGFR2 expression via inhibition of VEGFR2 promoter activity. This study 
suggests that E2-2 can maintain EC quiescence and that Id1 can counter this
effect.

PMID: 20231428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;654:391-419. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-3271-3_17.

Wnt signaling in pancreatic islets.

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA 02114, USA. zlieu4@partners.org

The Wnt signaling pathway is critically important not only for stem cell
amplification, differentiation, and migration, but also is important for
organogenesis and the development of the body plan. Beta-catenin/TCF7L2-dependent
Wnt signaling (the canonical pathway) is involved in pancreas development, islet 
function, and insulin production and secretion. The glucoincretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 and the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 modulate 
canonical Wnt signaling in beta-cells which is obligatory for their mitogenic and
cytoprotective actions. Genome-wide association studies have uncovered 19 gene
loci that confer susceptibility for the development of type 2 diabetes. At least 
14 of these diabetes risk alleles encode proteins that are implicated in islet
growth and functioning. Seven of them are either components of, or known target
genes for, Wnt signaling. The transcription factor TCF7L2 is particularly
strongly associated with risk for diabetes and appears to be fundamentally
important in both canonical Wnt signaling and beta-cell functioning. Experimental
loss of TCF7L2 function in islets and polymorphisms in TCF7L2 alleles in humans
impair glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, suggesting that perturbations in the
Wnt signaling pathway may contribute substantially to the susceptibility for, and
pathogenesis of, type 2 diabetes. This review focuses on considerations of the
hormonal regulation of Wnt signaling in islets and implications for mutations in 
components of the Wnt signaling pathway as a source for risk-associated alleles
for type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 20217507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2009;2(4-5):225-34. doi: 10.1159/000259341. Epub 2010
Mar 9.

Evidence of interaction between type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and dietary 
fat intake for adiposity and glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes.

Ruchat SM(1), Elks CE, Loos RJ, Vohl MC, Weisnagel SJ, Rankinen T, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Genome-wide association studies have led to the identification
of several susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The
objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that the associations between 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes and adiposity and glucose
homeostasis-related phenotypes are influenced by dietary fat intake.
METHODS: Thirty-three SNPs in 9 T2DM genes (CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, HNF1B,
IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, TCF7L2 and WFS1) were tested in a maximum of 669
subjects from the Quebec Family Study. Subjects were measured for several
adiposity indices and underwent a 75-gram oral glucose tolerance test. Total fat 
intake was estimated from a 3-day dietary record.
RESULTS: We observed 13 significant (p < or = 0.01) SNP-dietary fat interactions.
Among them, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, alone or in interaction with dietary fat intake,
influenced abdominal total fat (ATF: SNP effect, p = 0.006, interaction effect, p
= 0.009) and abdominal visceral fat (AVF: SNP effect, p = 0.007, interaction
effect, p = 0.01). Similarly, TCF7L2 rs12573128 alone or in interaction with
dietary fat intake, influenced insulin sensitivity (SNP effect and interaction
effect, p < or = 0.008) and glucose tolerance (SNP effect p < or= 0.009 and
interaction effect, p < or = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that gene-dietary fat interactions may
influence glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes and play an important role in
determining the increased risk of diabetes associated with the T2DM
susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20215779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Diabetes. 2010 May;59(5):1266-75. doi: 10.2337/db09-1568. Epub 2010 Feb 25.

Detailed physiologic characterization reveals diverse mechanisms for novel
genetic Loci regulating glucose and insulin metabolism in humans.

Ingelsson E(1), Langenberg C, Hivert MF, Prokopenko I, Lyssenko V, Dupuis J, Mägi
R, Sharp S, Jackson AU, Assimes TL, Shrader P, Knowles JW, Zethelius B, Abbasi
FA, Bergman RN, Bergmann A, Berne C, Boehnke M, Bonnycastle LL, Bornstein SR,
Buchanan TA, Bumpstead SJ, Böttcher Y, Chines P, Collins FS, Cooper CC, Dennison 
EM, Erdos MR, Ferrannini E, Fox CS, Graessler J, Hao K, Isomaa B, Jameson KA,
Kovacs P, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Ladenvall C, Mohlke KL, Morken MA, Narisu N,
Nathan DM, Pascoe L, Payne F, Petrie JR, Sayer AA, Schwarz PE, Scott LJ,
Stringham HM, Stumvoll M, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tuomi T, Tuomilehto J, Tönjes A, 
Valle TT, Williams GH, Lind L, Barroso I, Quertermous T, Walker M, Wareham NJ,
Meigs JB, McCarthy MI, Groop L, Watanabe RM, Florez JC; MAGIC investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. erik.ingelsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVE Recent genome-wide association studies have revealed loci associated
with glucose and insulin-related traits. We aimed to characterize 19 such loci
using detailed measures of insulin processing, secretion, and sensitivity to help
elucidate their role in regulation of glucose control, insulin secretion and/or
action. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS We investigated associations of loci
identified by the Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related traits Consortium 
(MAGIC) with circulating proinsulin, measures of insulin secretion and
sensitivity from oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs), euglycemic clamps, insulin
suppression tests, or frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance tests in
nondiabetic humans (n = 29,084). RESULTS The glucose-raising allele in MADD was
associated with abnormal insulin processing (a dramatic effect on higher
proinsulin levels, but no association with insulinogenic index) at extremely
persuasive levels of statistical significance (P = 2.1 x 10(-71)). Defects in
insulin processing and insulin secretion were seen in glucose-raising allele
carriers at TCF7L2, SCL30A8, GIPR, and C2CD4B. Abnormalities in early insulin
secretion were suggested in glucose-raising allele carriers at MTNR1B, GCK,
FADS1, DGKB, and PROX1 (lower insulinogenic index; no association with proinsulin
or insulin sensitivity). Two loci previously associated with fasting insulin
(GCKR and IGF1) were associated with OGTT-derived insulin sensitivity indices in 
a consistent direction. CONCLUSIONS Genetic loci identified through their effect 
on hyperglycemia and/or hyperinsulinemia demonstrate considerable heterogeneity
in associations with measures of insulin processing, secretion, and sensitivity. 
Our findings emphasize the importance of detailed physiological characterization 
of such loci for improved understanding of pathways associated with alterations
in glucose homeostasis and eventually type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2857908
PMID: 20185807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):190-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0310-190.

Open chromatin and diabetes risk.

Groop L.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):255-9.

PMID: 20179731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 10;5(2):e9153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009153.

Investigation of type 2 diabetes risk alleles support CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1, and
TCF7L2 as susceptibility genes in a Han Chinese cohort.

Wen J(1), Rönn T, Olsson A, Yang Z, Lu B, Du Y, Groop L, Ling C, Hu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Medical College Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have reported several 
genetic variants to be reproducibly associated with type 2 diabetes. Additional
variants have also been detected from a metaanalysis of three GWASs, performed in
populations of European ancestry. In the present study, we evaluated the
influence of 17 genetic variants from 15 candidate loci, identified in type 2
diabetes GWASs and the metaanalysis, in a Han Chinese cohort.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Selected type 2 diabetes-associated genetic
variants were genotyped in 1,165 type 2 diabetic patients and 1,136 normoglycemic
control individuals of Southern Han Chinese ancestry. The OR for risk of
developing type 2 diabetes was calculated using a logistic regression model
adjusted for age, sex, and BMI. Genotype-phenotype associations were tested using
a multivariate linear regression model. Genetic variants in CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1,
TCF7L2, TCF2, MC4R, and PPARG showed a nominal association with type 2 diabetes
(P<or=0.05), of whom the three first would stand correction for multiple testing:
CDKN2A/B rs10811661, OR: 1.26 (1.12-1.43) P = 1.8*10(-4); CDKAL1 rs10946398, OR: 
1.23 (1.09-1.39); P = 7.1*10(-4), and TCF7L2 rs7903146, OR: 1.61 (1.19-2.18) P = 
2.3 * 10(-3). Only nominal phenotype associations were observed, notably for
rs8050136 in FTO and fasting plasma glucose (P = 0.002), postprandial plasma
glucose (P = 0.002), and fasting C-peptide levels (P = 0.006) in the diabetic
patients, and with BMI in controls (P = 0.033).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have identified significant association between
variants in CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1 and TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in a Han Chinese
cohort, indicating these genes as strong candidates conferring susceptibility to 
type 2 diabetes across different ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC2818850
PMID: 20161779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Apr;22(2):206-11. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.01.005. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Regulation of plasmacytoid dendritic cell development.

Reizis B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA. bvr2101@columbia.edu

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC) represent a distinct immune cell type
specialized in direct virus recognition and rapid secretion of type I interferon.
The origin and lineage affiliation of PDC have been controversial, partly because
PDC show features of both lymphocytes and dendritic cells (DC). Recent studies
helped elucidate the cellular and molecular basis of PDC development. In
particular, the common developmental origin and genetic similarity of PDC and
classical antigen-presenting DC have been established. In addition, E protein
transcription factor E2-2 was shown to control lineage commitment and gene
expression program of PDC. Because E proteins are essential regulators of
lymphocyte development, E2-2 activity may underlie the distinct 'lymphoid'
features of PDC.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854232
PMID: 20144853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Feb;19(2):558-65. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0902.

Diabetes genes and prostate cancer in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study.

Meyer TE(1), Boerwinkle E, Morrison AC, Volcik KA, Sanderson M, Coker AL, Pankow 
JS, Folsom AR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center and Division of Epidemiology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

There is a known inverse association between type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prostate
cancer (PrCa) that is poorly understood. Genetic studies of the T2D-PrCa
association may provide insight into the underlying mechanisms of this
association. We evaluated associations in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study between PrCa and nine T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from genome-wide 
association studies of T2D (in CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
PPARG, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2) and four T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from
pre-genome-wide association studies (in ADRB2, CAPN10, SLC2A2, and UCP2). From
1987 to 2000, there were 397 incident PrCa cases among 6,642 men ages 45 to 64
years at baseline. We used race-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate associations between PrCa and increasing number of T2D risk-raising
alleles. PrCa was positively associated with the CAPN10 rs3792267 G allele
[hazard ratio (HR) 1.20; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.00-1.44] and inversely
associated with the SLC2A2 rs5400 Thr110 allele (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.72, 1.00),
the UCP2 rs660339 Val55 allele (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.73, 0.97) and the IGF2BP2
rs4402960 T allele (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.61-1.02; blacks only). The TCF7L2
rs7903146 T allele was inversely associated with PrCa using a dominant genetic
model (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.65-0.97). Further knowledge of T2D gene-PrCa
mechanisms may improve understanding of PrCa etiology.

PMCID: PMC2820124
PMID: 20142250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 2;9:25. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-25.

Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin, but not p53, and
inhibits the proliferation and invasion of lung cancer cells.

Yang LH(1), Xu HT, Han Y, Li QC, Liu Y, Zhao Y, Yang ZQ, Dong QZ, Miao Y, Dai SD,
Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that overexpression of Axin downregulates T
cell factor-4 (TCF-4) transcription. However, the mechanism(s) by which Axin
downregulates the transcription and expression of TCF-4 is not clear. It has been
reported that beta-catenin promotes and p53 inhibits TCF-4 transcription,
respectively. The aim of this study was to investigate whether beta-catenin
and/or p53 is required for Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4.
RESULTS: Axin mutants that lack p53/HIPK2 and/or beta-catenin binding domains
were expressed in lung cancer cells, BE1 (mutant p53) and A549 (wild type p53).
Expression of Axin or AxinDeltap53 downregulates beta-catenin and TCF-4, and
knock-down of beta-catenin upregulates TCF-4 in BE1 cells. However, expression of
AxinDeltabeta-ca into BE1 cells did not downregulate TCF-4 expression. These
results indicate that Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin.
Although overexpression of wild-type p53 also downregulates TCF-4 in BE1 cells,
cotransfection of p53 and AxinDeltabeta-ca did not downregulate TCF-4 further.
These results suggest that Axin does not promote p53-mediated downregulation of
TCF-4. Axin, AxinDeltap53, and AxinDeltabeta-ca all downregulated beta-catenin
and TCF-4 in A549 cells. Knock-down of p53 upregulated beta-catenin and TCF-4,
but cotransfection of AxinDeltabeta-ca and p53 siRNA resulted in downregulation
of beta-catenin and TCF-4. These results indicate that p53 is not required for
Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4. Knock-down or inhibition of GSK-3beta
prevented Axin-mediated downregulation of TCF-4. Furthermore, expression of Axin 
and AxinDeltap53, prevented the proliferative and invasive ability of BE1 and
A549, expression of AxinDeltabeta-ca could only prevented the proliferative and
invasive ability effectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Axin downregulates TCF-4 transcription via beta-catenin and
independently of p53. Axin may also inhibits the proliferation and invasion of
lung cancer cells via beta-catenin and p53.

PMCID: PMC2827467
PMID: 20122174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):255-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.530. Epub 2010 Jan 31.

A map of open chromatin in human pancreatic islets.

Gaulton KJ(1), Nammo T, Pasquali L, Simon JM, Giresi PG, Fogarty MP, Panhuis TM, 
Mieczkowski P, Secchi A, Bosco D, Berney T, Montanya E, Mohlke KL, Lieb JD,
Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Mar;42(3):190-2.

Tissue-specific transcriptional regulation is central to human disease. To
identify regulatory DNA active in human pancreatic islets, we profiled chromatin 
by formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements coupled with
high-throughput sequencing (FAIRE-seq). We identified approximately 80,000 open
chromatin sites. Comparison of FAIRE-seq data from islets to that from five
non-islet cell lines revealed approximately 3,300 physically linked clusters of
islet-selective open chromatin sites, which typically encompassed single genes
that have islet-specific expression. We mapped sequence variants to open
chromatin sites and found that rs7903146, a TCF7L2 intronic variant strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes, is located in islet-selective open chromatin. We
found that human islet samples heterozygous for rs7903146 showed allelic
imbalance in islet FAIRE signals and that the variant alters enhancer activity,
indicating that genetic variation at this locus acts in cis with local chromatin 
and regulatory changes. These findings illuminate the tissue-specific
organization of cis-regulatory elements and show that FAIRE-seq can guide the
identification of regulatory variants underlying disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2828505
PMID: 20118932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes. 2010 Apr;59(4):836-43. doi: 10.2337/db09-0918. Epub 2010 Jan 27.

The T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 associates with a reduced compensation of
insulin secretion for insulin resistance induced by 9 days of bed rest.

Alibegovic AC(1), Sonne MP, Højbjerre L, Hansen T, Pedersen O, van Hall G, Holst 
JJ, Stallknecht B, Dela F, Vaag A.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Centre, Gentofte, Denmark. aagv@steno.dk

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether the type 2
diabetes-associated T-allele of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 
associates with impaired insulin secretion to compensate for insulin resistance
induced by bed rest.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 38 healthy young Caucasian men were
studied before and after bed rest using the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp
technique combined with indirect calorimetry preceded by an intravenous glucose
tolerance test. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 was genotyped using allelic discrimination
performed with an ABI 7900 system. The genetic analyses were done assuming a
dominant model of inheritance.
RESULTS: The first-phase insulin response (FPIR) was significantly lower in
carriers of the T-allele compared with carriers of the CC genotype before bed
rest, with and without correction for insulin resistance. The incremental rise of
FPIR in response to insulin resistance induced by bed rest was lower in carriers 
of the T-allele (P < 0.001). Fasting plasma glucagon levels were significantly
lower in carriers of the T-allele before and after bed rest. While carriers of
the CC genotype developed increased hepatic insulin resistance, the TCF7L2
rs7903146 did not influence peripheral insulin action or the rate of lipolysis
before or after bed rest.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthy carriers of the T-allele of TCF7L2 rs7903146 exhibit a
diminished increase of insulin secretion in response to intravenous glucose to
compensate for insulin resistance as induced by bed rest. Reduced paracrine
glucagon stimulation may contribute to the impairment of beta-cell function in
the carriers TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-allele associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2844831
PMID: 20107109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Pharmacotherapy. 2010 Feb;30(2):195-209. doi: 10.1592/phco.30.2.195.

Understanding the genetic basis for adverse drug effects: the calcineurin
inhibitors.

Bai JP(1), Lesko LJ, Burckart GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Office of Translational Science, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, United States Food and Drug Administration, Silver 
Spring, Maryland, USA.

The calcineurin inhibitors-cyclosporine and tacrolimus-are the mainstay of
immunosuppressive therapy in solid organ transplantation. These drugs produce
severe adverse drug effects (ADEs) such as nephrotoxicity, posttransplantation
diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. Accumulated evidence suggests that the
development of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and renal failure may be associated
with specific DNA genotypes. In this review, the genes involved with the
development of these disease processes are compared with those implicated in
calcineurin inhibitor-induced ADEs. The renin-angiotensin system genes,
cytokine-encoding genes, and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 genes have
been implicated in calcineurin inhibitor-induced nephrotoxicity, as well as in
development of renal failure. A number of genes are implicated in contributing to
diabetes, and these include the vitamin D receptor gene, VDR; hepatocyte nuclear 
factor genes, HNF; transcription factor 7-like 2 gene, TCF7L2;
angiotensin-converting enzyme gene, ACE; cytokines; peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma gene, PPARG; and others. Studies have
suggested that the VDR, PPARG, HNF1A, and adenosine 5'-triphosphate-binding
cassette ABCC8 (which encodes the sulfonylurea receptor) genes are associated
with calcineurin inhibitor-induced diabetes. The genes encoding for the
angiotensin-converting enzyme, endothelial constitutive nitric oxide synthase,
and cytochrome P450 3A isoenzyme have been involved in the development of
hypertension and in calcineurin inhibitor-induced hypertension. The genetic study
of disease states can be the stepping stones for thoroughly understanding the
genetic basis of ADEs. Gene polymorphisms are implicated in the development of
diseases and corresponding disease-like ADEs. The disease-associated genes
provide candidate genes for exploring ADEs and may provide genomic biomarkers for
assessing the risk for developing severe calcineurin inhibitor-related ADEs as
well as for developing preventive strategies.

PMID: 20099993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Mar;95(3):1450-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2064. Epub
2010 Jan 22.

Genotype and tissue-specific effects on alternative splicing of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 gene in humans.

Mondal AK(1), Das SK, Baldini G, Chu WS, Sharma NK, Hackney OG, Zhao J, Grant SF,
Elbein SC.

Author information: 
(1)or Swapan K. Das, Section on Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of
Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

CONTEXT: Noncoding single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the TCF7L2 gene 
are confirmed risk factors for type 2 diabetes, but the mechanism by which they
increase risk is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that associated SNPs alter TCF7L2 splicing and that
splice forms have altered biological roles.
DESIGN: Splice forms and 5' and 3' untranslated regions were characterized in sc 
adipose, muscle, liver, HepG2 cells, pancreas, and islet. Isoform-specific
transcript levels were quantified in sc adipose. Alternative splice forms were
characterized in HepG2 liver cells under glucose and insulin conditions and in
SGBS cells with differentiation. Major isoforms were characterized by
transfection.
SETTING: The study was conducted at an ambulatory general clinical research
center.
PATIENTS: PATIENTS included 78 healthy, nondiabetic study subjects characterized 
for insulin sensitivity and secretion.
RESULTS: We identified 32 alternatively spliced transcripts and multiple-length
3' untranslated region transcripts in adipose, muscle, islet, and pancreas.
Alternative exons 3a, 12, 13, and 13a were observed in all tissues, whereas exon 
13b was islet specific. Transcripts retaining exons 13 and 13a but not total
TCF7L2 transcripts were significantly correlated with both obesity measures (P < 
0.01) and rs7903146 genotype (P < 0.026) in sc adipose. Insulin (5-10 nm)
suppressed all TCF7L2 isoforms in SGBS cells but suppressed exon 13a-containing
isoforms most significantly (P < 0.001). The isoform distribution differed
throughout SGBS cell differentiation. Isoforms with predicted early stop codons
yielded stable proteins of the predicted size, bound beta-catenin, and targeted
correctly to the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Intronic TCF7L2 variants may regulate alternative transcript
isoforms, which in turn may have distinct physiologic roles.

PMCID: PMC2841530
PMID: 20097709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Apr;49(4):379-89. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20750.

FOXO1 and TCF7L2 genes involved in metastasis and poor prognosis in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma.

Kojima T(1), Shimazui T, Horie R, Hinotsu S, Oikawa T, Kawai K, Suzuki H, Meno K,
Akaza H, Uchida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

The goal of this study was to identify genes related to the metastasis of clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (CRCC). We analyzed copy number alterations in renal
tissue specimens of patients with CRCC patients with or without metastasis by
using high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and then
integrated these data with gene expression profiling data obtained using
oligonucleotide microarrays. The expression levels of target genes were
determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) with an independent tumor
set. An analysis of specimens from 23 CRCC cases with SNP arrays revealed that
hemizygous deletions at 10q and 13q were found only in cases of metastatic
disease. We found the homozygous deletion of TCF7L2 at 10q25.2 in an aggressive
case that had hemizygous deletions at 10q. In addition, a qRT-PCR analysis of
TCF7L2 mRNA levels in tumor samples revealed significantly lower levels in
patients with metastasis when compared with those without metastasis. FOXO1 was
identified as a down-regulated gene in the minimal overlapping region of the 13q 
hemizygous deletion in CRCC. Decreased FOXO1 expression was significantly
correlated with metastasis and poor survival outcome. Knockdown of FOXO1
inhibited apoptosis after doxorubicin treatment in CRCC cells and reduced the
expression of downstream genes involved in cell proliferation (CDKN1B) and
survival (BCL2L11). Lower levels of FOXO1 expression were associated with
decreased expression of CDKN1B and BCL2L11 in CRCC specimens. We conclude that
FOXO1 and TCF7L2 are involved in metastasis and that molecules in these signaling
pathways may be targets for diagnostic procedures and therapies for CRCC.

PMID: 20095040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jan 21;11:12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-12.

Large effects on body mass index and insulin resistance of fat mass and obesity
associated gene (FTO) variants in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Tan S(1), Scherag A, Janssen OE, Hahn S, Lahner H, Dietz T, Scherag S, Grallert
H, Vogel CI, Kimmig R, Illig T, Mann K, Hebebrand J, Hinney A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a common endocrine disorder in 
women of child-bearing age, mainly characterised by chronic anovulation and
hyperandrogenism, is often associated with insulin resistance (IR) and obesity.
Its etiology and the role of IR and obesity in PCOS are not fully understood. We 
examined the influence of validated genetic variants conferring susceptibility to
obesity and/or type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) on metabolic and PCOS-specific
traits in patients with PCOS.
METHODS: We conducted an association study in 386 patients with PCOS (defined by 
the Rotterdam-criteria) using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in or in
proximity to the fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO), insulin-induced
gene-2 (INSIG2), transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) and melanocortin 4
receptor gene (MC4R). To compare the effect of FTO obesity risk alleles on BMI in
patients with PCOS to unselected females of the same age range we genotyped 1,971
females from the population-based KORA-S4 study (Kooperative Gesundheitsforschung
im Raum Augsburg, Survey 4).
RESULTS: The FTO risk allele was associated with IR traits and measures of
increased body weight. In addition, the TCF7L2 SNP was associated with body
weight traits. For the SNPs in the vicinity of INSIG2 and MC4R and for the other 
examined phenotypes there was no evidence for an association. In PCOS the
observed per risk allele effect of FTO intron 1 SNP rs9939609 on BMI was +1.56
kg/m2, whereas it was +0.46 kg/m2 in females of the same age range from the
general population as shown previously.
CONCLUSION: The stronger effect on body weight of the FTO SNP in PCOS might well 
have implications for the etiology of the disease.

PMCID: PMC2824654
PMID: 20092643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Feb;152A(2):340-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33194.

Pancreatic hypoplasia presenting with neonatal diabetes mellitus in association
with congenital heart defect and developmental delay.

Balasubramanian M(1), Shield JP, Acerini CL, Walker J, Ellard S, Marchand M,
Polak M, Vaxillaire M, Crolla JA, Bunyan DJ, Mackay DJ, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.

Congenital pancreatic hypoplasia is a rare cause of neonatal diabetes. We report 
on a series of three patients with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart
defects. All had abdominal scan evidence of pancreatic agenesis. In addition,
Patient 1 had a ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary
artery stenosis; Patient 2 had a truncus arteriosus and Patient 3 had tetralogy
of Fallot. Two of the three patients have developmental delay. All three patients
were isolated cases within the family. Investigations included sequencing of GCK,
ABCC8, IPF1, NEUROD1, PTF1A, HNF1B, INS, ISL1, NGN3, HHEX, G6PC2, TCF7L2, SOX4,
FOXP3 (Patients 1 and 2), GATA4 and KCNJ11 genes (all three patients), but no
mutations were found. Genetic investigation to exclude paternal UPD 6,
methylation aberrations and duplications of 6q24 was also negative in all three. 
22q11 deletion was excluded in all three patients. Array CGH in Patient (1)
showed a approximately 250 kb, paternally inherited duplication of chromosome 12q
[arr cgh 12q24.33 (B35:CHR12:131808577-132057649++) pat], not found in the other 
two patients. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic hypoplasia
with congenital heart defects has been reported before and may represent a
distinct condition. We discuss this rare association and review previously
reported literature.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20082465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):142-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.521. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Genetic variation in GIPR influences the glucose and insulin responses to an oral
glucose challenge.

Saxena R, Hivert MF, Langenberg C, Tanaka T, Pankow JS, Vollenweider P, Lyssenko 
V, Bouatia-Naji N, Dupuis J, Jackson AU, Kao WH, Li M, Glazer NL, Manning AK,
Luan J, Stringham HM, Prokopenko I, Johnson T, Grarup N, Boesgaard TW, Lecoeur C,
Shrader P, O'Connell J, Ingelsson E, Couper DJ, Rice K, Song K, Andreasen CH,
Dina C, Köttgen A, Le Bacquer O, Pattou F, Taneera J, Steinthorsdottir V, Rybin
D, Ardlie K, Sampson M, Qi L, van Hoek M, Weedon MN, Aulchenko YS, Voight BF,
Grallert H, Balkau B, Bergman RN, Bielinski SJ, Bonnefond A, Bonnycastle LL,
Borch-Johnsen K, Böttcher Y, Brunner E, Buchanan TA, Bumpstead SJ,
Cavalcanti-Proença C, Charpentier G, Chen YD, Chines PS, Collins FS, Cornelis M, 
J Crawford G, Delplanque J, Doney A, Egan JM, Erdos MR, Firmann M, Forouhi NG,
Fox CS, Goodarzi MO, Graessler J, Hingorani A, Isomaa B, Jørgensen T, Kivimaki M,
Kovacs P, Krohn K, Kumari M, Lauritzen T, Lévy-Marchal C, Mayor V, McAteer JB,
Meyre D, Mitchell BD, Mohlke KL, Morken MA, Narisu N, Palmer CN, Pakyz R, Pascoe 
L, Payne F, Pearson D, Rathmann W, Sandbaek A, Sayer AA, Scott LJ, Sharp SJ,
Sijbrands E, Singleton A, Siscovick DS, Smith NL, Sparsø T, Swift AJ, Syddall H, 
Thorleifsson G, Tönjes A, Tuomi T, Tuomilehto J, Valle TT, Waeber G, Walley A,
Waterworth DM, Zeggini E, Zhao JH; GIANT consortium; MAGIC investigators, Illig
T, Wichmann HE, Wilson JF, van Duijn C, Hu FB, Morris AD, Frayling TM, Hattersley
AT, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, Nilsson P, Syvänen AC, Shuldiner AR, Walker
M, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P, Williams GH, Nathan DM, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Cooper 
C, Marmot M, Ferrucci L, Mooser V, Stumvoll M, Loos RJ, Altshuler D, Psaty BM,
Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Florez JC, McCarthy MI, Boehnke M,
Barroso I, Sladek R, Froguel P, Meigs JB, Groop L, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM.

Comment in
    Curr Diab Rep. 2010 Aug;10(4):249-51.

Glucose levels 2 h after an oral glucose challenge are a clinical measure of
glucose tolerance used in the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. We report a
meta-analysis of nine genome-wide association studies (n = 15,234 nondiabetic
individuals) and a follow-up of 29 independent loci (n = 6,958-30,620). We
identify variants at the GIPR locus associated with 2-h glucose level
(rs10423928, beta (s.e.m.) = 0.09 (0.01) mmol/l per A allele, P = 2.0 x 10(-15)).
The GIPR A-allele carriers also showed decreased insulin secretion (n = 22,492;
insulinogenic index, P = 1.0 x 10(-17); ratio of insulin to glucose area under
the curve, P = 1.3 x 10(-16)) and diminished incretin effect (n = 804; P = 4.3 x 
10(-4)). We also identified variants at ADCY5 (rs2877716, P = 4.2 x 10(-16)),
VPS13C (rs17271305, P = 4.1 x 10(-8)), GCKR (rs1260326, P = 7.1 x 10(-11)) and
TCF7L2 (rs7903146, P = 4.2 x 10(-10)) associated with 2-h glucose. Of the three
newly implicated loci (GIPR, ADCY5 and VPS13C), only ADCY5 was found to be
associated with type 2 diabetes in collaborating studies (n = 35,869 cases,
89,798 controls, OR = 1.12, 95% CI 1.09-1.15, P = 4.8 x 10(-18)).

PMCID: PMC2922003
PMID: 20081857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genet Med. 2010 Jan;12(1):56; author reply 56-7. doi:
10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181c956fe.

Disease risks derived from genetic variants need clinical context.

Stack CB.

Comment on
    Genet Med. 2009 Aug;11(8):588-94.

PMID: 20081422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar;1800(3):344-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.12.007.
Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Insulin alters the expression of components of the Wnt signaling pathway
including TCF-4 in the intestinal cells.

Sun J(1), Wang D, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Canada; Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, University Health Network,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological and experimental evidence that support the
correlation between Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and increased risks of
colorectal cancer formation have led us to hypothesize the existence of molecular
crosstalk between insulin and canonical Wnt signaling pathways. Insulin was shown
to stimulate Wnt target gene expression, utilizing the effector of the Wnt
signaling pathway. Whether insulin affects expression of components of Wnt
pathway has not been extensively examined.
METHODS: cDNA microarray was utilized to assess the effect of insulin on gene
expression profile in the rat intestinal non-cancer IEC-6 cell line, followed by 
real-time RT-PCR, Western blotting and reporter gene analyses in intestinal
cancer and non-cancer cells.
RESULTS: Insulin was shown to alter the expression of a dozen of Wnt pathway
related genes including TCF-4 (=TCF7L2) and frizzled- (Fzd-4). The stimulatory
effect of insulin on TCF-4 expression was then confirmed by real-time RT-PCR,
Western blotting and luciferase reporter analyses, while the activation on Fzd-4 
was confirmed by real-time PCR.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Our observations suggest that insulin may crosstalk with
the Wnt signaling pathway in a multi-level fashion, involving insulin regulation 
of the expression of Wnt target genes, a Wnt receptor, as well as mediators of
the Wnt signaling pathway.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20056134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Mar;87(3):330-5. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2009.242. Epub 2010 
Jan 6.

KCNJ11 Lys23Glu and TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T) polymorphisms affect therapeutic
efficacy of repaglinide in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes.

Yu M(1), Xu XJ, Yin JY, Wu J, Chen X, Gong ZC, Ren HY, Huang Q, Sheng FF, Zhou
HH, Liu ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, 
Central South University, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

This study showed that the polymorphisms KCNJ11 Lys23Glu and TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T)
are associated with a heightened risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM). We also explored the effects of these polymorphisms on the efficacy of
repaglinide therapy in Chinese patients with T2DM. A total of 259 patients with
T2DM and 188 healthy controls were genotyped. Forty patients with various
genotypes were randomly selected to undergo an 8-week repaglinide treatment
regimen. Patients with the G allele of the KCNJ11 Lys23Glu polymorphism showed
higher levels of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and postprandial plasma glucose
(PPG) (P < 0.05). After repaglinide treatment, patients with the GA or AA
genotype showed higher levels of FPG, PPG, and glycated hemoglobin (HbA(1c))
compared with patients with the GG genotype (P < 0.05). Patients with the C
allele of TCF7L2 rs290487(C/T) had higher total cholesterol levels and lower body
mass index (BMI) (P < 0.05). In patients with the TT genotype, the drug showed
better efficacy with respect to levels of fasting insulin, triglycerides, and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) than in patients with the CC or CT
genotype (P < 0.05). The KCNJ11 and TCF7L2 polymorphisms were associated with
repaglinide efficacy.

PMID: 20054294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 1;5(1):e8541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008541.

Association between type 2 diabetes loci and measures of fatness.

Pecioska S(1), Zillikens MC, Henneman P, Snijders PJ, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM,
Aulchenko YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Clinical Genetics, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a metabolic disorder characterized by
disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism and insulin resistance. 
The majority of T2D patients are obese and obesity by itself may be a cause of
insulin resistance. Our aim was to evaluate whether the recently identified T2D
risk alleles are associated with human measures of fatness as characterized with 
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genotypes and phenotypes of approximately 3,000
participants from cross-sectional ERF study were analyzed. Nine single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CDKN2AB, CDKAL1, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, PPARG,
SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 were genotyped. We used linear regression to study association
between individual SNPs and the combined allelic risk score with body mass index 
(BMI), fat mass index (FMI), fat percentage (FAT), waist circumference (WC) and
waist to hip ratio (WHR). Significant association was observed between rs8050136 
(FTO) and BMI (p = 0.003), FMI (p = 0.007) and WC (p = 0.03); fat percentage was 
borderline significant (p = 0.053). No other SNPs alone or combined in a risk
score demonstrated significant association to the measures of fatness.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: From the recently identified T2D risk variants only the
risk variant of the FTO gene (rs8050136) showed statistically significant
association with BMI, FMI, and WC.

PMCID: PMC2796390
PMID: 20049090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Apr;38(6):1964-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1197. Epub 2009
Dec 30.

Alternative splicing of Tcf7l2 transcripts generates protein variants with
differential promoter-binding and transcriptional activation properties at
Wnt/beta-catenin targets.

Weise A(1), Bruser K, Elfert S, Wallmen B, Wittel Y, Wöhrle S, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Center for Biochemistry and
Molecular Cell Research, Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Germany.

Alternative splicing can produce multiple protein products with variable domain
composition from a single gene. The mouse Tcf7l2 gene is subject to alternative
splicing. It encodes TCF4, a member of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of
DNA-binding proteins and a nuclear interaction partner of beta-catenin which
performs essential functions in Wnt growth factor signalling. Multiple TCF4
isoforms, potentially exhibiting cell-type-specific distribution and differing in
gene regulatory properties, could strongly influence tissue-specific Wnt
responses. Therefore, we have examined mouse Tcf7l2 splice variants in neonatal
tissues, embryonic stem cells and neural progenitors. By polymerase chain
reaction amplification, cloning and sequencing, we identify a large number of
alternatively spliced transcripts and report a highly flexible combinatorial
repertoire of alternative exons. Many, but not all of the variants exhibit a
broad tissue distribution. Moreover, two functionally equivalent versions of the 
C-clamp, thought to represent an auxiliary DNA-binding domain, were identified.
Depending upon promoter context and precise domain composition, TCF4 isoforms
exhibit strikingly different transactivation potentials at natural
Wnt/beta-catenin target promoters. However, differences in C-clamp-mediated DNA
binding can only partially explain functional differences among TCF4 variants.
Still, the cell-type-specific complement of TCF4 isoforms is likely to be a major
determinant for the context-dependent transcriptional output of Wnt/beta-catenin 
signalling.

PMCID: PMC2847248
PMID: 20044351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 31;2:72. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-72.

Prioritizing genes for follow-up from genome wide association studies using
information on gene expression in tissues relevant for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Parikh H(1), Lyssenko V, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden. parikhhm@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have emerged as a powerful
approach for identifying susceptibility loci associated with polygenetic diseases
such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, it is still a daunting task to 
prioritize single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from GWAS for further
replication in different population. Several recent studies have shown that
genetic variation often affects gene-expression at proximal (cis) as well as
distal (trans) genomic locations by different mechanisms such as altering rate of
transcription or splicing or transcript stability.
METHODS: To prioritize SNPs from GWAS, we combined results from two GWAS related 
to T2DM, the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI) and the Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium (WTCCC), with genome-wide expression data from pancreas,
adipose tissue, liver and skeletal muscle of individuals with or without T2DM or 
animal models thereof to identify T2DM susceptibility loci.
RESULTS: We identified 1,170 SNPs associated with T2DM with P < 0.05 in both GWAS
and 243 genes that were located in the vicinity of these SNPs. Out of these 243
genes, we identified 115 differentially expressed in publicly available gene
expression profiling data. Notably five of them, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, NOTCH2, TCF7L2 
and TSPAN8, have subsequently been shown to be associated with T2DM in different 
populations. To provide further validation of our approach, we reversed the
approach and started with 26 known SNPs associated with T2DM and related traits. 
We could show that 12 (57%) (HHEX, HNF1B, IGF2BP2, IRS1, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, NOTCH2,
PPARG, TCF7L2, THADA, TSPAN8 and WFS1) out of 21 genes located in vicinity of
these SNPs were showing aberrant expression in T2DM from the gene expression
profiling studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing of gene expression profiling data from different tissues
of individuals with or without T2DM or animal models thereof is a powerful tool
for prioritizing SNPs from WGAS for further replication studies.

PMCID: PMC2815699
PMID: 20043853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Diabetologia. 2010 Apr;53(4):679-89. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1630-2. Epub 2009
Dec 31.

Improvements in glucose homeostasis in response to regular exercise are
influenced by the PPARG Pro12Ala variant: results from the HERITAGE Family Study.

Ruchat SM(1), Rankinen T, Weisnagel SJ, Rice T, Rao DC, Bergman RN, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, PEPS-Laval University, 2300 rue 
de Terrasse, Quebec, QC, Canada G1V 0A6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Exercise training improves glucose homeostasis, but large
inter-individual differences are reported, suggesting a role of genetic factors. 
We investigated whether variants either confirmed or newly identified as diabetes
susceptibility variants through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) modulate
changes in phenotypes derived from an IVGTT in response to an endurance training 
programme.
METHODS: We analysed eight polymorphisms in seven type 2 diabetes genes (CDKAL1
rs7756992; CDKN2A and CDKN2B rs10811661 and rs564398; HHEX rs7923837; IGF2BP2
rs4402960; KCNJ11 rs5215; PPARG rs1801282; and TCF7L2 rs7903146) in a maximum of 
481 sedentary, non-diabetic white individuals, who participated in a 20-week
endurance training programme. Associations were tested between the variants and
changes in IVGTT-derived phenotypes.
RESULTS: The only evidence of association with training response was found with
PPARG rs1801282 (Pro12Ala). We observed that Ala carriers experienced greater
increase in overall glucose tolerance (Deltaglucose disappearance index Ala/Ala
0.22 +/- 0.22, Pro/Ala 0.14 +/- 0.06, Pro/Pro 0.004 +/- 0.03; p = 0.0008),
glucose effectiveness (Ala/Ala 0.28 +/- 0.41, Pro/Ala 0.44 +/- 0.14, Pro/Pro 0.09
+/- 0.06; p = 0.004), acute insulin response to glucose (Ala/Ala 64.21 +/- 37.73,
Pro/Ala -11.92 +/- 40.30, Pro/Pro -46.30 +/- 14.70; p = 0.03) and disposition
index (Ala/Ala 551.8 +/- 448.5, Pro/Ala 534.6 +/- 218.3, Pro/Pro -7.44 +/- 88.18;
p = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Compared with Pro/Pro individuals, PPARG Ala carriers
experienced greater improvements in glucose and insulin metabolism in response to
regular endurance training. However, we did not find evidence of association
between type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants recently identified through GWAS 
and glucose homeostasis response to exercise. Our results extend those of
previous studies showing that Ala carriers appear to be more responsive to
beneficial health effects of lifestyle interventions.

PMCID: PMC2840709
PMID: 20043145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2010 Jan;27(1):23-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-009-9377-8. Epub 
2009 Dec 30.

Polymorphisms of TCF7L2 and HHEX genes in Chinese women with polycystic ovary
syndrome.

Xu P(1), Che Y, Cao Y, Wu X, Sun H, Liang F, Sun J, Ke L, Yi L, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine & The Center for Reproductive
medicine, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, 210093, China.

PURPOSE: This study was to evaluate whether polymorphisms of TCF7L2 (rs7903146)
and HHEX (rs1111875) genes responsible for insulin secretion are associated with 
the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in Chinese people.
METHODS: 326 PCOS patients and 290 healthy individuals as controls were studied. 
Blood samples were obtained for DNA analyses and hormone measurements. Genotyping
of the TCF7L2 (rs7903146) and HHEX (rs1111875) genes was carried out by the
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method.
RESULTS: We did not find statistically significant differences in the
distribution of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and HHEX rs1111875 polymorphisms between the
Chinese women with PCOS and the controls. Levels of hormones such as insulin,
FSH, LH, LH/FSH, P, T and E2 were also similar between the different genotypes of
the genes TCF7L2 and HHEX, respectively, which was confirmed within either the
PCOS subjects or controls.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no association of either of the two variants, rs7903146 of
TCF7L2 and rs1111875 of HHEX, with the occurrence of PCOS in the Chinese
population.

PMCID: PMC2826618
PMID: 20041287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Diabetologia. 2010 Apr;53(4):712-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1640-0. Epub 2009 Dec
24.

Evidence for neuroendocrine function of a unique splicing form of TCF7L2 in human
brain, islets and gut.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 8717 Grovemont Circle, Bethesda, MD 20892-4605, USA.
prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variants in the TCF7L2 gene remain the strongest genetic
associations with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Recently, we identified a
unique splicing form of TCF7L2 expressed in pancreatic islets, pancreas and colon
and detected by assay 'ex13-13b'. The expression of ex13-13b strongly correlated 
with proinsulin in glucose-stimulated pancreatic islets, suggesting a potential
role for this form in the development of type 2 diabetes. The goal of this study 
was to further characterise this unique TCF7L2 splicing form in human tissues.
METHODS: We used a panel of 34 human tissues and 80 human cell lines to measure
the expression of assay ex13-13b with use of quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The highest expression of assay ex13-13b was detected in several areas
of the brain (hypothalamus/thalamus, occipital lobe) and in neuronal cell line
SHS5Y5. Low expression was confirmed in pancreatic islets, small intestine,
pancreas and colon, while no expression was detected in other human tissues and
cell lines. The expression of assay ex13-13b correlated with the gene for
cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART, also known as CARTPT) in a
panel of human tissues (n = 12, r = 0.85, p = 0.00046), pancreatic islets (n =
23, r = 0.62, p = 0.0016) and colon (n = 98, r = 0.54, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The significant correlation between expression of a
unique splicing form of TCF7L2, named here TCF7L2-NE, and CART, the gene for an
anorexigenic neurohormone expressed in the central and peripheral nervous system,
suggests that these transcripts may share neuroendocrine functions important for 
brain, gut and pancreatic islets.

PMCID: PMC2830605
PMID: 20033802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;91(2):472-9. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27947. Epub 2009 Dec
23.

TCF7L2 rs7903146-macronutrient interaction in obese individuals' responses to a
10-wk randomized hypoenergetic diet.

Grau K(1), Cauchi S, Holst C, Astrup A, Martinez JA, Saris WH, Blaak EE, Oppert
JM, Arner P, Rössner S, Macdonald IA, Klimcakova E, Langin D, Pedersen O, Froguel
P, Sørensen TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine Copenhagen University Hospital, Centre for
Health and Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. kg@ipm.regionh.dk

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 associates with type
2 diabetes and may operate via impaired glucagon-like peptide 1 secretion, which 
is stimulated more by fat than by carbohydrate ingestion.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to examine the interaction between TCF7L2 rs7903146 
and dietary fat and carbohydrate [high-fat, low-carbohydrate: 40-45% of energy as
fat (HF); compared with low-fat, high-carbohydrate: 20-25% of energy as fat (LF)]
in obese individuals' responses to a 10-wk hypoenergetic diet (-600 kcal/d).
DESIGN: European, obese participants (n = 771) were randomly assigned to receive 
an HF or an LF diet. Body weight, fat mass (FM), fat-free mass (FFM), waist
circumference (WC), resting energy expenditure (REE), fasting fat oxidation in
percentage of REE (FatOx), homeostasis model assessed insulin release
(HOMA-beta), and HOMA-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) were determined at baseline
and after the intervention; 739 individuals were genotyped for rs7903146.
RESULTS: Average weight loss was 6.9 kg with the LF and 6.6 kg with the HF
(difference between diets, NS) diet. Among individuals who were homozygous for
the T-risk allele, those in the HF diet group experienced smaller weight losses
(Deltaweight) (2.6 kg; P = 0.009; n = 622), smaller DeltaFFM (1.6 kg; P = 0.027; 
n = 609), smaller DeltaWC (3.3 cm; P = 0.010; n = 608), and a smaller
DeltaHOMA-IR (1.3 units; P = 0.004; n = 615) than did the LF diet group. For C
allele carriers, there were no differences between the HF and LF diet groups. For
the HF diet group, each additional T allele was associated with a reduced loss of
FM (0.67 kg; P = 0.019; n = 609). TCF7L2 rs7903146 was not associated with
DeltaREE, DeltaFatOx, DeltaHOMA-beta, or dropout.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that obese individuals who are homozygous for the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-risk allele are more sensitive to LF than to HF weight-loss
diets.

PMID: 20032493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Diabetes. 2010 Mar;59(3):747-50. doi: 10.2337/db09-1050. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Gene variants of TCF7L2 influence weight loss and body composition during
lifestyle intervention in a population at risk for type 2 diabetes.

Haupt A(1), Thamer C, Heni M, Ketterer C, Machann J, Schick F, Machicao F, Stefan
N, Claussen CD, Häring HU, Fritsche A, Staiger H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The impact of the diabetes risk gene transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) on body weight is unclear. As TCF7L2 is expressed in adipose tissue and 
involved in Wnt-dependent regulation of adipogenesis, we studied the impact of
TCF7L2 variants on body composition and weight loss during lifestyle
intervention.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 309 German subjects at increased risk
for type 2 diabetes for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, and rs7895340 in TCF7L2 and performed oral glucose
tolerance tests before and after a 9-month lifestyle intervention. Fat
distribution was quantified using whole-body magnetic resonance
imaging/spectroscopy in a subgroup of 210 subjects.
RESULTS: After adjustment for confounding variables, we observed a negative
impact of the type 2 diabetes allele of SNP rs7903146 on change in BMI (P =
0.0034) and on changes in nonvisceral (P = 0.0032) and visceral fat (P = 0.0165) 
during lifestyle intervention. An association of rs7903146 with lifestyle
intervention-induced changes in insulin secretion, glucose concentrations, liver 
fat, or insulin sensitivity were not detected (all P > 0.2). Essentially the same
results were obtained with SNP rs1255372. In contrast, we found no effects of
SNPs rs11196205 and rs7895340 on change in BMI (all P > or = 0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that diabetes-associated alleles of TCF7L2 are
associated with less weight loss in response to lifestyle intervention. Thus,
diabetes-associated TCF7L2 gene variation predicts the success of lifestyle
intervention in terms of weight loss and determines individual susceptibility
toward environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC2828665
PMID: 20028944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMC Proc. 2009 Dec 15;3 Suppl 7:S71.

Epistatic interactions of CDKN2B-TCF7L2 for risk of type 2 diabetes and of
CDKN2B-JAZF1 for triglyceride/high-density lipoprotein ratio longitudinal change:
evidence from the Framingham Heart Study.

An P(1), Feitosa M, Ketkar S, Adelman A, Lin S, Borecki I, Province M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Statistical Genomics and Department of Genetics, Washington
University School of Medicine (Campus Box 8506), 4444 Forest Park Boulevard, St, 
Louis, Missouri 63108, USA. anping@wustl.edu.

Fifteen known type 2 diabetes (T2D) gene variants were assessed for their
associations with T2D status in 228 T2D families from the Framingham Heart Study 
(FHS) Original, Offspring, and Children Cohorts. Bayesian approach was used to
test single-single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) association followed by logistic
regression. Bayesian and logic regression approaches were used to test multiple
SNP association searching for the best combinations of variants followed by
logistic regression reconfirmation. The significant variants for T2D risk were
also tested for their main and interacting effects on triglyceride
(TG)/high-density lipoprotein (HDL) ratio change derived from four point measures
across time. This slope phenotype was made available using mixed model growth
curve approach from 155 T2D families in the FHS Offspring Cohort.RESULTS: CDKN2B 
rs10811661 (p = 0.042), TCF7L2 rs4506565 (p = 0.004), and JAZF1 rs864745 (p =
0.04) were individually associated with risk of T2D (OR = 1.0-2.0; effect size
<1%). CDKN2B and TCF7L2 were found with significant main (p = 0.02, 0.01) and
interacting (p = 0.05) effects for increased (OR = 3.0) risk of T2D. CDKN2B and
JAZF1 were found with significant main (p = 0.0002 and 0.034) and interacting (p 
= 0.001) effects on increased (beta = 0.42) TG/HDL ratio longitudinal change.
These interacting effects were independent of effects of age and sex with effect 
sizes of 0.3-0.4% for risk of T2D or TG/HDL ratio longitudinal change.
CONCLUSION: These synthetic approaches allowed for successful detection of CDKN2B
and TCF7L2 interacting effect for T2D risk and CDKN2B and JAZF1 interacting
effect on TG/HDL ratio increase over time among T2D families in the FHS. These
interacting effects were consistent in conferring risk of T2D or progressive
insulin resistance with modest effect sizes.

PMCID: PMC2795973
PMID: 20018066  [PubMed]


104. Endocr Rev. 2010 Apr;31(2):183-93. doi: 10.1210/er.2009-0029. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

Can the genetics of type 1 and type 2 diabetes shed light on the genetics of
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults?

Grant SF(1), Hakonarson H, Schwartz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. grants@chop.edu

The pathophysiology of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is considered 
less understood than its much better characterized counterparts of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes (T1D and T2D), where its clinical presentation exhibits some
features of each of these two main diseases, earning it a reputation as being
"type 1.5 diabetes". The etiology of LADA remains unknown, but a genetic
component has been implicated from recent reports of T1D and T2D genes playing a 
role in its pathogenesis. One way to shed much needed light on the classification
of LADA is to determine the discrete genetic factors conferring risk to the
pathogenesis of this specific phenotype and to determine to what extent LADA
shares genetic similarities with T1D and T2D. For instance, no conclusive support
for a role of the T1D-associated INS gene has been reported in T2D; conversely,
but similarly, no evidence has been found for the role of the T2D-associated
genes IDE/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, FTO, and TCF7L2 in T1D.
However, and somewhat at odds with current thinking, TCF7L2, the most strongly
associated gene with T2D to date, is strongly associated with LADA, a disorder
considered by the World Health Organization to be a slowly progressing form of
T1D. In this review, we address recent advances in the genetics of T1D and T2D
and how such discoveries have in turn shed some light on the genetics of LADA as 
being potentially at the "genetic intersection" of these two major diseases.

PMID: 20007922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Diabet Med. 2009 Dec;26(12):1185-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02847.x.

Role of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity in the pathophysiology of Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and emerging treatment strategies.

Del Prato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Section of Metabolic Diseases and 
Diabetes, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. delprato@immr.med.unipi.it

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by persistent and progressive
deterioration of glucose tolerance. Both insulin resistance and impaired insulin 
secretion contribute to development of Type 2 diabetes. However, whilst insulin
resistance is fully apparent in the pre-diabetic condition, impairment of insulin
secretion worsens over the time, being paralleled by a progressive decline in
both pancreatic B-cell function and B-cell mass. Intense research has identified 
a number of genetic variants that may predispose to impaired B-cell function, but
such predisposition can be precipitated and worsened by toxic effects of
hyperglycaemia (glucotoxicity) and elevated levels of free fatty acids
(lipotoxicity). All these aspects of the pathogenesis of Type 2 diabetes are
discussed in this review. Moreover, treatments that target reduction in
glucotoxicity or lipotoxicity are outlined, including emerging strategies that
target the role of glucagon-like peptide 1 and sodium glucose co-transporter 2.

PMID: 20002468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):479-85. doi: 10.2337/db09-1169. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 affects the risk of type 2 diabetes by modulating
incretin action.

Villareal DT(1), Robertson H, Bell GI, Patterson BW, Tran H, Wice B, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Jun;59(6):e4; author reply e5-6.

OBJECTIVE: Common variants in the gene TCF7L2 confer the largest effect on the
risk of type 2 diabetes. The present study was undertaken to increase our
understanding of the mechanisms by which this gene affects type 2 diabetes risk.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Eight subjects with risk-conferring TCF7L2 genotypes
(TT or TC at rs7903146) and 10 matched subjects with wild-type genotype (CC)
underwent 5-h oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), isoglycemic intravenous glucose
infusion, and graded glucose infusion (GGI). Mathematical modeling was used to
quantify insulin-secretory profiles during OGTT and glucose infusion protocols.
The incretin effect was assessed from ratios of the insulin secretory rates (ISR)
during oral and isoglycemic glucose infusions. Dose-response curves relating
insulin secretion to glucose concentrations were derived from the GGI.
RESULTS: beta-cell responsivity to oral glucose was 50% lower (47 +/- 4 vs. 95
+/- 15 x 10(9) min(-1); P = 0.01) in the group of subjects with risk-conferring
TCF7L2 genotypes compared with control subjects. The incretin effect was also
reduced by 30% (32 +/- 4 vs. 46 +/- 4%; P = 0.02) in the at-risk group. The lower
incretin effect occurred despite similar glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) responses to oral glucose. 
The ISR response to intravenous glucose over a physiologic glucose concentration 
range (5-9 mmol/l) was similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 variant rs7903146 appears to affect risk of type 2
diabetes, at least in part, by modifying the effect of incretins on insulin
secretion. This is not due to reduced secretion of GLP-1 and GIP but rather due
to the effect of TCF7L2 on the sensitivity of the beta-cell to incretins.
Treatments that increase incretin sensitivity may decrease the risk of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2809956
PMID: 19934000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Diabetes. 2010 Mar;59(3):751-5. doi: 10.2337/db09-0972. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

Examination of all type 2 diabetes GWAS loci reveals HHEX-IDE as a locus
influencing pediatric BMI.

Zhao J(1), Bradfield JP, Zhang H, Annaiah K, Wang K, Kim CE, Glessner JT,
Frackelton EC, Otieno FG, Doran J, Thomas KA, Garris M, Hou C, Chiavacci RM, Li
M, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A number of studies have found that BMI in early life influences the
risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life. Our goal was to investigate if 
any type 2 diabetes variants uncovered through genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) impact BMI in childhood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using data from an ongoing GWAS of pediatric BMI in 
our cohort, we investigated the association of pediatric BMI with 20 single
nucleotide polymorphisms at 18 type 2 diabetes loci uncovered through GWAS,
consisting of ADAMTS9, CDC123-CAMK1D, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, EXT2, FTO, HHEX-IDE,
IGF2BP2, the intragenic region on 11p12, JAZF1, KCNQ1, LOC387761, MTNR1B, NOTCH2,
SLC30A8, TCF7L2, THADA, and TSPAN8-LGR5. We randomly partitioned our cohort
exactly in half in order to have a discovery cohort (n = 3,592) and a replication
cohort (n = 3,592).
RESULTS: Our data show that the major type 2 diabetes risk-conferring G allele of
rs7923837 at the HHEX-IDE locus was associated with higher pediatric BMI in both 
the discovery (P = 0.0013 and survived correction for 20 tests) and replication
(P = 0.023) sets (combined P = 1.01 x 10(-4)). Association was not detected with 
any other known type 2 diabetes loci uncovered to date through GWAS except for
the well-established FTO.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that the same genetic HHEX-IDE variant, which is
associated with type 2 diabetes from previous studies, also influences pediatric 
BMI.

PMCID: PMC2828649
PMID: 19933996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007872.

Control of TCF-4 expression by VDR and vitamin D in the mouse mammary gland and
colorectal cancer cell lines.

Beildeck ME(1), Islam M, Shah S, Welsh J, Byers SW.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) pathway is important in the prevention
and potentially in the treatment of many cancers. One important mechanism of VDR 
action is related to its interaction with the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
Agonist-bound VDR inhibits the oncogenic Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF pathway by
interacting directly with beta-catenin and in some cells by increasing cadherin
expression which, in turn, recruits beta-catenin to the membrane. Here we
identify TCF-4, a transcriptional regulator and beta-catenin binding partner as
an indirect target of the VDR pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this work, we show that TCF-4 (gene name
TCF7L2) is decreased in the mammary gland of the VDR knockout mouse as compared
to the wild-type mouse. Furthermore, we show 1,25(OH)2D3 increases TCF-4 at the
RNA and protein levels in several human colorectal cancer cell lines, the effect 
of which is completely dependent on the VDR. In silico analysis of the human and 
mouse TCF7L2 promoters identified several putative VDR binding elements. Although
TCF7L2 promoter reporters responded to exogenous VDR, and 1,25(OH)2D3, mutation
analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, showed that the increase in
TCF7L2 did not require recruitment of the VDR to the identified elements and
indicates that the regulation by VDR is indirect. This is further confirmed by
the requirement of de novo protein synthesis for this up-regulation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although it is generally assumed that binding of
beta-catenin to members of the TCF/LEF family is cancer-promoting, recent studies
have indicated that TCF-4 functions instead as a transcriptional repressor that
restricts breast and colorectal cancer cell growth. Consequently, we conclude
that the 1,25(OH)2D3/VDR-mediated increase in TCF-4 may have a protective role in
colon cancer as well as diabetes and Crohn's disease.

PMCID: PMC2774944
PMID: 19924301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007697.

TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 is associated with coronary artery disease severity
and mortality.

Sousa AG(1), Marquezine GF, Lemos PA, Martinez E, Lopes N, Hueb WA, Krieger JE,
Pereira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute (InCor),
University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 polymorphisms have been consistently associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus in different populations and type 2 diabetes mellitus is a
major risk factor for cardiovascular disease, especially coronary artery disease.
This study aimed to evaluate the association between TCF7L2 polymorphism
rs7903146 and coronary artery disease in diabetic and non-diabetic subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: two populations were studied in order to assess severity of 
coronary artery disease and cardiovascular events incidence. Eight-hundred and
eighty nine subjects who were referred for cardiac catheterization for coronary
artery disease diagnosis were cross-sectionally evaluated for coronary lesions
(atherosclerotic burden) and 559 subjects from the MASS-II Trial were
prospectively followed-up for 5 years and assessed for major cardiovascular
events incidence. As expected, rs7903146 T allele was associated with diabetes.
Although diabetic patients had a higher prevalence of coronary lesions, no
association between TCF7L2 genotype and coronary lesions was found in this
subgroup. However, non-diabetic individuals carrying the T allele were associated
with a significantly higher frequency of coronary lesions than non-diabetic
non-carriers of the risk allele (adjusted OR = 2.32 95%CI 1.27-4.24, p = 0.006). 
Moreover, presence of multi-vessel coronary artery disease was also associated
with the CT or TT genotypes in non-diabetics. Similarly, from the prospective
sample analysis, non-diabetics carrying the CT/TT genotypes had significantly
more composite cardiovascular end-points events than CC carriers (p = 0.049),
mainly due to an increased incidence of death (p = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: rs7903146 T allele is associated with diabetes and, in non-diabetic 
individuals, with a higher prevalence and severity of coronary artery disease and
cardiovascular events. name of registry site (see list below), registration
number, trial registration URL in brackets.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: MEDICINE, ANGIOPLASTY, OR SURGERY STUDY 
(MASS II): Unique identifier: ISRCTN66068876.

PMCID: PMC2773425
PMID: 19924244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;298(2):E245-56. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00538.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Neonatal growth and regeneration of beta-cells are regulated by the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in normal and diabetic rats.

Figeac F(1), Uzan B, Faro M, Chelali N, Portha B, Movassat J.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris Diderot-Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Equipe
d'Accueil Conventionnée 4413, Laboratory of Biology and Pathology of the
Endocrine Pancreas, Paris, France.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is critical for a variety of fundamental cellular
processes. Here, we investigated the implication of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling in the in vivo regulation of beta-cell growth and regeneration in
normal and diabetic rats. To this aim, TCF7L2, the distal effector of the
canonical Wnt pathway, was knocked down in groups of normal and diabetic rats by 
the use of specific antisense morpholino-oligonucleotides. In other groups of
diabetic rats, the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway was activated by the inhibition of
its negative regulator GSK-3beta. GSK-3beta was inactivated by either LiCl or
anti-GSK-3beta oligonucleotides. The beta-cell mass was evaluated by morphometry.
beta-cell proliferation was assessed in vivo and in vitro by BrdU incorporation
method. In vivo beta-cell neogenesis was estimated by the evaluation of
PDX1-positive ductal cells and GLUT2-positive ductal cells and the number of beta
cells budding from the ducts. We showed that the in vivo disruption of the
canonical Wnt pathway resulted in the alteration of normal and compensatory
growth of beta-cells mainly through the inhibition of beta-cell proliferation.
Conversely, activation of the Wnt pathway through the inhibition of GSK-3beta had
a significant stimulatory effect on beta-cell regeneration in diabetic rats. In
vitro, GSK-3beta inactivation resulted in the stimulation of beta-cell
proliferation. This was mediated by the stabilization of beta-catenin and the
induction of cyclin D. Taken together, our results demonstrate the involvement of
the canonical Wnt signaling in the neonatal regulation of normal and regenerative
growth of pancreatic beta-cells. Moreover, we provide evidence that activation of
this pathway by pharmacological maneuvers can efficiently improve beta-cell
regeneration in diabetic rats. These findings might have potential clinical
applications in the regenerative therapy of diabetes.

PMID: 19920216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2010 Feb;21(1):31-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e3283346cb6.

Interactions between genetic factors that predict diabetes and dietary factors
that ultimately impact on risk of diabetes.

Qi L(1), Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of the present review is to summarize recent
advances in investigations of interactions between established genetic and
dietary risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
RECENT FINDINGS: Several studies reported that dietary factors related to
carbohydrate quality and quantity, such as whole grains and glycemic load, might 
interact with transcription factor 7-like 2 variants in relation to T2D risk. The
genetic predisposition defined by the combination of 10 established T2D risk
alleles was found to modulate the association between Western dietary pattern
(high intakes of red meat, processed meat, and low fiber) and T2D; a stronger
association was observed in those with a high-risk genetic profile. Variants in
genes HHEX, CDKN2A/2B, JAZF1, and IGF2BP2 were found to interact with prenatal
nutrition in relation to T2D risk and glucose levels in later life.
SUMMARY: The available data provide preliminary support for the gene-diet
interactions in determining T2D. However, most findings have yet to be validated.
Future studies will need agreed standards of study design and statistical power, 
dietary measurement, analytical methods, and replication strategies.

PMCID: PMC2833314
PMID: 19915463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Diabetologia. 2010 Jan;53(1):123-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1578-2. Epub 2009 Nov
8.

Regulation of wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT) signalling in
pancreatic islets from wild-type and obese mice.

Krützfeldt J(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY,
USA.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2010 Sep;53(9):2073-5.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: TCF7L2 is a type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene and downstream
effector of canonical wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT)
signalling. However, it is unknown whether this pathway is active in adult
pancreatic islets in vivo, and whether it is regulated in obesity.
METHODS: We analysed activation of endogenous WNT signalling in the endocrine
pancreas from wild-type and obese mice (ob/ob) using a reporter transgene
(Topgal). Regulation of WNT signalling was compared using gene chip experiments
from isolated pancreatic islets. Activation of canonical WNT signalling in
pancreatic islets and the mouse beta cell line MIN6 was measured using
immunoblotting for cytosolic beta-catenin.
RESULTS: Endogenous canonical WNT signalling was absent in the adult endocrine
pancreas in both wild-type and obese mice. We identified WNT4 as an abundant WNT 
signalling molecule in adult pancreatic islets that is induced in two different
insulin-resistant mouse models. Increased expression of WNT4 inhibited canonical 
WNT signalling in pancreatic islets and MIN6 cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Canonical WNT signalling is not active in adult beta 
cells in vivo. WNT4 provides a potential mechanism for suppression of canonical
WNT signalling in obese mice.

PMID: 19898815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cancer. 2009 Nov 6;8:96. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-96.

No effect of cancer-associated SNP rs6983267 in the 8q24 region on co-expression 
of MYC and TCF7L2 in normal colon tissue.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
20892, MD, USA. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs6983267, located within the 8q24 region,
is strongly associated with risk of colorectal and prostate cancer. It has been
suggested that the mechanism of this association is related to differential
interaction of TCF7L2 protein (previously known as TCF-4) with alleles of
rs6983267, influencing the expression of a well-known oncogene, MYC, located 335 
Kb telomeric. Here, we tested the correlation between mRNA expression of MYC and 
several alternatively spliced forms of TCF7L2 in 117 non-cancer colon samples. We
observed a strong correlation (r = 0.60, p < 10(-6)) between expression of MYC
and a unique splicing form of TCF7L2. The level of MYC expression in these
samples was associated with expression of some TCF7L2 splicing forms but not with
genotypes of rs6983267, or interaction of rs6983267 with TCF7L2 expression. These
findings suggest that some splicing forms of TCF7L2 may be functionally important
for regulation of MYC expression in colon tissue but this regulation is not
directly dependent on rs6983267.

PMCID: PMC2777153
PMID: 19895682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Acta Diabetol. 2010 Dec;47 Suppl 1:195-8. doi: 10.1007/s00592-009-0161-0. Epub
2009 Nov 3.

Association of a common variant in TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus in
the Palestinian population.

Ereqat S(1), Nasereddin A, Cauchi S, Azmi K, Abdeen Z, Amin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School, Al-Quds
University, Jerusalem, Palestine.

Recent genome-wide association studies have provided an important resource for
furthering our understanding of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) disease
mechanisms. Most of these T2DM gene loci affect insulin secretion. We examined
the association of rs7903146 variant in the transcription factor 7 like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) with T2DM in 333 Palestinian subjects (219 were type 2 diabetic patients
and 114 normoglycemic subjects). The rs7903146 variant of TCF7L2 significantly
increased T2DM risk with an allelic odds ratio of 3.34 (95% CI [1.99-5.60], P <
0.0001). No significant association was observed between TCF7L2 genotypes and
covariates of age, gender and BMI or any tested metabolic trait (total
cholesterol and fasting plasma glucose) in both diabetic and nondiabetic
individuals (P > 0.05). Among the diabetic group, the TT genotype carrier have
earlier age at diagnosis compared with CC and CT carriers (P = 0.013). This is
the first study conducted on this gene in the Palestinian population and provides
valuable information for comparison with other ethnic groups.

PMID: 19885641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Dec;90(6):1502-8. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28379. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

Effects of TCF7L2 polymorphisms on glucose values after a lifestyle intervention.

Bo S(1), Gambino R, Ciccone G, Rosato R, Milanesio N, Villois P, Pagano G,
Cassader M, Gentile L, Durazzo M, Cavallo-Perin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Unit of Cancer Epidemiology,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy. sbo@molinette.piemonte.it

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is the strongest locus linked to type 2 diabetes that has been
identified thus far, and rs7903146 is the most significantly associated variant. 
Few intervention studies have shown that it has negative effects on metabolic
improvement after lifestyle programs.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to assess the effects of this variant on lifestyle
intervention-induced changes in glucose values and metabolic variables at 1- and 
4-y follow-ups.
DESIGN: The rs7903146 variant was genotyped in 335 nondiabetic, dysmetabolic
participants in a randomized lifestyle intervention trial.
RESULTS: Subjects with the unfavorable TT genotype showed higher values of
fasting glucose and lower homeostasis model assessment of beta cell function at
baseline. Lifestyle modifications were successful in the amelioration of
metabolic traits in all genetic subgroups after 1 y. At 4-y follow-up most of the
metabolic benefits had disappeared. In a multiple regression model, values for
glucose and homeostasis model assessment of beta cell function at 4 y were
significantly associated with the T allele (for glucose and homeostasis model
assessments, respectively: beta = 6.6; 95% CI: 2.5, 10.7; P = 0.001; and beta =
-0.37; 95% CI: -0.54, -0.20; P < 0.001) but not with intervention. There was no
interaction between genotype and intervention. After 1 y, impaired fasting
glucose and diabetes incidence were inversely associated with intervention. After
4 y, the presence of a T allele was associated with impaired fasting glucose
(odds ratio: 3.04; 95% CI: 1.53, 6.04; P = 0.001) and diabetes (odds ratio: 2.63;
95% CI: 1.00, 6.96; P = 0.05) but not with intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Lifestyle modifications improved the metabolic pattern in all
genetic subgroups. At the end of the trial, however, weight gain occurred, and
carriers of the T allele developed first hyperglycemia and decreased insulin
secretion, which suggests the need for different "after-care" preventive
approaches tailored to each genotype's metabolic risk.

PMID: 19864407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Med Microbiol. 2010 Jan;300(1):34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2009.08.011. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Innate antimicrobial host defense in small intestinal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Beisner J, Stange EF, Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, D-70376
Stuttgart, Germany.

Paneth cells (PCs) are specialized epithelial cells predominantly found in the
small intestinal crypts of Lieberkuehn. They produce different broad spectrum
antimicrobial peptides most abundantly the alpha-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und
DEFA6). Both these PC products show a specific reduction in small intestinal
Crohn's disease (CD) - a form of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Their decrease
is independent of current inflammation and an association with a NOD2 frameshift 
mutation has been demonstrated. More recently, another independent and even more 
frequent mechanism has been found which is linked to diminished levels of the Wnt
pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4). Besides regulating the 
expression of HD-5 and HD-6 as TCF4 target genes, the Wnt pathway also
orchestrates Paneth cell differentiation and maturation and controls stem cell
maintenance in the small intestine. Besides NOD2 (which is predominantly
expressed in PC) and ATG16L1 (inter alia important in the exocytosis of PC
products), TCF4 is the third gene which is associated with small intestinal CD
and Paneth cell antimicrobial function. Thus, Paneth cells seem to be key player 
emphazising a paramount importance of antimicrobial host defense in small
intestinal CD pathogenesis.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 19850516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Dec 20;517(6):925-39. doi: 10.1002/cne.22199.

Expression of the diabetes-associated gene TCF7L2 in adult mouse brain.

Lee S(1), Lee CE, Elias CF, Elmquist JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9077, USA.

Polymorphisms of the gene TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2) are strongly
associated with the development and progression of type 2 diabetes. TCF7L2 is
important in the development of peripheral organs such as adipocytes, pancreas,
and the intestine. However, very little is known about its expression elsewhere. 
In this study we used in situ hybridization histochemistry to show that TCF7L2
has a unique expression pattern in the mouse brain. TCF7L2 is expressed in two
distinct populations. First, it is highly expressed in thalamic and tectal
structures. Additionally, TCF7L2 mRNA is expressed at moderate to low levels in
specific cells of the hypothalamus, preoptic nucleus, and circumventricular
organs. Collectively, these patterns of expression suggest that TCF7L2 has
distinct functions within the brain, with a general role in the development and
maintenance of thalamic and midbrain neurons, and then a distinct role in
autonomic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4176933
PMID: 19845015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2009 Oct 12;1(1):16. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-1-16.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms and inflammatory markers before and after treatment with
fenofibrate.

Kabagambe EK(1), Glasser SP, Ordovas JM, Warodomwichit D, Tsai MY, Hopkins PN,
Borecki IB, Wojczynski M, Arnett DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition
Research Center, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
edmondk@uab.edu.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is implicated in causing diabetes. We tested whether
transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms (rs12255372 and
rs7903146), consistently associated with type 2 diabetes, are associated with
plasma concentrations of inflammatory markers before and after three weeks of
daily treatment with fenofibrate.
METHODS: Men and women in the Genetics of Lipid-Lowering Drugs and Diet Network
study (n = 1025, age 49 +/- 16 y) were included. All participants suspended use
of lipid-lowering drugs for three weeks and were then given 160 mg/day of
fenofibrate for three weeks. Inflammatory markers and lipids were measured before
and after fenofibrate. ANOVA was used to test for differences across TCF7L2
genotypes.
RESULTS: Under the additive or dominant model, there were no significant
differences (P > 0.05) in the concentrations of inflammatory markers (hsCRP,
IL-2, IL-6, TNF-alpha and MCP-1) across TCF7L2 genotypes in the period before or 
after treatment. For both rs12255372 and rs7903146, homozygote T-allele carriers 
had significantly higher (P < 0.05) post-fenofibrate concentrations of MCP-1 in
the recessive model. No other significant associations were detected.
CONCLUSION: Overall these data show no association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms
and the inflammatory markers suggesting that the effects of TCF7L2 on diabetes
may not be via inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2766367
PMID: 19825152  [PubMed]


119. Gastroenterology. 2010 Mar;138(3):1035-45.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.09.061. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Galectin-3 increases gastric cancer cell motility by up-regulating fascin-1
expression.

Kim SJ(1), Choi IJ, Cheong TC, Lee SJ, Lotan R, Park SH, Chun KH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastric Cancer Branch, Division of Translational and Clinical Research I,
National Cancer Center Research Institute and Hospital, Jungbalsan-ro,
Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Galectin-3 is a beta-galactoside-binding protein that
increases gastric cancer cell motility in response to integrin signaling and is
highly expressed in gastric tumor cells. Galectin-3 induces cytoskeletal
remodeling to increase cell motility, but the mechanisms of this process are not 
understood. We investigated the effects of galectin-3 on fascin-1, an
actin-bundling protein.
METHODS: We collected malignant and normal tissues from gastric cancer patients
and examined the expression levels of galectin-3 and fascin-1. We silenced
galectin-3 expression in human gastric cancer cell lines using small interfering 
RNA and lenti-viral constructs and determined the effects on fascin-1 expression,
cell motility, and invasion.
RESULTS: Malignant gastric tissues expressed high levels of galectin-3 and
fascin-1, compared with normal gastric tissues. Silencing of galectin-3 resulted 
in altered cancer cell morphology, reduced fascin-1 expression, decreased cell
motility, and reduced malignant cell invasion. Galectin-3 overexpression reversed
these effects. Silencing of fascin-1 also reduced cell motility and caused
changes in cell shape, as did silencing of galectin-3. Furthermore, galectin-3
silencing inhibited the interaction between glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta,
beta-catenin, and T-cell factor (TCF) 4, and the binding of beta-catenin/TCF-4 to
the fascin-1 promoter. Nuclear localization of GSK-3beta and beta-catenin were
not detected when galectin-3 was silenced. Overexpression of mutated galectin-3
(with mutations in the GSK-3beta binding and phosphorylation motifs) did not
increase fascin-1 levels, in contrast to overexpression of wild-type galectin-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Galectin-3 increases cell motility by up-regulating fascin-1
expression. Galectin-3 might be a potential therapeutic target for the prevention
and treatment of gastric cancer progression.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19818782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):287-92. doi: 10.2337/db09-0736. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Combined risk allele score of eight type 2 diabetes genes is associated with
reduced first-phase glucose-stimulated insulin secretion during hyperglycemic
clamps.

't Hart LM(1), Simonis-Bik AM, Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Schäfer SA,
Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Boomsma DI, Groenewoud MJ, Reiling E, van Hove EC,
Diamant M, Kramer MH, Heine RJ, Maassen JA, Kirchhoff K, Machicao F, Häring HU,
Slagboom PE, Willemsen G, Eekhoff EM, de Geus EJ, Dekker JM, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands. l.m.t_hart@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: At least 20 type 2 diabetes loci have now been identified, and several
of these are associated with altered beta-cell function. In this study, we have
investigated the combined effects of eight known beta-cell loci on insulin
secretion stimulated by three different secretagogues during hyperglycemic
clamps.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 447 subjects originating from four
independent studies in the Netherlands and Germany (256 with normal glucose
tolerance [NGT]/191 with impaired glucose tolerance [IGT]) underwent a
hyperglycemic clamp. A subset had an extended clamp with additional glucagon-like
peptide (GLP)-1 and arginine (n = 224). We next genotyped single nucleotide
polymorphisms in TCF7L2, KCNJ11, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, HHEX/IDE, CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8,
and MTNR1B and calculated a risk allele score by risk allele counting.
RESULTS: The risk allele score was associated with lower first-phase
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) (P = 7.1 x 10(-6)). The effect size
was equal in subjects with NGT and IGT. We also noted an inverse correlation with
the disposition index (P = 1.6 x 10(-3)). When we stratified the study population
according to the number of risk alleles into three groups, those with a medium-
or high-risk allele score had 9 and 23% lower first-phase GSIS. Second-phase
GSIS, insulin sensitivity index and GLP-1, or arginine-stimulated insulin release
were not significantly different.
CONCLUSIONS: A combined risk allele score for eight known beta-cell genes is
associated with the rapid first-phase GSIS and the disposition index. The slower 
second-phase GSIS, GLP-1, and arginine-stimulated insulin secretion are not
associated, suggesting that especially processes involved in rapid granule
recruitment and exocytosis are affected in the majority of risk loci.

PMCID: PMC2797935
PMID: 19808892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Feb;88(2):183-92. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0542-4. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

TCF7L2 genetic variants and progression to diabetes in the Chinese population:
pleiotropic effects on insulin secretion and insulin resistance.

Chang YC(1), Chiu YF, Ho LL, Ting CT, Shih KC, Curb JD, Chen YD, Li HY, Chuang
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Douliou,
Yunlin, Taiwan.

TCF7L2 genetic variants were associated with progression to type 2 diabetes in
Europeans. However, the role of TCF7L2 in type 2 diabetes remained uncertain in
Chinese. Seventeen tag single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 1,094
subjects of Chinese origin from the Stanford Asia-Pacific Program for
Hypertension and Insulin Resistance family study. At baseline, the rs7903146 T
allele in the exon 4 linkage disequilibrium (LD) block were associated with lower
insulinogenic index at 60 min (P = 0.01), while the rs290481 G allele near the 3'
end was associated with higher 2-h post-challenge glucose (P = 0.003) and insulin
concentration (P = 0.02), elevated systolic (P = 0.01) and diastolic blood
pressure (P = 0.006), lower waist circumference (P = 0.01), and increased
steady-state plasma glucose (SSPG) concentration measured with modified insulin
suppression test (P = 0.02). Over an average follow-up period of 5.43 years,
participants with the rs7903146 T allele or variants in the same LD block, but
not those with the rs290481 G allele, were more likely to progress to diabetes
(hazard ratio = 2.61, 95% confidence interval, 1.27-5.39, P = 0.009) than were
non-carriers. TCF7L2 gene expression was inversely associated with SSPG in human 
visceral (r = -0.73, P = 0.006) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (r = -0.62, P =
0.03). TCF7L2 may exert pleiotropic effects on insulin secretion or insulin
resistance. However, only variants associated with impaired beta-cell function
predict progression to diabetes in Chinese.

PMID: 19806338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Curr Drug Metab. 2009 Jul;10(6):643-58.

Influence of genetic polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-dynamics 
of sulfonylurea drugs.

Xu H(1), Murray M, McLachlan AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Sulfonylurea drugs including chlorpropamide, gliclazide, tolbutamide, glipizide, 
glibenclamide (glyburide) and glimepiride are the most widely used oral
hypoglycaemic agents in people with type 2 diabetes. This review investigates the
impact of genetic polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
sulfonylurea drugs. CYP2C9 is the major enzyme involved in sulfonylurea drug
metabolism. CYP2C9 variant allele carriers have significant lower apparent
clearance of these medicines. CYP2C19 genotype is more influential for gliclazide
pharmacokinetics when compared to CYP2C9. Sulfonylurea pharmacodynamics is
affected by several genes. Sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1, ABCC8 gene) and K+
inward rectifier Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) have been correlated to significant variation in
sulfonylurea response. Diabetics with the SUR1 exon 33 G allele are more
sensitive to gliclazide and the rs5210 variant of the KCNJ11 gene was associated 
with improved clinical efficacy of gliclazide. Carriers of Transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants are more likely to fail sulfonylurea therapy. On the
other hand, patients with HNF-1alpha mutations had a significant greater response
to gliclazide when compared to those with type 2 diabetes. The Arg972
polymorphism of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) may lead to secondary failure
of sulfonylurea therapy. Calpain 10 gene (CAPN10) polymorphism has also been
linked to sulfonylurea drug response. Despite the available evidence, larger
population studies that investigate the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
sulfonylurea drugs are needed to investigate the influence of key SNPs amidst all
potential contributing factors to variability in response to these which inturn
will provide information to optimise sulfonylurea use in people with diabetes.

PMID: 19799532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 30;4(9):e7231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007231.

Alternative splicing of TCF7L2 gene in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue
and risk of type 2 diabetes.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Kaplan LM, Schadt EE, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs7903146 and rs12255372
located within TCF7L2 gene have been identified as the strongest common genetic
risk factors for development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We hypothesized that these
genetic variants might increase the risk of T2D through regulation of alternative
splicing or expression level of TCF7L2 in human adipose tissue.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Expression of 13 assays detecting alternatively
spliced forms of TCF7L2 was measured by quantitative reverse-transcriptase PCR
(qRT-PCR) in paired biopsies of omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue from 159 
obese individuals (BMI 54.6+/-12.2 kg/m(2)). TCF7L2 expression in both types of
adipose tissue was not associated with SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372, T2D status 
and blood levels of glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c). Expression of
assays "ex12-13", "ex12-14" and "ex13-13a" detecting C-terminal alternative exons
of TCF7L2 was higher in subcutaneous compared to omental adipose tissue by 1.46
fold (p = 6.5x10(-15)), 1.41 fold (p = 1.4x10(-9)) and 1.26 fold (p = 4.7x10(-6))
in the control group and by 1.86 fold (p = 1.7x10(-4)), 1.77 fold (p =
7.3x10(-4)) and 1.58 fold (p = 6.1x10(-4)) in the T2D group. A pathway enrichment
analysis on transcripts significantly co-expressed with TCF7L2 in a microarray
set combined with individual expression assays, suggested tissue-specific roles
of TCF7L2 splicing forms in regulation of transcription, signal transduction and 
cell adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of TCF7L2 alternatively spliced forms may have different 
functional roles in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue but is not associated
with SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 or T2D status.

PMCID: PMC2747626
PMID: 19789636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Causes Control. 2009 Nov;20(9):1739-51. doi: 10.1007/s10552-009-9427-7.

Association of common polymorphisms in IL10, and in other genes related to
inflammatory response and obesity with colorectal cancer.

Tsilidis KK(1), Helzlsouer KJ, Smith MW, Grinberg V, Hoffman-Bolton J, Clipp SL, 
Visvanathan K, Platz EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: The association of 17 candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in IL10 and other immune response genes (CRP, TLR4, IL6,
IL1B, IL8, TNF, RNASEL) and genes related to obesity (PPARG, TCF7L2, ADIPOQ, LEP)
with colorectal cancer was investigated. Haplotype tagging SNPs were chosen for
IL10, CRP, and TLR4. Incident colorectal cancer cases (n = 208) and matched
controls (n = 381) were identified between baseline in 1989 and 2003 among
participants in the CLUE II cohort. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(95% CI) were estimated using conditional logistic regression.
RESULTS: Compared with the AA genotype at the candidate IL10-1082 locus
(rs1800896), carrying one (OR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.53-1.18) or two (OR, 0.58; 95% CI,
0.35-0.95) G alleles, a known higher producer of the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10, was associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer (p trend = 0.03).
Statistically significant associations with colorectal cancer were observed for
three tagSNPs in IL10 (rs1800890, rs3024496, rs3024498) and one common haplotype,
but these associations were due to high linkage disequilibrium with IL10-1082.
Two CRP haplotypes (global p = 0.04) and TLR4 tagSNPs (rs7873784, rs11536891),
but not TLR4 haplotypes, were associated with colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that polymorphisms in IL10, and also possibly in 
CRP and other genes related to immune response or obesity may be associated with 
colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4119174
PMID: 19760027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Can Fam Physician. 2009 Sep;55(9):893.

Genetics: type 2 diabetes.

Dorman H, Meschino WS, Allanson J, Blaine SM, Cremin C, Gibbons CA, Honeywell C, 
Permaul J, Carroll JC.

PMCID: PMC2743584
PMID: 19752257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Transplantation. 2009 Sep 15;88(5):693-8. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181b29c41.

Association of common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants and posttransplantation 
diabetes mellitus in renal allograft recipients in Korea.

Kang ES(1), Kim MS, Kim CH, Nam CM, Han SJ, Hur KY, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim SI, Lee
HC, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a major metabolic
complication in renal transplant recipients. Recent genome-wide association
studies have identified several genes associated with type 2 diabetes. Here, we
examined the association between PTDM and 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) located within 15 genes in a cohort of renal allograft recipients in
Korea.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 589 patients who received kidney transplants
between 1989 and 2007, without a history of diabetes and had a pretransplant
fasting glucose less than 5.5 mmol/L were included in this study. We analyzed the
association between the PTDM development and the following SNPs: TCF7L2
rs7903146, SLC30A8 rs13266634, HHEX (rs1111875, rs7923837, and rs5015480), CDKAL1
rs10946398, CDKN2A/B rs10811661, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, FTO rs8050136, WFS1 rs734312,
JAZF1 rs864745, CDC123/CAMK1D rs12779790, TSPAN8 rs7961581, THADA rs7578597,
ADAMTS9 rs4607103, NOTCH2 rs1092391, and KCNQ1 rs2237892.
RESULTS: Eight SNPs in six genes were significantly associated with the PTDM
development: TCF7L2 rs7903146 (odds ratio [OR]=2.20, P =0.016), SLC30A8
rs13266634 (OR=1.52, P =0.003), HHEX rs1111875 (OR=1.47, P =0.007), HHEX
rs7923837 (OR=2.32, P =0.014), HHEX rs5015480 (OR=1.59, P =0.003), CDKAL1
rs10946398 (OR=1.43, P =0.008), CDKN2A/B rs10811661 (OR=1.33, P =0.039), and
KCNQ1 rs2237892 (OR=1.46, P =0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that genetic variations in TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, and KCNQ1 are associated with PTDM in Korea.

PMID: 19741467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. BMC Cancer. 2009 Sep 4;9:312. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-312.

No association between a candidate TCF7L2 variant and risk of breast or ovarian
cancer.

Goode EL(1), Szabo C, Prokunina-Olsson L, Vierkant RA, Fredericksen ZS, Collins
FS, White KL, Schmidt M, Fridley BL, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, USA.
egoode@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is a transcription factor involved in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling which has a variant known to be associated with risk of Type 2 diabetes
and, in some studies, with risk of certain cancers, including familial breast
cancer. No studies of ovarian cancer have been reported to date.
METHODS: Two clinic-based case-control studies at the Mayo Clinic were assessed
including 798 breast cancer cases, 843 breast cancer controls, 391 ovarian cancer
cases, and 458 ovarian cancer controls. Genotyping at TCF7L2 rs12255372 used a 5'
endonuclease assay, and statistical analysis used logistic regression among
participants as a whole and among a priori-defined subsets.
RESULTS: No associations with risk of breast or ovarian cancer were observed
(ordinal model, p = 0.62 and p = 0.75, respectively). In addition, no
associations were observed among sub-groups defined by age, BMI, family history, 
stage, grade, histology, or tumor behavior.
CONCLUSION: Although the biology of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and
prior association between rs12255372 and numerous phenotypes warranted
examination of this TCF7L2 SNP, no compelling evidence for association with
breast or ovarian cancer was observed.

PMCID: PMC2749057
PMID: 19732438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2010 Feb;26(2):129-34. doi: 10.3109/09513590903215490.

Genetic variants of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit associated
protein 1-like 1 and transcription factor 7-like 2 are not associated with
polycystic ovary syndrome in Chinese women.

Liu X(1), Li L, Chen ZJ, Lu Z, Shi Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for ReproductiveMedicine of Shandong Province, Shandong
Provincial Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of
China.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common disorder in women that shares many
genetic features with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Novel risk loci for type 2
diabetes, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7756992 in cyclin-dependent
kinase 5 (CDK5) regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1), rs290487
and rs11196218 in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), were recently
identified. The aim of this study was to test whether these loci are also
associated with PCOS. We recruited 826 patients with PCOS and 620 healthy
controls for case-control analysis. The genotypes of these three SNPs were
identified. The relationships between PCOS-related clinical endocrine and
metabolic features and genotypes were also analyzed. Genotype distribution of
these three loci in case and control groups showed no deviation from the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. No significant differences in genotype and allele
frequencies were found between patients with PCOS and healthy controls. No
associations were observed between genotypes of the three SNPs and the clinical
endocrine and metabolic features of patients with PCOS in case group after
adjustment for body mass index. We concluded that rs7756992 in CDKAL1, rs290487
and rs11196218 in TCF7L2 have no associations with PCOS or PCOS-related clinical 
features.

PMID: 19718565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Nov;20(11):2459-67. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008121314. Epub 2009
Aug 27.

TCF7L2 polymorphism associates with new-onset diabetes after transplantation.

Ghisdal L(1), Baron C, Le Meur Y, Lionet A, Halimi JM, Rerolle JP, Glowacki F,
Lebranchu Y, Drouet M, Noël C, El Housni H, Cochaux P, Wissing KM, Abramowicz D, 
Abramowicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Transplantation Rénale, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, 1070 Bruxelles,
Belgique. lghisdal@yahoo.com

New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a serious and frequent
complication in transplant recipients. Whether NODAT shares the same
susceptibility genes as type 2 diabetes is unknown. In this multicenter study, we
genotyped 1076 white patients without diabetes at transplantation for 11
polymorphisms that associate with type 2 diabetes. We defined NODAT as a fasting 
plasma glucose > or =126 mg/dl on at least two occasions or de novo hypoglycemic 
therapy. We compared clinical and genetic factors between patients who developed 
NODAT within 6 mo of transplantation (n = 118; incidence 11%) and patients
without diabetes (n = 958). In multivariate analysis, NODAT significantly
associated with the following characteristics: TCF7L2 polymorphism (odds ratio
[OR] 1.60 per each T allele; P = 0.002), age (OR 1.03 per year; P < 0.001), body 
mass index at transplantation (OR 1.09 per unit; P < 0.001), tacrolimus use (OR
2.26; P < 0.001), and the occurrence of a corticoid-treated acute rejection
episode (OR 2.78; P < 0.001). In summary, our data show that the TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism, a known risk factor for type 2 diabetes in the general population, 
also associates with NODAT.

PMCID: PMC2799180
PMID: 19713311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Anim Breed Genet. 2009 Jun;126(3):228-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0388.2008.00770.x.

An evaluation of four candidate genes for use in selection programmes aimed at
increased intramuscular fat in Duroc swine.

Schwab CR(1), Mote BE, Du ZQ, Amoako R, Baas TJ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)National Swine Registry, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA.

A sufficient level of intramuscular fat (IMF) is needed to enhance consumer
acceptance of pork products, and is currently receiving greater attention within 
swine genetic improvement programmes. An examination of previously described and 
novel genetic variants within candidate genes for IMF deposition was performed to
evaluate potential use of genetic markers in marker-assisted selection (MAS).
Biological candidate genes implicated to play a role in adipogenesis were
investigated within two different lines of purebred Duroc pigs. These included
MC4R, FABP3, DLK1, and TCF7L2. Significant variation in IMF within the control
line was described by the MC4R genotype and a novel BsrfI single nucleotide
polymorphism within the FABP3 gene. Genetic markers for DLK1 and TCF7L2 evaluated
in this population are not currently recommended for selection in Duroc swine.
Existence of MC4R and FABP3 mutations may be useful markers in MAS aimed at IMF
improvement, provided that gene effects are segregating and the presence of an
association is detected within the population. However, additional work to
confirm the use of the investigated genetic markers in selection programmes is
needed.

PMID: 19646151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Oct;29(10):1664-70. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.194043. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Chronic hypoxia activates the Akt and beta-catenin pathways in human macrophages.

Deguchi JO(1), Yamazaki H, Aikawa E, Aikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Macrophage activation contributes importantly to the pathogenesis of
inflammatory diseases including atherosclerosis. Macrophages exist chronically
under moderate hypoxia (2% to 5% O(2)) in inflamed tissues such as
atherosclerotic plaques. However, macrophage phenotypes in such environments
remain incompletely understood. This study tested the hypothesis that chronic
moderate hypoxia induces macrophage activation and explored the underlying
mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We cultured primary human macrophages derived from
peripheral blood monocytes in moderate hypoxia (2% O(2) tension) or normoxia (21%
O(2)) for 10 days. Moderate hypoxia did not affect macrophage differentiation
assessed via expression levels of scavenger receptor A. Chronic moderate hypoxia,
but not normoxia, activated Akt and inactivated GSK-3beta, a negative effector of
Akt, thus allowing nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. 2% O(2) tension
increased accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factors 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha)
transiently at 3 to 5 days. Hypoxia induced mRNA expression of the
beta-catenin-associated genes: MMP-7, CD44, and c-Myc. RNAi of TCF7L2, a cofactor
of beta-catenin, suppressed MMP-7 expression induced by hypoxia. Inhibition of
Akt phosphorylation with LY294002 abolished hypoxia-induced GSK-3beta
inactivation, beta-catenin activation, and MMP-7 expression. Macrophages under
hypoxia were more resistant for oxLDL-induced apoptosis. Moreover, phospho-Akt
colocalized with MMP-7 and CD44 expression in macrophages of human
atherosclerotic plaques.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic moderate hypoxia induces macrophage activation via the Akt
and beta-catenin pathways, providing new insight into the pathogenesis of
inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 19644051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Schizophr Res. 2009 Oct;114(1-3):50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.07.008. Epub
2009 Jul 29.

Genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes with pharmacologic intervention in
African-American patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.

Irvin MR(1), Wiener HW, Perry RP, Savage RM, Go RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA. irvinr@uab.edu

An increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) in schizophrenia (SCZ) patients 
has been observed. Exposure to antipsychotics (APs) has been shown to induce
metabolic dysregulation in some patients but not all treated patients. We
hypothesized that important candidate genes for T2D may increase risk for T2D in 
African-American patients with SCZ or schizoaffective disorder. The PAARTNERS
study comprises African-American families with at least one proband with SCZ or
schizoaffective disorder. The current study of PAARTNERS SCZ and schizoaffective 
disorder cases (N=820) examined single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within
select T2D candidate genes including transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2),
calpain 10 (CAPN10), and ectoenzyme nucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 
1 (ENNP1) for association with prevalent T2D. We report the association of TCF7L2
(rs7903146) with T2D under both additive and recessive models for the risk allele
T. Specifically, the odds ratio (OR) for having T2D was 1.4 (p=0.03) under an
additive model and 2.4 (p=0.004) under a recessive model. We also report a
marginally significant TCF7L2 by AP treatment interaction that should be
investigated in future studies. CAPN10 (rs3792267) was marginally associated with
T2D with OR=1.5 (p=0.08) when considering the model GG vs. AG/AA with risk allele
G. ENPP1 (rs1044498) was not associated with T2D. We conclude TCF7L2, a risk
factor for T2D in the general population, is also a risk factor for T2D in
African-American patients with SCZ or schizoaffective disorder. Research is
needed to determine if T2D associated polymorphisms are of interest in the
pharmacogenetics and future treatment choices of antipsychotics in
African-American patients.

PMCID: PMC2753171
PMID: 19643578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0809-868.

Elucidating the role of 8q24 in colorectal cancer.

Harismendy O(1), Frazer KA.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Genomic Medicine, Scripps Translational Science Institute and the
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Oct;41(10):1156.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):885-90.
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):882-4.

PMID: 19639026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genet Med. 2009 Aug;11(8):588-94. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181b13a4f.

Evaluation of risk prediction updates from commercial genome-wide scans.

Mihaescu R(1), van Hoek M, Sijbrands EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Witteman JC, Hofman A, 
van Duijn CM, Janssens AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2010 Jan;12(1):56; author reply 56-7.

PURPOSE: Commercial internet-based companies offer genome-wide scans to predict
the risk of common diseases and personalize nutrition and lifestyle
recommendations. These risk estimates are updated with every new gene discovery.
METHODS: To assess the benefits of updating risk information in commercial
genome-wide scans, we compared type 2 diabetes risk predictions based on TCF7L2
alone, 18 polymorphisms alone, and 18 polymorphisms plus age, sex, and body mass 
index. Analyses were performed using data from the Rotterdam study, a
prospective, population-based study among individuals aged 55 years and older.
Data were available from 5297 participants.
RESULTS: The actual prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the study population was
20%. Predicted risks were below average for carriers of the TCF7L2 CC genotype
(predicted risk 17.6%) and above average for the CT and TT genotypes (20.8% and
28.0%). Adding the other 17 polymorphisms caused 34% of participants to be
reclassified (i.e., switched between below and above average): 24% of the CC
carriers changed to increased risk, 52% and 6% of the CT and TT carriers changed 
to decreased risk. Including information on age, sex, and body mass index caused 
29% to change categories (27%, 31%, and 19% for CC, CT, and TT carriers,
respectively). In total, 39% of participants changed categories once when risk
factors were updated, and 11% changed twice, i.e., back to their initial risk
category.
CONCLUSION: Updating risk factors may produce contradictory information about an 
individual's risk status over time, which is undesirable if lifestyle and
nutritional recommendations vary accordingly.

PMID: 19636253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Jul 17;10:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-67.

Type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2 polymorphism is not associated with fetal and
postnatal growth in two birth cohort studies.

Mook-Kanamori DO(1), de Kort SW, van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, Moll
HA, Steegers EA, Hokken-Koelega AC, Jaddoe VW.

Author information: 
(1)The Generation R Study Group, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. d.mook@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: An inverse association between birth weight and the risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (T2D) in adulthood has been reported. This association
may be explained by common genetic variants related to insulin secretion and
resistance, since insulin is the most important growth factor in fetal life. The 
objective of this study was to examine whether T2D gene polymorphism TCF7L2
rs7903146 is associated with growth patterns from fetal life until infancy.
METHODS: This study was performed in two independent birth cohort studies, one
prospective population-based (Generation R), and one of subjects born
small-for-gestational-age (SGA cohort). Fetal growth was assessed by ultrasounds 
in second and third trimesters of pregnancy in Generation R. Growth in infancy
was assessed in both cohorts at birth and at 6, 12 and 24 months postnatally.
TCF7L2 genotype was determined in 3,419 subjects in Generation R and in 566
subjects in the SGA cohort.
RESULTS: Minor allele frequency did not differ significantly (p = 0.47) between
Generation R (T-allele: 28.7%) and the SGA cohort (T-allele: 29.8%). No
differences at birth were found in gestational age or size (head circumference,
length, weight) between the genotypes in either cohort. TCF7L2 genotype was also 
not associated with any pre- or postnatal growth characteristic in either
Generation R or the SGA cohort.
CONCLUSION: We found no evidence for an association between TCF7L2 genotype and
fetal and early postnatal growth. Furthermore, this TCF7L2 polymorphism was not
associated with an increased risk of SGA.

PMCID: PMC2722586
PMID: 19615048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 15;18(20):3795-804. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp321. Epub 2009
Jul 14.

Tissue-specific alternative splicing of TCF7L2.

Prokunina-Olsson L(1), Welch C, Hansson O, Adhikari N, Scott LJ, Usher N, Tong M,
Sprau A, Swift A, Bonnycastle LL, Erdos MR, He Z, Saxena R, Harmon B, Kotova O,
Hoffman EP, Altshuler D, Groop L, Boehnke M, Collins FS, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. prokuninal@mail.nih.gov

Common variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
identified as the strongest genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
However, the mechanisms by which these non-coding variants increase risk for T2D 
are not well-established. We used 13 expression assays to survey mRNA expression 
of multiple TCF7L2 splicing forms in up to 380 samples from eight types of human 
tissue (pancreas, pancreatic islets, colon, liver, monocytes, skeletal muscle,
subcutaneous adipose tissue and lymphoblastoid cell lines) and observed a
tissue-specific pattern of alternative splicing. We tested whether the expression
of TCF7L2 splicing forms was associated with single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), rs7903146 and rs12255372, located within introns 3 and 4 of the gene and 
most strongly associated with T2D. Expression of two splicing forms was lower in 
pancreatic islets with increasing counts of T2D-associated alleles of the SNPs: a
ubiquitous splicing form (P = 0.018 for rs7903146 and P = 0.020 for rs12255372)
and a splicing form found in pancreatic islets, pancreas and colon but not in
other tissues tested here (P = 0.009 for rs12255372 and P = 0.053 for rs7903146).
Expression of this form in glucose-stimulated pancreatic islets correlated with
expression of proinsulin (r(2) = 0.84-0.90, P < 0.00063). In summary, we
identified a tissue-specific pattern of alternative splicing of TCF7L2. After
adjustment for multiple tests, no association between expression of TCF7L2 in
eight types of human tissue samples and T2D-associated genetic variants remained 
significant. Alternative splicing of TCF7L2 in pancreatic islets warrants future 
studies. GenBank Accession Numbers: FJ010164-FJ010174.

PMCID: PMC2748888
PMID: 19602480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Diabetes. 2009 Oct;58(10):2414-8. doi: 10.2337/db09-0506. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

Examination of type 2 diabetes loci implicates CDKAL1 as a birth weight gene.

Zhao J(1), Li M, Bradfield JP, Wang K, Zhang H, Sleiman P, Kim CE, Annaiah K,
Glaberson W, Glessner JT, Otieno FG, Thomas KA, Garris M, Hou C, Frackelton EC,
Chiavacci RM, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A number of studies have found that reduced birth weight is associated
with type 2 diabetes later in life; however, the underlying mechanism for this
correlation remains unresolved. Recently, association has been demonstrated
between low birth weight and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CDKAL1
and HHEX-IDE loci, regions that were previously implicated in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes. In order to investigate whether type 2 diabetes risk-conferring 
alleles associate with low birth weight in our Caucasian childhood cohort, we
examined the effects of 20 such loci on this trait.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using data from an ongoing genome-wide association
study in our cohort of 5,465 Caucasian children with recorded birth weights, we
investigated the association of the previously reported type 2
diabetes-associated variation at 20 loci including TCF7L2, HHEX-IDE, PPARG,
KCNJ11, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, and JAZF1 with birth weight.
RESULTS: Our data show that the minor allele of rs7756992 (P = 8 x 10(-5)) at the
CDKAL1 locus is strongly associated with lower birth weight, whereas a perfect
surrogate for variation previously implicated for the trait at the same locus
only yielded nominally significant association (P = 0.01; r(2) rs7756992 =
0.677). However, association was not detected with any of the other type 2
diabetes loci studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We observe association between lower birth weight and type 2
diabetes risk-conferring alleles at the CDKAL1 locus. Our data show that the same
genetic locus that has been identified as a marker for type 2 diabetes in
previous studies also influences birth weight.

PMCID: PMC2750235
PMID: 19592620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Diabetologia. 2009 Sep;52(9):1858-65. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1436-2. Epub 2009
Jul 8.

A susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes confers substantial risk for diabetes
complicating cystic fibrosis.

Blackman SM(1), Hsu S, Ritter SE, Naughton KM, Wright FA, Drumm ML, Knowles MR,
Cutting GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Insulin-requiring diabetes affects 25-50% of young adults with
cystic fibrosis (CF). Although the cause of diabetes in CF is unknown, recent
heritability studies in CF twins and siblings indicate that genetic modifiers
play a substantial role. We sought to assess whether genes conferring risk for
diabetes in the general population may play a risk modifying role in CF.
METHODS: We tested whether a family history of type 2 diabetes affected diabetes 
risk in CF patients in 539 families in the CF Twin and Sibling family-based
study. A type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene (transcription factor 7-like 2, or
TCF7L2) was evaluated for association with diabetes in CF using 998 patients from
the family-based study and 802 unrelated CF patients in an independent
case-control study.
RESULTS: Family history of type 2 diabetes increased the risk of diabetes in CF
(OR 3.1; p = 0.0009). A variant in TCF7L2 associated with type 2 diabetes (the T 
allele at rs7903146) was associated with diabetes in CF in the family study (p = 
0.004) and in the case-control study (p = 0.02; combined p = 0.0002). In the
family-based study, variation in TCF7L2 increased the risk of diabetes about
three-fold (HR 1.75 per allele, 95% CI 1.3-2.4; p = 0.0006), and decreased the
mean age at diabetes diagnosis by 7 years. In CF patients not treated with
systemic glucocorticoids, the effect of TCF7L2 was even greater (HR 2.9 per
allele, 95% CI 1.7-4.9, p = 0.00011).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: A genetic variant conferring risk for type 2 diabetes
in the general population is a modifier of risk for diabetes in CF.

PMCID: PMC2877501
PMID: 19585101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Metabolism. 2009 Oct;58(10):1369-71. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.04.023. Epub
2009 Jul 1.

Preliminary report: No association between TCF7L2 rs7903146 and
euglycemic-clamp-derived insulin sensitivity in a mixed-age cohort.

Rasmussen-Torvik LJ(1), Pankow JS, Jacobs DR Jr, Sinaiko AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55454-1015, USA. rasm0218@umn.edu

There are conflicting reports about the significance of TCF7L2 single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs7903146, a single nucleotide polymorphism found to be associated
with type 2 diabetes mellitus in several genomewide association studies, and
insulin sensitivity. The association of rs7903146 and euglycemic-clamp-derived
insulin sensitivity was tested in a cohort of children and their parents. Four
hundred seventy whites (from 226 families) and 89 African Americans (from 48
families) were included in the analysis. No significant associations were seen
between rs7903146 and insulin sensitivity. Adjusted genotype means were
consistent across races and generational subgroups.

PMCID: PMC2748141
PMID: 19573884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):882-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.403. Epub 2009 Jun 28.

The 8q24 cancer risk variant rs6983267 shows long-range interaction with MYC in
colorectal cancer.

Pomerantz MM(1), Ahmadiyeh N, Jia L, Herman P, Verzi MP, Doddapaneni H, Beckwith 
CA, Chan JA, Hills A, Davis M, Yao K, Kehoe SM, Lenz HJ, Haiman CA, Yan C,
Henderson BE, Frenkel B, Barretina J, Bass A, Tabernero J, Baselga J, Regan MM,
Manak JR, Shivdasani R, Coetzee GA, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9.

An inherited variant on chromosome 8q24, rs6983267, is significantly associated
with cancer pathogenesis. We present evidence that the region harboring this
variant is a transcriptional enhancer, that the alleles of rs6983267
differentially bind transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and that the risk
region physically interacts with the MYC proto-oncogene. These data provide
strong support for a biological mechanism underlying this non-protein-coding risk
variant.

PMCID: PMC2763485
PMID: 19561607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):885-90. doi: 10.1038/ng.406. Epub 2009 Jun 28.

The common colorectal cancer predisposition SNP rs6983267 at chromosome 8q24
confers potential to enhanced Wnt signaling.

Tuupanen S(1), Turunen M, Lehtonen R, Hallikas O, Vanharanta S, Kivioja T,
Björklund M, Wei G, Yan J, Niittymäki I, Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Ristimäki A,
Di-Bernardo M, East P, Carvajal-Carmona L, Houlston RS, Tomlinson I, Palin K,
Ukkonen E, Karhu A, Taipale J, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Aug;41(8):868-9.

Homozygosity for the G allele of rs6983267 at 8q24 increases colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk approximately 1.5 fold. We report here that the risk allele G shows
copy number increase during CRC development. Our computer algorithm, Enhancer
Element Locator (EEL), identified an enhancer element that contains rs6983267.
The element drove expression of a reporter gene in a pattern that is consistent
with regulation by the key CRC pathway Wnt. rs6983267 affects a binding site for 
the Wnt-regulated transcription factor TCF4, with the risk allele G showing
stronger binding in vitro and in vivo. Genome-wide ChIP assay revealed the
element as the strongest TCF4 binding site within 1 Mb of MYC. An unambiguous
correlation between rs6983267 genotype and MYC expression was not detected, and
additional work is required to scrutinize all possible targets of the enhancer.
Our work provides evidence that the common CRC predisposition associated with
8q24 arises from enhanced responsiveness to Wnt signaling.

PMID: 19561604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7. doi: 10.1038/nn0709-815.

Genetics meets epigenetics: HDACs and Wnt signaling in myelin development and
regeneration.

Li H, Richardson WD.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38.

PMID: 19554044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Acta Diabetol. 2010 Mar;47(1):83-6. doi: 10.1007/s00592-009-0133-4. Epub 2009 Jun
17.

Transcription factor 7-like 2-gene polymorphism is related to fasting C peptide
in latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA).

Szepietowska B(1), Moczulski D, Wawrusiewicz-Kurylonek N, Grzeszczak W, Gorska M,
Szelachowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. barbara.szepietowska@yale.edu

Common polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been
associated with type 2 diabetes in different populations and recently with LADA, 
but not with type 1 diabetes. The aim of our study was to investigate association
between the rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene and LADA in Polish
patients. Link between the "high risk for type 2 diabetes genotype" with clinical
features was analyzed. 68 newly diagnosed patients with LADA and 195 healthy
controls were genotyped for the rs7903146 polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene using
the PCR-based RFLP method. Fasting C peptide level was measured by ELISA. We
observed increased frequencies of the TT genotype of the rs7903146 polymorphism
in the TCF7L2 gene in LADA patients compared to controls (15 vs. 6%, P = 0.03).
Fasting C peptide serum concentration was significantly lower in group of
patients with LADA carrying the TT genotype (P < 0.01). In conclusion, the data
from this study confirmed previous results showing genetic similarities between
patients with LADA and type 2 diabetes. Non-autoimmune mechanism may be related
to beta cell dysfunction in patients with LADA.

PMID: 19533015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Diabetologia. 2009 Sep;52(9):1846-51. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1419-3. Epub 2009
Jun 13.

Is the thrifty genotype hypothesis supported by evidence based on confirmed type 
2 diabetes- and obesity-susceptibility variants?

Southam L(1), Soranzo N, Montgomery SB, Frayling TM, McCarthy MI, Barroso I,
Zeggini E.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: According to the thrifty genotype hypothesis, the high
prevalence of type 2 diabetes and obesity is a consequence of genetic variants
that have undergone positive selection during historical periods of erratic food 
supply. The recent expansion in the number of validated type 2 diabetes- and
obesity-susceptibility loci, coupled with access to empirical data, enables us to
look for evidence in support (or otherwise) of the thrifty genotype hypothesis
using proven loci.
METHODS: We employed a range of tests to obtain complementary views of the
evidence for selection: we determined whether the risk allele at associated
'index' single-nucleotide polymorphisms is derived or ancestral, calculated the
integrated haplotype score (iHS) and assessed the population differentiation
statistic fixation index (F (ST)) for 17 type 2 diabetes and 13 obesity loci.
RESULTS: We found no evidence for significant differences for the
derived/ancestral allele test. None of the studied loci showed strong evidence
for selection based on the iHS score. We find a high F (ST) for rs7901695 at
TCF7L2, the largest type 2 diabetes effect size found to date.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide some evidence for selection at
specific loci, but there are no consistent patterns of selection that provide
conclusive confirmation of the thrifty genotype hypothesis. Discovery of more
signals and more causal variants for type 2 diabetes and obesity is likely to
allow more detailed examination of these issues.

PMCID: PMC2723682
PMID: 19526209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1571-85. doi: 10.1101/gad.1806309. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway inhibits timely myelination and remyelination in
the mammalian CNS.

Fancy SP(1), Baranzini SE, Zhao C, Yuk DI, Irvine KA, Kaing S, Sanai N, Franklin 
RJ, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Regeneration Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1487-93.

The progressive loss of CNS myelin in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) has
been proposed to result from the combined effects of damage to oligodendrocytes
and failure of remyelination. A common feature of demyelinated lesions is the
presence of oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) blocked at a premyelinating stage. 
However, the mechanistic basis for inhibition of myelin repair is incompletely
understood. To identify novel regulators of OLP differentiation, potentially
dysregulated during repair, we performed a genome-wide screen of 1040
transcription factor-encoding genes expressed in remyelinating rodent lesions. We
report that approximately 50 transcription factor-encoding genes show dynamic
expression during repair and that expression of the Wnt pathway mediator Tcf4
(aka Tcf7l2) within OLPs is specific to lesioned-but not normal-adult white
matter. We report that beta-catenin signaling is active during oligodendrocyte
development and remyelination in vivo. Moreover, we observed similar regulation
of Tcf4 in the developing human CNS and lesions of MS. Data mining revealed
elevated levels of Wnt pathway mRNA transcripts and proteins within MS lesions,
indicating activation of the pathway in this pathological context. We show that
dysregulation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling in OLPs results in profound delay of 
both developmental myelination and remyelination, based on (1) conditional
activation of beta-catenin in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo and (2)
findings from APC(Min) mice, which lack one functional copy of the endogenous Wnt
pathway inhibitor APC. Together, our findings indicate that dysregulated
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling inhibits myelination/remyelination in the mammalian
CNS. Evidence of Wnt pathway activity in human MS lesions suggests that its
dysregulation might contribute to inefficient myelin repair in human neurological
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2704469
PMID: 19515974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3575-82. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0609. Epub 
2009 Jun 9.

Genetic variants of TCF7L2 are associated with insulin resistance and related
metabolic phenotypes in Taiwanese adolescents and Caucasian young adults.

Liu PH(1), Chang YC, Jiang YD, Chen WJ, Chang TJ, Kuo SS, Lee KC, Hsiao PC, Chiu 
KC, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Genes, Environment, and Human Health, Institute of
Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100,
Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: The effect of TCF7L2 rs7903146 on glucose homeostasis is considered
primarily due to impaired insulin secretion in European populations. Because we
previously demonstrated that TCF7L2 rs290487 near the 3' end of TCF7L2 was
significantly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Taiwanese subjects, we
aimed to investigate potential mechanisms underlying the associations of rs290487
with T2D.
METHODS: Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested for
association with glucose/insulin homeostasis as well as other quantitative
metabolic phenotypes using the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test in
525 Taiwanese adolescent twin-pairs and siblings. The results were further
replicated in 116 nondiabetic normotensive Caucasian young adults.
RESULTS: Among the 18 SNPs, rs290487 C allele was significantly associated with
higher 60-, 90-, and 120-min glucose concentrations (P = 0.001, 0.01, and 0.02,
respectively); higher 60- and 90-min insulin concentrations (P = 0.01 and 0.01,
respectively); and a lower insulin sensitivity index (P = 0.04). No association
was found for rs290487 with measures of insulin secretion. The rs290487 C allele 
was also associated with HOMA-IR (P = 0.005) and insulin sensitivity index (P =
0.01) in Caucasian young adults. Another SNP, rs10749127 C allele located in
intron 4, was also associated with features of the metabolic syndrome, including 
elevated systolic (P = 0.02) and diastolic (P = 2.0 x 10(-4)) blood pressure,
triglycerides (P = 7.0 x 10(-4)), and uric acid (P = 0.03). In a meta-analysis,
the rs290487 C allele was confirmed to be associated with an increased risk of
T2D (odds ratio, 1.11; 95% confidence interval, 1.03-1.19; P = 0.005) across East
Asian populations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support an important role for T2D risk-conferring
gene TCF7L2 in insulin resistance in both Taiwanese and Caucasian youth and
underscore the emerging role of Wnt signaling in insulin resistance.

PMID: 19509102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Nov;24(11):3360-6. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp271. Epub
2009 Jun 8.

Association and interaction analyses of genetic variants in ADIPOQ, ENPP1, GHSR, 
PPARgamma and TCF7L2 genes for diabetic nephropathy in a Taiwanese population
with type 2 diabetes.

Wu LS(1), Hsieh CH, Pei D, Hung YJ, Kuo SW, Lin E.

Author information: 
(1)1Vita Genomics, Inc, Wugu Shiang, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a common microvascular complication of
diabetes. In this study, we aimed to explore both primary effects of single-locus
and multilocus interactions to test the hypothesis that the type 2 diabetes (T2D)
genes may contribute to the aetiology of DN in T2D independently and/or through
complex interactions in a Taiwanese population with T2D.
METHODS: We genotyped six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for five common 
T2D genes including adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing (ADIPOQ),
ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/ phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1), growth hormone
secretagogue receptor (GHSR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma) and transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2). There were 216 T2D
patients diagnosed with DN and 178 age-similar T2D without DN (control) subjects.
To investigate gene-gene interactions, we employed both generalized multifactor
dimensionality reduction (GMDR) method and logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Single-locus analyses showed significant main effects of ENPP1 (P =
0.0032; adjusted OR = 1.85; 95% CI = 1.17-2.92) on the risk of DN in T2D.
Furthermore, a potential gene-gene interaction involving ENPP1 and GHSR was
suggested in the best two-locus GMDR model (P = 0.021). The significant
three-locus GMDR model (P < 0.001) was also identified among ADIPOQ, GHSR and
TCF7L2. Analyses using logistic regression models confirmed the gene-gene
interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the SNPs from the T2D-related genes may
contribute to the risk of DN in T2D independently and/or in an interactive manner
in Taiwanese T2D patients.

PMID: 19506043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38. doi: 10.1038/nn.2333. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation by disrupting the
beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Ye F(1), Chen Y, Hoang T, Montgomery RL, Zhao XH, Bu H, Hu T, Taketo MM, van Es
JH, Clevers H, Hsieh J, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7.

Oligodendrocyte development is regulated by the interaction of repressors and
activators in a complex transcriptional network. We found that two
histone-modifying enzymes, HDAC1 and HDAC2, were required for oligodendrocyte
formation. Genetic deletion of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 in oligodendrocyte lineage
cells resulted in stabilization and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, which 
negatively regulates oligodendrocyte development by repressing Olig2 expression. 
We further identified the oligodendrocyte-restricted transcription factor
TCF7L2/TCF4 as a bipartite co-effector of beta-catenin for regulating
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Targeted disruption of Tcf7l2 in mice led to
severe defects in oligodendrocyte maturation, whereas expression of its
dominant-repressive form promoted precocious oligodendrocyte specification in
developing chick neural tube. Transcriptional co-repressors HDAC1 and HDAC2
compete with beta-catenin for TCF7L2 interaction to regulate downstream genes
involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, crosstalk between HDAC1/2 and 
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway mediated by TCF7L2 serves as a regulatory
mechanism for oligodendrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2701973
PMID: 19503085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes. 2009 Sep;58(9):2129-36. doi: 10.2337/db09-0117. Epub 2009 Jun 5.

Association of 18 confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes with indices 
of insulin release, proinsulin conversion, and insulin sensitivity in 5,327
nondiabetic Finnish men.

Stancáková A(1), Kuulasmaa T, Paananen J, Jackson AU, Bonnycastle LL, Collins FS,
Boehnke M, Kuusisto J, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of 18 confirmed type 2 diabetes risk
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion,
and conversion of proinsulin to insulin.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 5,327 nondiabetic men (age 58 +/- 7
years, BMI 27.0 +/- 3.8 kg/m(2)) from a large population-based cohort were
included. Oral glucose tolerance tests and genotyping of SNPs in or near PPARG,
KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1,
JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, and MTNR1B were performed. 
HNF1B rs757210 was excluded because of failure to achieve Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium.
RESULTS: Six SNPs (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, CDKAL1, and MTNR1B) were
significantly (P < 6.9 x 10(-4)) and two SNPs (KCNJ11 and IGF2BP2) were nominally
(P < 0.05) associated with early-phase insulin release
(InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30)), adjusted for age, BMI, and insulin sensitivity
(Matsuda ISI). Combined effects of these eight SNPs reached -32% reduction in
InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30) in carriers of >or=11 vs. <or=3 weighted risk alleles. 
Four SNPs (SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, and TCF7L2) were significantly or nominally
associated with indexes of proinsulin conversion. Three SNPs (KCNJ11, HHEX, and
TSPAN8) were nominally associated with Matsuda ISI (adjusted for age and BMI).
The effect of HHEX on Matsuda ISI became significant after additional adjustment 
for InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30). Nine SNPs did not show any associations with
examined traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Eight type 2 diabetes-related loci were significantly or nominally
associated with impaired early-phase insulin release. Effects of SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKAL1, and TCF7L2 on insulin release could be partially explained by impaired
proinsulin conversion. HHEX might influence both insulin release and insulin
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2731523
PMID: 19502414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Metabolism. 2009 Sep;58(9):1263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.03.025. Epub 2009 
Jun 18.

Genetic variation of FTO and TCF7L2 in premature adrenarche.

Lappalainen S(1), Voutilainen R, Utriainen P, Laakso M, Jääskeläinen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. saila.lappalainen@uku.fi

Premature adrenarche (PA) has been associated with increased body mass index. Our
aim was to determine whether the obesity-associated variant at fat mass and
obesity gene (FTO) is more frequent in PA subjects. Furthermore, we hypothesized 
that altered Wnt signaling due to genetic variants at transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) could play a role in the polygenic pathogenesis of PA. We genotyped
polymorphisms at FTO rs9939609 and at TCF7L2 rs7903146 and rs12255372 in 73
Finnish white prepubertal children with PA and in 97 age- and sex-matched healthy
controls. In addition, we investigated the associations of these genetic
variations with weight, height, circulating adrenocortical hormone levels,
glucose metabolism, lipid profile, and blood pressure. The differences in the
minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of rs9939609, rs7903146, and rs12255372 were not 
statistically significant between the PA and control groups (difference in MAFs
[95% confidence interval]: -0.06 [-0.18, 0.05], 0.04 [-0.05, 0.12], and 0.01
[-0.07, 0.10]; P = .3, .4, and .8, respectively). However, the risk allele at
TCF7L2 rs7903146 was more frequent in PA subjects than in controls when we
restricted the analysis to the subjects with lower weight-for-height than the
median of the PA subjects (weight-for-height <108%, corresponding body mass index
SD score <0.79; difference in MAFs [95% confidence interval]: 0.12 [-0.001,
0.23]; P = .038). Risk variant at FTO rs9939609 associated with higher
weight-for-height in the healthy children (P = .001). In conclusion, the minor
variant at FTO rs9939609 seems to play no major role in the increased
weight-for-height of PA subjects; but the risk allele at TCF7L2 rs7903146 may
have a role in the pathogenesis of PA in lean subjects.

PMID: 19497595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2009 Jun;13(3):332-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.04.622. Epub 
2009 May 23.

Emerging therapies for metabolic diseases--the focus is on diabetes and obesity.

Hughes TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zafgen, Inc., 5 Cambridge Center, Floor 2, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States.
thughes@zafgen.com

Type 2 diabetes and obesity remain the focus of investigational drugs for
metabolic disease. Only one new class of agents (Dipeptidylpeptidase 4
Inhibitors) has been approved in this field for control of blood glucose in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Significant progress has been made in the
elucidation of pathways of interest for new therapies in diabetes and obesity,
partly through advances in human genetics that have highlighted genetic loci
relevant to pancreatic beta cell dysfunction and hypothalamic control of food
intake, respectively. Investigational drugs targeting these pathways are in early
clinical investigation, including GPR119 agonists. Compounds targeting lipid
partitioning and lipid biosynthetic enzymes also have emerged, including
inhibitors of the enzymes DGAT1 and SCD1.

PMID: 19482541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Aug;85(2):139-46. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2009.04.024. Epub 2009 May 30.

Meta-analysis of the association between SNPs in TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in
East Asian population.

Luo Y(1), Wang H, Han X, Ren Q, Wang F, Zhang X, Sun X, Zhou X, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing, PR China.

AIMS: To evaluate the effect of TCF7L2 on genetic susceptibility of type 2
diabetes (T2DM) in East Asian population by using the meta-analysis.
METHODS: Search all the publications about the association between TCF7L2 and
T2DM in East Asian population from PubMed, CNKI and abstracts of major diabetes
conferences. Perform the meta-analysis of all the validated studies and evaluate 
the association between rs7903146 T allele, rs12255372 T allele, rs11196205 C
allele, rs290487 C allele and rs11196218 G allele of TCF7L2 and the risk of T2DM.
RESULTS: Eleven studies from nine eligible papers and one unpublished study of
ours were included in the meta-analysis. Ten eligible studies were analyzed for
rs7903146, five were analyzed for rs12255372 and rs11196205, and three were
analyzed for rs290487 and rs11196218. We found that four SNPs (rs7903146,
rs12255372, rs11196205, rs290487) in TCF7L2 were significantly associated with
T2DM in East Asian populations. The rs11196218 also showed a marginal
association. The estimated population-attributable risk (PAR) associated with
analyzed SNPs ranged from 2% to 7%.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in TCF7L2 were strongly associated with the risk of T2DM in
East Asian population. But the contribution of its genetic variants to the
epidemic of type 2 diabetes in East Asian was relatively low.

PMID: 19482368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genet Epidemiol. 2010 Jan;34(1):34-41. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20432.

A novel method for haplotype clustering and visualization.

Teo YY(1), Small KS.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. teo@well.ox.ac.uk

In population genetics, it is common to represent the haplotype diversity at a
genomic region between multiple populations using well-constructed visual
representations. This typically requires the chromosomes from these populations
to be grouped according to some definition of haplotypic similarity. Here, we
introduce a novel algorithm for clustering haplotypes with the specific aim of
addressing haplotype diversity within or between populations. The algorithm
allows for missing data in the haplotypes and appropriately downweighs single
nucleotide polymorphisms with higher extent of missingness. By identifying the
canonical haplotypes in a genomic region, defined as the haplotype forms, which
most chromosomes are similar to, the algorithm maps each chromosome to either a
unique canonical haplotype or as a mosaic of the identified canonical haplotypes.
This mapping can subsequently be utilized for producing graphical visualizations 
of the haplotype clustering for understanding the extent of haplotype diversity
in the region. The clustering application has been implemented in R for
distribution as haplosim, and we also provide a visualization script hapvisual
for graphical display of the clustering results. The outcome of such analysis can
be informative in understanding the extent of haplotype diversity between
populations, in addressing the reproducibility of established association signals
across multiple populations, and also in the investigation of positive selection 
in the human genome.

PMID: 19479748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Jan;72(1):47-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03635.x. Epub 2009 May 18.

Interactions between TCF7L2 genotype and growth hormone-induced changes in
glucose homeostasis in small for gestational age children.

de Kort SW(1), Mook-Kanamori DO, Jaddoe VW, Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus MC-Sophia,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. s.dekort@erasmusmc.nl

CONTEXT: The Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 gene polymorphism
has been associated with risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM),
possibly by decreasing insulin secretion. Small for gestational age (SGA) birth
has been associated with type 2 DM in later life. Growth hormone (GH) treatment
reduces insulin sensitivity and increases insulin secretion. Therefore,
GH-treated SGA children are an ideal group to investigate whether the TCF7L2
rs7903146 genotype is associated with changes in glucose homeostasis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism on
changes in insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity during 4 years of GH
treatment in children born SGA.
SUBJECTS: A total of 246 Caucasian short children born SGA, with a median age of 
7.8 years.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion were measured by the 
frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test (FSIGT) (n = 68) and
homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) calculations (all).
RESULTS: There was no association between rs7903146 genotype and insulin
sensitivity or insulin secretion at baseline but after adjustment for possible
confounders, insulin secretion was higher in the CT/TT group than in the CC
group. During GH treatment, carriers of the rs7903146 T allele had an increase in
insulin secretion similar to that of carriers of the CC genotype. The decrease in
insulin sensitivity was only significant in the CT/TT group, but the difference
in decrease between genotype groups did not reach significance (P = 0.06). The
disposition index (insulin secretion x insulin sensitivity), which is an estimate
of beta cell function, was not associated with genotype and did not change during
GH treatment.
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism is not associated with the change
in insulin secretion during GH treatment in short SGA children.

PMID: 19473183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Diabetologia. 2009 Aug;52(8):1589-98. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1384-x. Epub 2009
May 26.

Stromal cell-derived factor-1 promotes survival of pancreatic beta cells by the
stabilisation of beta-catenin and activation of transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2).

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Thier 306, Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) is a chemokine produced in
stromal tissues in multiple organs. Earlier we reported on levels of SDF-1 and
SDF-1 receptor (CXCR4) in the insulin-producing beta cells of the mouse pancreas 
and determined that the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis is important for beta cell survival
through activation of the prosurvival kinase, protein kinase B (AKT). Since AKT
is known to modulate the wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT)
signalling cascade, we examined the effects of SDF-1/CXCR4 on WNT signalling in
beta cells and whether this signalling is important for cell survival.
METHODS: Activation of downstream WNT signalling (beta-catenin and transcription 
factor 7-like 2, [TCF7L2]) in response to SDF-1 was examined in the islets of WNT
signalling reporter (Tcf-optimal promoter beta-galactosidase) mice and in INS-1
and MIN6 beta cells. Cytoprotection of beta cells by SDF-1 in response to the
induction of apoptosis was assessed by caspase 3 and TUNEL assays.
RESULTS: SDF-1 induced WNT signalling in beta cells of isolated islets and in
INS-1 cells via CXCR4-mediated activation of Galphai/o-coupled signalling and the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT signalling cascade resulting in the inhibition 
of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta. The key WNT signalling regulators,
beta-catenin and AKT, were activated by SDF-1 at the transcriptional and
post-translational levels. Specific inhibition of beta-catenin in the WNT
signalling cascade reversed the anti-apoptotic effects of SDF-1.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: SDF-1 promotes pancreatic beta cell survival via
activation of AKT and downstream WNT signalling via the stabilisation and
activation of beta-catenin/TCF7L2 transcriptional activators. These findings
suggest a mechanism for SDF-1 based glucose-lowering therapies by enhancing beta 
cell mass through increasing cell survival.

PMCID: PMC4085163
PMID: 19468708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Lett. 2009 Oct 18;284(1):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.04.012. Epub
2009 May 21.

Anti-proliferative activity of heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 inhibitors via
beta-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway in adult T cell leukemia cells.

Kurashina R(1), Ohyashiki JH, Kobayashi C, Hamamura R, Zhang Y, Hirano T,
Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) 
inhibition, and to identify molecular pathways responsible for anti-proliferative
effect on adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) cells. For Hsp90 inhibition, we
used geldanamycin derivates, 17-AAG (17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) and 
17-DMAG (17-(dimethylaminoethylamino) 17-demethoxygeldanamycin) in this study.
The inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of 17-AAG in an ATL cell line, designated
as TaY, and two HTLV-1 transformed cell lines (MT-2 and MT-4) was 300-700 nM, and
that of 17-DMAG was 150-200nM. Fresh ATL cells obtained from patients were more
sensitive to both 17-AAG and 17-DMAG. Gene expression analysis of TaY cells
revealed up-regulation of HSPA1A encoding Hsp70, a hallmark of Hsp90 inhibition. 
Genes regulating cell proliferation or anti-apoptosis (i.e. BCL2 and BIRC5),
genes related to cytokines or chemokines (i.e. IL9 and CCL27), and notably
TCF7L2, a down-stream effecter of beta-catenin were remarkably down-regulated.
Down-regulation of TCF7L2 mRNA was noted in the three cell lines and two patient 
specimens after Hsp90 inhibition. Hsp90 inhibitors dephosphorylate AKT, thereby, 
activate GSK-3beta, which phosphorylates beta-catenin for ubiquitination. This
indicates the possibility that beta-catenin/TCF7L2 pathway plays an important
role in Hsp90 inhibitor-induced cell death in ATL cells and HTLV-1 transformed
cells. Our results have provided new insights into the complex molecular
pharmacology of Hsp90 inhibitors, and suggest that Hsp90 inhibitors might be
beneficial as anti-proliferative agents in treating ATL patients.

PMID: 19464103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Diabetes Care. 2009 Jun;32(6):1107-14. doi: 10.2337/dc08-2171.

Genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes: recent progress and clinical
implications.

Grant RW(1), Moore AF, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. rgrant@partners.org

PMCID: PMC2681026
PMID: 19460916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):2109-16. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1391-y. Epub 2009 
May 20.

No association of multiple type 2 diabetes loci with type 1 diabetes.

Raj SM(1), Howson JM, Walker NM, Cooper JD, Smyth DJ, Field SF, Stevens HE, Todd 
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):1983-6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We used recently confirmed type 2 diabetes gene regions to
investigate the genetic relationship between type 1 and type 2 diabetes, in an
average of 7,606 type 1 diabetic individuals and 8,218 controls, providing >80%
power to detect effects as small as an OR of 1.11 at a false-positive rate of
0.003.
METHODS: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the most convincing
evidence of association in 12 type 2 diabetes-associated gene regions, PPARG,
CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, SLC30A8, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, FTO,
HHEX-IDE and THADA, were analysed in type 1 diabetes cases and controls. PPARG
and HHEX-IDE were additionally tested for association in 3,851 type 1 diabetes
families. Tests for interaction with HLA class II genotypes, autoantibody status,
sex, and age-at-diagnosis of type 1 diabetes were performed with all 12 gene
regions.
RESULTS: Only PPARG and HHEX-IDE showed any evidence of association with type 1
diabetes cases and controls (p = 0.004 and p = 0.003, respectively; p > 0.05 for 
other SNPs). The potential association of PPARG was supported by family analyses 
(p = 0.003; p (combined) = 1.0 x 10(-4)). No SNPs showed evidence of interaction 
with any covariate (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We found no convincing genetic link between type 1
and type 2 diabetes. An association of PPARG (rs1801282/Pro12Ala) could be
consistent with its known function in inflammation. Hence, our results reinforce 
evidence suggesting that type 1 diabetes is a disease of the immune system,
rather than being due to inherited defects in beta cell function or regeneration 
or insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC2738846
PMID: 19455305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2009 Nov;36(11):1074-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2009.05203.x. Epub 2009 Apr 27.

Anticancer activity of Panax notoginseng extract 20(S)-25-OCH3-PPD: Targetting
beta-catenin signalling.

Bi X(1), Zhao Y, Fang W, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 
60612, USA.

1. The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a critical role in carcinogenesis and so
agents that target Wnt/beta-catenin may have potential in cancer prevention and
therapy. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the anticancer activity of 
the novel natural product dammarane-type triterpene sapogenin (20(S)-25-OCH3-PPD;
PPD25) isolated from the leaves of Panax notoginseng. 2. The anticancer activity 
of PPD25 was evaluated in three colon cancer cell lines and in one lung cancer
cell line. The effects of PPD25 to inhibit proliferation and to induce apoptosis 
were evaluated. In addition, the potential mechanisms underlying the effects of
PPD25 were investigated. 3. It was found that the addition of 5 or 25 micromol/L 
PPD25 to the culture medium significantly inhibited cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis in all four cancer cell lines. Mechanistic studies revealed
that PPD25 significantly reduced the expression of beta-catenin, a key mediator
in the Wnt pathway, as well as transcriptional targets of beta-catenin, namely
c-myc, cyclin D1, cdk4 and T cell factor (TCF)-4. In addition, beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional activity was significantly suppressed by PPD25. 4. The data
demonstrate that the PPD25 exerts its anticancer effect by targetting
beta-catenin signalling, suggesting that PPD25 may have potential as a
chemotherapeutic and/or chemopreventive agent for colon and lung cancer.

PMID: 19413587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neuroscience. 2009 Apr 10;159(4):1326-37. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.02.010. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

Molecular development of the lateral geniculate nucleus in the absence of retinal
waves during the time of retinal axon eye-specific segregation.

Iwai L(1), Kawasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Systems Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

When retinal waves are inhibited binocularly, eye-specific segregation of retinal
axons is disrupted, and retinal axons from the two eyes remain intermingled in
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). This effect of binocular retinal wave
inhibition is mediated by the lack of activity-dependent competition between
retinal axons from the two eyes, but it is unknown whether this effect is also
mediated by the developmental arrest of the LGN in an immature state. Here we
find developmental markers of the LGN during eye-specific segregation. The
expression levels of Purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4/PEP19), transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2/TCF4) and LIM homeobox protein 9 (Lhx9) in the LGN change
significantly during eye-specific segregation. Using PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 as
developmental markers of the LGN, we examine whether LGN development is affected 
by binocular disruption of retinal waves during eye-specific segregation.
Binocular injection of epibatidine strongly inhibits eye-specific segregation,
whereas it does not affect the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9. Furthermore, 
the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 is normal in binocularly enucleated
animals and in mice treated with the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) inhibitor,
clorgyline. In addition, our experiments using LGN slice cultures show that the
expression of PCP4 and TCF7L2 in LGN slices changes as in vivo. Our results
suggest that LGN development proceeds, at least in part, even in the absence of
retinal inputs. PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 should be useful to examine LGN development
during eye-specific segregation in mice and in ferrets.

PMID: 19409202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G168-78. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90589.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 regulates Paneth cell lineage allocation and 
accrual of epithelial stem cells during murine intestinal development.

Vidrich A(1), Buzan JM, Brodrick B, Ilo C, Bradley L, Fendig KS, Sturgill T, Cohn
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Health Center of Excellence, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR-3) is expressed in the lower crypt
epithelium, where stem cells of the intestine reside. The role of FGFR-3
signaling in regulating features of intestinal morphogenesis was examined in
FGFR-3-null (FGFR-3(-/-)) mice. FGFR-3(-/-) mice had only about half the number
of intestinal crypts and a marked decrease in the number of functional clonogenic
stem cells, as assessed by an in vivo microcolony-forming assay, compared with
wild-type littermates. A marked deficit in allocation of progenitor cells to
Paneth cell differentiation was noted, although all the principal epithelial
lineages were represented in FGFR-3(-/-) mice. The total cellular content and
nuclear localization of beta-catenin protein were reduced in FGFR-3(-/-) mice, as
was expression of cyclin D1 and matrix metalloproteinase-7, major downstream
targets of beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) signaling. Activation of FGFR-3
in Caco-2 cells, an intestinal epithelial cell line, abrogated the fall in
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling activity that is normally observed in these cells as
cultures become progressively more confluent. These findings are consistent with 
the hypothesis that, during intestinal development, FGFR-3 signaling regulates
crypt epithelial stem cell expansion and crypt morphogenesis, as well as Paneth
cell lineage specification, through beta-catenin/Tcf-4-dependent and -independent
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2711760
PMID: 19407216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Diabetes. 2009 Jul;58(7):1690-9. doi: 10.2337/db08-1494. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Confirmation of multiple risk Loci and genetic impacts by a genome-wide
association study of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Takeuchi F(1), Serizawa M, Yamamoto K, Fujisawa T, Nakashima E, Ohnaka K, Ikegami
H, Sugiyama T, Katsuya T, Miyagishi M, Nakashima N, Nawata H, Nakamura J, Kono S,
Takayanagi R, Kato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Ecology and Informatics, Research Institute,
International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel type 2 diabetes gene variants and confirm previously
identified ones, a three-staged genome-wide association study was performed in
the Japanese population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In the stage 1 scan, we genotyped 519 case and 503
control subjects with 482,625 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers; in
the stage 2 panel comprising 1,110 case subjects and 1,014 control subjects, we
assessed 1,456 SNPs (P < 0.0025, stage 1); additionally to direct genotyping, 964
healthy control subjects formed the in silico control panel. Along with
genome-wide exploration, we aimed to replicate the disease association of 17 SNPs
from 16 candidate loci previously identified in Europeans. The associated and/or 
replicated loci (23 SNPs; P < 7 x 10(-5) for genome-wide exploration and P < 0.05
for replication) were examined in the stage 3 panel comprising 4,000 case
subjects and 12,569 population-based samples, from which 4,889 nondiabetic
control subjects were preselected. The 12,569 subjects were used for overall risk
assessment in the general population.
RESULTS: Four loci-1 novel with suggestive evidence (PEPD on 19q13, P = 1.4 x
10(-5)) and three previously reported-were identified; the association of CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, and KCNQ1 were confirmed (P < 10(-19)). Moreover, significant
associations were replicated in five other candidate loci: TCF7L2, IGF2BP2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, and KCNJ11. There was substantial overlap of type 2 diabetes
susceptibility genes between the two populations, whereas effect size and
explained variance tended to be higher in the Japanese population.
CONCLUSIONS: The strength of association was more prominent in the Japanese
population than in Europeans for more than half of the confirmed type 2 diabetes 
loci.

PMCID: PMC2699880
PMID: 19401414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1227-30. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1356-1. Epub 2009
Apr 22.

Translating TCF7L2: from gene to function.

Pearson ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
e.pearson@cpse.dundee.ac.uk

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1298-307.

PMID: 19387612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2388-99. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp178. Epub 2009 Apr 
21.

Decreased TCF7L2 protein levels in type 2 diabetes mellitus correlate with
downregulation of GIP- and GLP-1 receptors and impaired beta-cell function.

Shu L(1), Matveyenko AV, Kerr-Conte J, Cho JH, McIntosh CH, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Islet Biology Laboratory, Centre for Biomolecular Interactions Bremen,
University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):3004.

Recent human genetics studies have revealed that common variants of the TCF7L2
(T-cell factor 7-like 2, formerly known as TCF4) gene are strongly associated
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). We have shown that TCF7L2 expression in the
beta-cells is correlated with function and survival of the insulin-producing
pancreatic beta-cell. In order to understand how variations in TCF7L2 influence
diabetes progression, we investigated its mechanism of action in the beta-cell.
We show robust differences in TCF7L2 expression between healthy controls and
models of T2DM. While mRNA levels were approximately 2-fold increased in isolated
islets from the diabetic db/db mouse, the Vancouver Diabetic Fatty (VDF) Zucker
rat and the high fat/high sucrose diet-treated mouse compared with the
non-diabetic controls, protein levels were decreased. A similar decrease was
observed in pancreatic sections from patients with T2DM. In parallel, expression 
of the receptors for glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1R) and glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP-R) was decreased in islets from humans with T2DM 
as well as in isolated human islets treated with siRNA to TCF7L2 (siTCF7L2).
Also, insulin secretion stimulated by glucose, GLP-1 and GIP, but not KCl or
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) was impaired in siTCF7L2-treated isolated
human islets. Loss of TCF7L2 resulted in decreased GLP-1 and GIP-stimulated AKT
phosphorylation, and AKT-mediated Foxo-1 phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion.
Our findings suggest that beta-cell function and survival are regulated through
an interplay between TCF7L2 and GLP-1R/GIP-R expression and signaling in T2DM.

PMCID: PMC2722186
PMID: 19386626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Zebrafish. 2009 Mar;6(1):59-68. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2009.0580.

T-cell factor 4 (tcf7l2) is the main effector of Wnt signaling during zebrafish
intestine organogenesis.

Faro A(1), Boj SF, Ambrósio R, van den Broek O, Korving J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.

The Wnt pathway orchestrates cell fate decisions during embryonic development,
organogenesis, and adult tissues homeostasis. T-cell factor (Tcf )/lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors are the downstream effectors 
of canonical Wnt signaling. Upon Wnt signal activation, beta-catenin stabilizes
and translocates to the nucleus, where it interacts with Tcfs activating the
transcription of Wnt target genes. In the absence of Wnt, levels of stable
beta-catenin are reduced by the action of adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) and
other cytoplasmic proteins. Mutations in Apc cause constitutive accumulation of
beta-catenin and inappropriate activation of the Wnt pathway. apc(mcr/mcr) fish
embryos show absence of expression of tissue-specific differentiation markers in 
the intestine, suggesting that inappropriate activation of Wnt signaling
abrogates gut organogenesis. Which Tcf transcription factor mediates Wnt
signaling during zebrafish gut organogenesis remains unclear. We studied the
combined effect of loss of Tcf family members and Apc in the developing embryo.
Tcf4 (tcf7l2) loss rescues the apc(mcr/mcr) phenotype in the intestine. Single
depletion of Tcf1 (tcf7) and Tcf3 (tcf7l1a) function in an Apc mutant background 
had no effect on endoderm development. This study reveals that Tcf4 (tcf7l2) is
the major effector of Wnt signaling in the intestine during zebrafish
organogenesis.

PMID: 19374549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Apr 15;10:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-33.

Contribution of type 2 diabetes associated loci in the Arabic population from
Tunisia: a case-control study.

Ezzidi I(1), Mtiraoui N, Cauchi S, Vaillant E, Dechaume A, Chaieb M, Kacem M,
Almawi WY, Froguel P, Mahjoub T, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
intissar_z@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Candidate gene and genome-wide association studies have both
reproducibly identified several common Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
that confer type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk in European populations. Our aim was to
evaluate the contribution to T2D of five of these established T2D-associated loci
in the Arabic population from Tunisia.
METHODS: A case-control design comprising 884 type 2 diabetic patients and 513
control subjects living in the East-Center of Tunisia was used to analyze the
contribution to T2D of the following SNPs: E23K in KCNJ11/Kir6.2, K121Q in ENPP1,
the -30G/A variant in the pancreatic beta-cell specific promoter of Glucokinase, 
rs7903146 in TCF7L2 encoding transcription factor 7-like2, and rs7923837 in HHEX 
encoding the homeobox, hematopoietically expressed transcription factor.
RESULTS: TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele increased susceptibility to T2D (OR = 1.25
[1.06-1.47], P = 0.006) in our study population. This risk was 56% higher among
subjects carrying the TT genotype in comparison to those carrying the CC genotype
(OR = 1.56 [1.13-2.16], P = 0.002). No allelic or genotypic association with T2D 
was detected for the other studied polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: In the Tunisian population, TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele confers an
increased risk of developing T2D as previously reported in the European
population and many other ethnic groups. In contrast, none of the other tested
SNPs that influence T2D risk in the European population was associated with T2D
in the Tunisian Arabic population. An insufficient power to detect minor allelic 
contributions or genetic heterogeneity of T2D between different ethnic groups can
explain these findings.

PMCID: PMC2678106
PMID: 19368707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Circ Res. 2009 May 8;104(9):1076-84. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196899. Epub
2009 Apr 9.

Genetic fate mapping identifies second heart field progenitor cells as a source
of adipocytes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

Lombardi R(1), Dong J, Rodriguez G, Bell A, Leung TK, Schwartz RJ, Willerson JT, 
Brugada R, Marian AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Sciences Center, 6770 Bertner Street,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The phenotypic hallmark of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, a
genetic disease of desmosomal proteins, is fibroadipocytic replacement of the
right ventricle. Cellular origin of excess adipocytes, the responsible
mechanism(s) and the basis for predominant involvement of the right ventricle are
unknown. We generated 3 sets of lineage tracer mice regulated by cardiac lineage 
promoters alpha-myosin heavy chain (alphaMyHC), Nkx2.5, or Mef2C. We
conditionally expressed the reporter enhanced yellow fluorescent protein while
concomitantly deleting the desmosomal protein desmoplakin in cardiac myocyte
lineages using the Cre-LoxP technique. Lineage tracer mice showed excess
fibroadiposis and increased numbers of adipocytes in the hearts. Few adipocytes
in the hearts of alphaMyHC-regulated lineage tracer mice, but the majority of
adipocytes in the hearts of Nkx2.5- and Mef2C-regulated lineage tracer mice,
expressed enhanced yellow fluorescent protein. In addition, rare cells
coexpressed adipogenic transcription factors and the second heart field markers
Isl1 and Mef2C in the lineage tracer mouse hearts and in human myocardium from
patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. To delineate the
responsible mechanism, we generated transgenic mice expressing desmosomal protein
plakoglobin in myocyte lineages. Transgene plakoglobin translocated to nucleus,
detected by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence staining and
coimmunoprecipitated with Tcf7l2, a canonical Wnt signaling transcription factor.
Expression levels of canonical Wnt/Tcf7l2 targets bone morphogenetic protein 7
and Wnt5b, which promote adipogenesis, were increased and expression level of
connective tissue growth factor, an inhibitor of adipogenesis, was decreased. We 
conclude adipocytes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy originate 
from the second heart field cardiac progenitors, which switch to an adipogenic
fate because of suppressed canonical Wnt signaling by nuclear plakoglobin.

PMCID: PMC2767296
PMID: 19359597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;94(7):2617-25. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1664. Epub 
2009 Apr 7.

Evidence for association between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and TCF7L2 and 
glucose intolerance in women with PCOS and TCF7L2.

Biyasheva A(1), Legro RS, Dunaif A, Urbanek M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Of the recently identified type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) 
susceptibility loci, transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) confers the greatest 
relative risk for T2D and significantly predicts conversion to T2D in persons
with impaired glucose tolerance. TCF7L2 is, therefore, also a strong candidate
gene for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a common endocrine disorder
characterized by androgen excess and menstrual irregularities and associated with
insulin resistance and a 7-fold increased risk for T2D.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We tested for association between 58 single
nucleotide polymorphisms mapping to TCF7L2 and PCOS in 624 index (PCOS) cases and
553 control women of European ancestry. Furthermore, in the women with PCOS, we
tested for association with seven reproductive and metabolic quantitative traits.
RESULTS: Although we did not detect evidence for association between the
previously described TCF7L2 T2D locus, the proinsulin:insulin molar ratio, a
marker of pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction, was strongly associated with this
locus (P = 2.1 x 10(-4)). We also observed evidence for association between PCOS 
and two single nucleotide polymorphisms, rs11196236 (P = 9.0 x 10(-4)) and
rs11196229 (P = 0.0027) mapping more than 100 kb centromeric to the previously
published T2D susceptibility loci.
CONCLUSIONS: We have observed evidence of association with two independent TCF7L2
loci in a PCOS cohort: 1) association between the proinsulin:insulin molar ratio 
and the T2D locus; and 2) association with reproductive PCOS phenotype and a
novel locus. This study suggests that variation in different regions of a
susceptibility gene contributes to distinct phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2708958
PMID: 19351735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 May;46(5):621-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.01.005. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Transcriptional regulation of SM22alpha by Wnt3a: convergence with
TGFbeta(1)/Smad signaling at a novel regulatory element.

Shafer SL(1), Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
Internal Medicine/BMD, Campus Box 8301, 660 South Euclid Ave, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA.

The role of canonical Wnt signaling in myofibroblast biology has not been fully
investigated. The C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cell line recapitulates myofibroblast
differentiation in vitro and in vivo, including SM22alpha expression. Using this 
model, we find that Wnt3a upregulates SM22alpha in concert with TGFbeta(1). Wnt1,
Wnt5a and BMP2 could not replace Wnt3a and TGFbeta(1) signals. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified that Wnt3a enhances both genomic SM22alpha histone
H3 acetylation and beta-catenin association, hallmarks of transcriptional
activation. By analyzing a series of SM22alpha promoter-luciferase (LUC) reporter
constructs, we mapped Wnt3a-regulated DNA transcriptional activation to
nucleotides -213 to -192 relative to the transcription initiation site. In gel
shift assays, DNA-protein complexes assembled on this element were disrupted with
antibodies to beta-catenin, Smad2/3, and TCF7, confirming the participation of
known Wnt3a and TGFbeta transcriptional mediators. Mutation of a CAGAG motif
within this region abrogated recognition by these DNA binding proteins. Wnt3a
treatment increased Smad2/3 binding to this element. Mutation of the cognate
within the context of the native 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter resulted in a 70%
decrease in transcription, and reduced Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) induction. A concatamer
of SM22alpha [-213 to -192] conveyed Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) activation to the
unresponsive RSV promoter. Dominant negative TCF inhibited SM22alpha [-213 to
-192] x 6 RSVLUC activation. Moreover, ICAT (inhibitor of beta-catenin and TCF)
decreased while TCF7L2 and beta-catenin enhanced 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter
induction by Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1). RNAi "knockdown" of beta-catenin inhibited Wnt3a
induction of SM22alpha. Thus, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling interacts with
TGFbeta/Smad pathways to control SM22alpha gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2666882
PMID: 19344627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. BMC Immunol. 2009 Apr 2;10:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-10-18.

Identification of novel transcriptional regulators involved in macrophage
differentiation and activation in U937 cells.

Baek YS(1), Haas S, Hackstein H, Bein G, Hernandez-Santana M, Lehrach H, Sauer S,
Seitz H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany. baek@molgen.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Monocytes and macrophages play essential role in innate immunity.
Understanding the underlying mechanism of macrophage differentiation and the
identification of regulatory mechanisms will help to find new strategies to
prevent their harmful effects in chronic inflammatory diseases and sepsis.
RESULTS: Maturation of blood monocytes into tissue macrophages and subsequent
inflammatory response was mimicked in U937 cells of human histocytic lymphoma
origin. Whole genome array analysis was employed to evaluate gene expression
profile to identify underlying transcriptional networks implicated during the
processes of differentiation and inflammation. In addition to already known
transcription factors (i.e. MAFB, EGR, IRF, BCL6, NFkB, AP1, Nur77), gene
expression analysis further revealed novel genes (i.e. MEF2, BRI, HLX, HDAC5,
H2AV, TCF7L2, NFIL3) previously uncharacterized to be involved in the
differentiation process. A total of 58 selected genes representing cytokines,
chemokines, surface antigens, signaling molecules and transcription factors were 
validated by real time PCR and compared to primary monocyte-derived macrophages. 
Beside the verification of several new genes, the comparison reveals individual
heterogeneity of blood donors.
CONCLUSION: Up regulation of MEF2 family, HDACs, and H2AV during cell
differentiation and inflammation sheds new lights onto regulation events on
transcriptional and epigenetic level controlling these processes. Data generated 
will serve as a source for further investigation of macrophages differentiation
pathways and related biological responses.

PMCID: PMC2674038
PMID: 19341462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):800-2. doi: 10.2337/db09-0099.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene TCF7L2 and its role in beta-cell function.

Gloyn AL(1), Braun M, Rorsman P.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):894-905.

PMCID: PMC2661580
PMID: 19336690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3291-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1909. Epub
2009 Mar 31.

Epidermal growth factor receptor/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4/matrix
metalloproteinase 1: a new pathway for regulating keratinocyte invasiveness after
UVA irradiation.

Jean C(1), Blanc A, Prade-Houdellier N, Ysebaert L, Hernandez-Pigeon H, Al Saati 
T, Haure MJ, Coluccia AM, Charveron M, Delabesse E, Laurent G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U563, Toulouse
cedex-3, France. christine.jean@inserm.fr

Previous studies have established that UV irradiation results in epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) activation in keratinocytes. However, the signaling
pathways and cellular effects related to this process remain incompletely
elucidated. Herein, we describe for the first time that UVA-mediated EGFR
activation results in beta-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation at the Y654 residue
responsible for the dissociation of E-cadherin/alpha-catenin/beta-catenin
complexes. Moreover, UVA induces an EGFR-dependent, but Wnt-independent,
beta-catenin relocalization from the membrane to the nucleus followed by its
association with T-cell factor 4 (TCF4). This newly formed beta-catenin/TCF4
complex binds to a specific site on matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter
and governs MMP1 gene and protein expression, as well as cell migration in
collagen and gelatin. Altogether, these results suggest that UVA stimulates
keratinocyte invasiveness through two coordinated EGFR-dependent processes: loss 
of cell-to-cell contact due to beta-catenin/E-cadherin/alpha-catenin dissociation
and increased cell migration through extracellular matrix component degradation
due to beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent MMP1 regulation. These events may represent an
important step in epidermis repair following UVA injury and their abnormal
regulation could contribute to photoaging and photocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 19336574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Curr Diab Rep. 2009 Apr;9(2):172-81.

Pharmacogenetics in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Ninewells Avenue, Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK. e.pearson@chs.dundee.ac.uk

Genetic variation can impact on efficacy and risk of adverse events to commonly
used oral agents in -diabetes. Metformin is not metabolized and its mechanism of 
action remains debated; however, several cation transporters have been
identified. Variation in these pharmacokinetic genes might influence metformin
response. Conversely, although the cytochrome P450 system has been implicated in 
sulfonylurea response in some small studies, to date variants affecting
pharmacodynamics, including those in ABCC8 (SUR1) and TCF7L2, are the most
promising. For thiazolidinedione response, variants in PPARG or ADIPOQ
(adiponectin) have been variably associated with response. With increasing
well-phenotyped cohorts and new methods, including genome-wide association
studies, the next few years offer great hope to use pharmacogenetics to unravel
drug and disease mechanisms, as well as the possibility to individualize therapy 
by genotype.

PMID: 19323963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Cell Sci. 2009 Apr 1;122(Pt 7):1014-24. doi: 10.1242/jcs.028241.

The class I bHLH factors E2-2A and E2-2B regulate EMT.

Sobrado VR(1), Moreno-Bueno G, Cubillo E, Holt LJ, Nieto MA, Portillo F, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM),
28029 Madrid, Spain.

Functional loss of the cell-cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin is an essential
event for epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that allows cell
migration during embryonic development and tumour invasion. In most carcinomas,
transcriptional repression has emerged as the main mechanism responsible for
E-cadherin downregulation. Here, we report the identification of class I bHLH
factor E2-2 (TCF4/ITF2) as a new EMT regulator. Both isoforms of E2-2 (E2-2A and 
E2-2B) induce a full EMT when overexpressed in MDCK cells but without affecting
the tumorigenic properties of parental cells, in contrast to other EMT inducers, 
such as Snail1 or class I bHLH E47. E-cadherin repression mediated by E2-2 is
indirect and independent of proximal E-boxes of the promoter. Knockdown studies
indicate that E2-2 expression is dispensable for maintenance of the EMT driven by
Snail1 and E47. Comparative gene-profiling analysis reveals that E2-2 factors
induce similar, yet distinct, genetic programs to that induced by E47 in MDCK
cells. These results, together with the embryonic expression pattern of Tcf4 and 
E2A (which encodes E12/E47), support a distinct role for E2-2 and suggest an
interesting interplay between E-cadherin repressors in the regulation of
physiological and pathological EMT processes.

PMID: 19295128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1298-307. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1307-x. Epub 2009 
Mar 14.

The T allele of rs7903146 TCF7L2 is associated with impaired insulinotropic
action of incretin hormones, reduced 24 h profiles of plasma insulin and
glucagon, and increased hepatic glucose production in young healthy men.

Pilgaard K(1), Jensen CB, Schou JH, Lyssenko V, Wegner L, Brøns C, Vilsbøll T,
Hansen T, Madsbad S, Holst JJ, Vølund A, Poulsen P, Groop L, Pedersen O, Vaag AA.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensens Vej 1, Gentofte, Denmark. kapg@steno.dk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Jul;52(7):1227-30.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We studied the physiological, metabolic and hormonal mechanisms 
underlying the elevated risk of type 2 diabetes in carriers of TCF7L2 gene.
METHODS: We undertook genotyping of 81 healthy young Danish men for rs7903146 of 
TCF7L2 and carried out various beta cell tests including: 24 h glucose, insulin
and glucagon profiles; OGTT; mixed meal test; IVGTT; hyperglycaemic clamp with
co-infusion of glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 or glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
polypeptide (GIP); and a euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp combined with
glucose tracer infusion to study hepatic and peripheral insulin action.
RESULTS: Carriers of the T allele were characterised by reduced 24 h insulin
concentrations (p < 0.05) and reduced insulin secretion relative to glucose
during a mixed meal test (beta index: p < 0.003), but not during an IVGTT. This
was further supported by reduced late-phase insulinotropic action of GLP-1 (p =
0.03) and GIP (p = 0.07) during a 7 mmol/l hyperglycaemic clamp. Secretion of
GLP-1 and GIP during the mixed meal test was normal. Despite elevated hepatic
glucose production, carriers of the T allele had significantly reduced 24 h
glucagon concentrations (p < 0.02) suggesting altered alpha cell function.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Elevated hepatic glucose production and reduced
insulinotropic effect of incretin hormones contribute to an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes in carriers of the rs7903146 risk T allele of TCF7L2.

PMID: 19288077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2010 Dec;58(6):426-9. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2009.01.003.
Epub 2009 Mar 14.

TCF7L2 is associated with type 2 diabetes in nonobese individuals from Tunisia.

Bouhaha R(1), Choquet H, Meyre D, Abid Kamoun H, Ennafaa H, Baroudi T, Sassi R,
Vaxillaire M, Elgaaied A, Froguel P, Cauchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Immunology and Human Pathologies, Faculty of Sciences 
of Tunis, 2092 Tunis, Tunisia.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele was associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in most populations worldwide. In individuals of European
descent, the association with T2D was recently found to be modulated by obesity
status. However, further studies are necessary to clarify if whether interaction 
exists among subjects of non-European descent. In the present study, we analyzed 
the association of rs7903146 with T2D in 90 nonobese (Body Mass Index [BMI]
<25kg/m(2)), 171 overweight (25=BMI<30kg/m(2)) et 98 obese (BMI=30kg/m(2))
individuals from Tunisia. The T allele was nominally associated with T2D in
nonobese subjects (Odds Ratio [OR]=3.24 [1.10-9.53], P=0.021) whereas no effect
was detected in overweight (P=0.3) and obese (P=0.22) individuals. Consequently, 
the same risk allele decreased susceptibility to obesity in T2D subjects (OR=0.47
[0.23-0.94], P=0.029) but not in normoglycemic controls (P=0.44). When analyzed
all together, no allelic association was observed with T2D (P=0.20) whereas an
artefactual association with decreased obesity (0.59 [0.38-0.90], P=0.013) was
detected. As in Europeans, TCF7L2 is therefore not a risk factor for obesity in
Tunisians, but its effect on T2D risk is modulated by obesity. In conclusion, the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele is nominally associated with T2D susceptibility in
nonobese individuals from Tunisia.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19286335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14:4348-62.

Pharmacogenetics and future strategies in treating hyperglycaemia in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, 
DD1 9SY, Scotland. e.pearson@chs.dundee.ac.uk

This review focuses on current evidence for pharmacogenetics for the 3 commonly
used drug classes in treating diabetes: metformin, sulphonylureas and
thiazolidinediones. Currently, metformin pharmacogenetics is focussing on drug
transport with the recent finding that variation in OCT transporters might affect
metformin response. An aetiological approach has identified monogenic patients
with diabetes due to TCF1 mutations who are particularly sensitive to the
hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylureas, and KCNJ11 or ABCC8 mutations in which
sulphonylureas can be used in place of insulin treatment. In Type 2 diabetes
sulphonylurea response has been shown to be associated with variants TCF7L2
associated with type 2 diabetes risk. For thiazolidinediones, focus has been on
PPARgamma variants although with no consistent result. Genome wide association
studies offer great potential to unravel what genetic factors influence response 
and side effects of diabetes therapies. Large numbers of well phenotyped patients
for response and side effect as well as similarly sized similarly phenotyped
replication cohorts are required. Establishing such cohorts is a priority in
diabetes pharmacogenetics research.

PMID: 19273354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Prostate. 2009 Jun 1;69(8):874-85. doi: 10.1002/pros.20933.

Association of IL10 and other immune response- and obesity-related genes with
prostate cancer in CLUE II.

Wang MH(1), Helzlsouer KJ, Smith MW, Hoffman-Bolton JA, Clipp SL, Grinberg V, De 
Marzo AM, Isaacs WB, Drake CG, Shugart YY, Platz EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic intra-prostatic inflammation and obesity are thought to
influence prostate carcinogenesis. Thus, variants in genes in these pathways
could be associated with prostate cancer risk.
METHODS: We genotyped 17 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in RNASEL,
TLR4, IL1B, IL6, IL8, IL10, TNF, CRP, ADIPOQ, LEP, PPARG, and TCF7L2 in 258 white
prostate cancer cases and 258 matched controls nested in CLUE II. Single-locus
analyses were conducted using conditional logistic regression. TagSNPs were
selected in IL10, CRP, and TLR4 and haplotype analyses were done.
RESULTS: The A allele of IL10 -1082G>A (rs1800896), known to result in lower
levels of this anti-inflammatory cytokine, was positively associated with risk
(AG vs. GG, OR = 1.69, 95% CI: 1.10-2.60; AA vs. GG, OR = 1.81, 95% CI:
1.11-2.96; P (trend) = 0.02). Associations of IL10 haplotypes with prostate
cancer were explained by high linkage disequilibrium between two tagSNPs
(rs1800890 and rs3024496) and -1082G>A. A TLR4 candidate SNP (rs4986790; AG/GG
vs. AA, OR = 0.60, 95% CI: 0.33-1.08; P(trend) = 0.09), known to have decreased
expression and be associated with lower circulating levels of inflammatory
mediators, and tagSNP (rs10116253; CC vs. TT, OR = 3.05, 95% CI: 1.11-8.41), but 
not haplotypes, were associated with risk. None of the other candidate SNPs or
haplotypes was statistically significantly associated with risk.
CONCLUSION: Our prospective study suggests that genetic variation in IL10 and
possibly TLR4 is associated with prostate cancer risk. Although none of the SNPs 
in the obesity genes tested was associated, this does not rule out a complex role
of obesity and its metabolic consequences in prostate cancer etiology.

. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3016874
PMID: 19267370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1440-4. doi: 10.2337/db08-1173. Epub 2009 Mar 3.

Genetic variant in the IGF2BP2 gene may interact with fetal malnutrition to
affect glucose metabolism.

van Hoek M(1), Langendonk JG, de Rooij SR, Sijbrands EJ, Roseboom TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Fetal malnutrition may predispose to type 2 diabetes through gene
programming and developmental changes. Previous studies showed that these effects
may be modulated by genetic variation. Genome-wide association studies discovered
and replicated a number of type 2 diabetes-associated genes. We investigated the 
effects of such well-studied polymorphisms and their interactions with fetal
malnutrition on type 2 diabetes risk and related phenotypes in the Dutch Famine
Birth Cohort.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs10811661 (CDKN2AB),
rs1111875 (HHEX), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs5219 (KCNJ11), rs13266634 (SLC30A8), and
rs7903146 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms were genotyped in 772 participants of the Dutch 
Famine Birth Cohort Study (n = 328 exposed, n = 444 unexposed). Logistic and
linear regression models served to analyze their interactions with prenatal
exposure to famine on type 2 diabetes, impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), and area
under the curves (AUCs) for glucose and insulin during oral glucose tolerance
testing (OGTT).
RESULTS: In the total population, the TCF7L2 and IGF2BP2 variants most strongly
associated with increased risk for type 2 diabetes/IGT and increased AUC for
glucose, while the CDKAL1 polymorphism associated with decreased AUC for insulin.
The IGF2BP2 polymorphism showed an interaction with prenatal exposure to famine
on AUC for glucose (beta = -9.2 [95% CI -16.2 to -2.1], P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The IGF2BP2 variant showed a nominal interaction with exposure to
famine in utero, decreasing OGTT AUCs for glucose. This may provide a clue that
modulation of the consequences of fetal environment depends on an individual's
genetic background.

PMCID: PMC2682678
PMID: 19258437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 May;94(5):1775-80. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1876. Epub 
2009 Mar 3.

The inhibitory effect of recent type 2 diabetes risk loci on insulin secretion is
modulated by insulin sensitivity.

Haupt A(1), Guthoff M, Schäfer SA, Kirchhoff K, Machicao F, Gallwitz B, Staiger
H, Stefan N, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Nephrology and
Angiology, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

CONTEXT/OBJECTIVE: Recently novel type 2 diabetes risk loci were identified and
reported to associate with beta-cell dysfunction. We assessed whether the risk
alleles in TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/2B, JAZF1, and WFS1
reduce insulin secretion in an additive manner and whether their impact is
influenced by insulin sensitivity.
DESIGN/METHODS: We genotyped 1397 nondiabetic subjects for the aforementioned
risk alleles and performed risk allele summation. Participants underwent an oral 
glucose tolerance test and in a subgroup also an iv glucose tolerance test with
C-peptide and insulin measurements. In our cohort, only polymorphisms in SLC30A8,
HHEX, TCF7L2, and CDKAL1 influenced insulin secretion. So we tested only these
polymorphisms and, in a separate analysis, all above-mentioned polymorphisms.
RESULTS: We observed a 28% decline in insulin secretion with increment of risk
alleles (P <or= 0.0018). Subjects with two to four risk alleles displayed a
progressive decline in ss-cell function, which was not further enhanced in
carriers of five to seven alleles. After stratification for insulin sensitivity, 
subjects with low insulin sensitivity revealed a significant decline in insulin
secretion with increment of risk alleles (P = 0.0086), whereas this was not seen 
in subjects with high insulin sensitivity (P = 0.07). The additional study with
eight risk alleles provided similar results.
CONCLUSIONS: The negative effects of the risk alleles on ss-cell function appear 
additive in subjects with low insulin sensitivity but not in subjects with high
insulin sensitivity. Effective compensatory mechanisms may exist in subjects with
high insulin sensitivity that limit the impact of these genes.

PMID: 19258404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1463-7. doi: 10.2337/db08-1378. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Interrogating type 2 diabetes genome-wide association data using a biological
pathway-based approach.

Perry JR(1), McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT, Zeggini E; Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium, Weedon MN, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
Peninsula Medical School, Magdalen Road, Exeter, UK

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2009 Sep;58(9):e9; author reply e10.

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have resulted in a dramatic
increase in our knowledge of the genetic loci involved in type 2 diabetes. In a
complementary approach to these single-marker studies, we attempted to identify
biological pathways associated with type 2 diabetes. This approach could allow us
to identify additional risk loci.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We used individual level genotype data generated
from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) type 2 diabetes study,
consisting of 393,143 autosomal SNPs, genotyped across 1,924 case subjects and
2,938 control subjects. We sought additional evidence from summary level data
available from the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI) and the Finland-United
States Investigation of NIDDM Genetics (FUSION) studies. Statistical analysis of 
pathways was performed using a modification of the Gene Set Enrichment Algorithm 
(GSEA). A total of 439 pathways were analyzed from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes, Gene Ontology, and BioCarta databases.
RESULTS: After correcting for the number of pathways tested, we found no strong
evidence for any pathway showing association with type 2 diabetes (top P(adj) =
0.31). The candidate WNT-signaling pathway ranked top (nominal P = 0.0007,
excluding TCF7L2; P = 0.002), containing a number of promising single gene
associations. These include CCND2 (rs11833537; P = 0.003), SMAD3 (rs7178347; P = 
0.0006), and PRICKLE1 (rs1796390; P = 0.001), all expressed in the pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: Common variants involved in type 2 diabetes risk are likely to occur
in or near genes in multiple pathways. Pathway-based approaches to genome-wide
association data may be more successful for some complex traits than others,
depending on the nature of the underlying disease physiology.

PMCID: PMC2682674
PMID: 19252133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Vitam Horm. 2009;80:563-81. doi: 10.1016/S0083-6729(08)00619-5.

Role of Wnt signaling in the development of type 2 diabetes.

Bordonaro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Commonwealth Medical College, Department of Basic Sciences, Scranton,
Pennsylvania 18510, USA.

Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance, insulin deficiency, and
hyperglycemia. Susceptibility to type 2 diabetes has been linked to Wnt
signaling, which plays an important role in intestinal tumorigenesis. Carriers of
variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene, an important component of the
Wnt pathway, are at enhanced risk for developing type 2 diabetes. The modulation 
of proglucagon expression by Wnt activity may partially explain the link between 
Wnt signaling and diabetes, and one of the transcriptional and processing
products of the proglucagon gene, the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), exhibits a
wide variety of antidiabetogenic activities. GLP-1 stimulates Wnt signaling in
pancreatic beta cells, enhancing cell proliferation; thus, positive feedback
between GLP-1 and Wnt signaling may result in increased proliferation, and
suppressed apoptosis, of pancreatic cells. Since beta-cell protection is a
potential treatment for type 2 diabetes, stimulation of Wnt activity may
represent a valid therapeutic approach.

PMID: 19251050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Diabetologia. 2009 May;52(5):850-4. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1293-z. Epub 2009 Feb
27.

Unique splicing pattern of the TCF7L2 gene in human pancreatic islets.

Osmark P(1), Hansson O, Jonsson A, Rönn T, Groop L, Renström E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, CRC Malmö University Hospital, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Intronic variation in the TCF7L2 gene exhibits the strongest
association to type 2 diabetes observed to date, but the mechanism whereby this
genetic variation translates into altered biological function is largely unknown.
A possible explanation is a genotype-dependent difference in the complex splicing
pattern; however, this has not previously been characterised in pancreatic or
insulin target tissues. Here, the detailed TCF7L2 splicing pattern in five human 
tissues is described and dependence on risk genotype explored.
METHODS: RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR were employed to characterise
TCF7L2 splicing in pancreatic islets, blood lymphocytes, skeletal muscle and
subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue from non-diabetic individuals.
RESULTS: The mapping of TCF7L2 splice variants shows a specific pattern in
pancreatic islets, with four predominant transcripts and high usage of the
variable exons 4 and 15. The overall concentration of TCF7L2 mRNA is highest in
islets and fat and lower in blood and muscle. No significant difference in
overall amount or splicing pattern was observed between carriers and non-carriers
of the rs7903146 risk (T) allele. However, incorporation of exon 4 in islets
correlates positively with plasma HbA(1c) levels (r = 0.758; p = 0.018).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: There were pronounced tissue-specific differences in 
the splicing of TCF7L2 with forms containing exon 4 and 15 being most abundant in
islets. The incorporation of exon 4 in islets correlated with HbA(1c) levels.
Further experiments will be needed to determine the direction of this
correlation, and larger cohorts needed to unequivocally resolve whether there is 
a relationship between genotype and splicing in islets.

PMID: 19247628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;54(4):236-41. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.17. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Construction of a prediction model for type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Japanese
population based on 11 genes with strong evidence of the association.

Miyake K(1), Yang W, Hara K, Yasuda K, Horikawa Y, Osawa H, Furuta H, Ng MC,
Hirota Y, Mori H, Ido K, Yamagata K, Hinokio Y, Oka Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y,
Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A, Wang HY, Tanahashi T, Nakamura N,
Takeda J, Maeda E, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Ma RC, So WY, Chan JC, Kamatani N,
Makino H, Nanjo K, Kadowaki T, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Prediction of the disease status is one of the most important objectives of
genetic studies. To select the genes with strong evidence of the association with
type 2 diabetes mellitus, we validated the associations of the seven candidate
loci extracted in our earlier study by genotyping the samples in two independent 
sample panels. However, except for KCNQ1, the association of none of the
remaining seven loci was replicated. We then selected 11 genes, KCNQ1, TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, HHEX, GCKR, HNF1B, KCNJ11 and PPARG, whose
associations with diabetes have already been reported and replicated either in
the literature or in this study in the Japanese population. As no evidence of the
gene-gene interaction for any pair of the 11 loci was shown, we constructed a
prediction model for the disease using the logistic regression analysis by
incorporating the number of the risk alleles for the 11 genes, as well as age,
sex and body mass index as independent variables. Cumulative risk assessment
showed that the addition of one risk allele resulted in an average increase in
the odds for the disease of 1.29 (95% CI=1.25-1.33, P=5.4 x 10(-53)). The area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve, an estimate of the power of
the prediction model, was 0.72, thereby indicating that our prediction model for 
type 2 diabetes may not be so useful but has some value. Incorporation of data
from additional risk loci is most likely to increase the predictive power.

PMID: 19247372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Feb 19;10:15. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-15.

Association between TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus: a large Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE) review and
meta-analysis.

Tong Y(1), Lin Y, Zhang Y, Yang J, Zhang Y, Liu H, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Open laboratory, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, PR China. yuer.126@126.com

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been shown to be
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2MD) in multiple ethnic groups in the 
past two years, but, contradictory results were reported for Chinese and Pima
Indian populations. The authors then performed a large meta-analysis of 36
studies examining the association of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with
polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene in various ethnicities, containing rs7903146
C-to-T (IVS3C>T), rs7901695 T-to-C (IVS3T>C), a rs12255372 G-to-T (IVS4G>T), and 
rs11196205 G-to-C (IVS4G>C) polymorphisms and to evaluate the size of gene effect
and the possible genetic mode of action.
METHODS: Literature-based searching was conducted to collect data and three
methods, that is, fixed-effects, random-effects and Bayesian multivariate
mete-analysis, were performed to pool the odds ratio (OR). Publication bias and
study-between heterogeneity were also examined.
RESULTS: The studies included 35,843 cases of T2DM and 39,123 controls, using
mainly primary data. For T2DM and IVS3C>T polymorphism, the Bayesian OR for TT
homozygotes and TC heterozygotes versus CC homozygote was 1.968 (95% credible
interval (CrI): 1.790, 2.157), 1.406 (95% CrI: 1.341, 1.476), respectively, and
the population attributable risk (PAR) for the TT/TC genotypes of this variant is
16.9% for overall. For T2DM and IVS4G>T polymorphism, TT homozygotes and TG
heterozygotes versus GG homozygote was 1.885 (95%CrI: 1.698, 2.088), 1.360 (95%
CrI: 1.291, 1.433), respectively. Four ORs among these two polymorphisms all
yielded significant between-study heterogeneity (P < 0.05) and the main source of
heterogeneity was ethnic differences. Data also showed significant associations
between T2DM and the other two polymorphisms, but with low heterogeneity (P >
0.10). Pooled ORs fit a codominant, multiplicative genetic model for all the four
polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene, and this model was also confirmed in different
ethnic populations when stratification of IVS3C>T and IVS4G>T polymorphisms
except for Africans, where a dominant, additive genetic mode is suggested for
IVS3C>T polymorphism.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis demonstrates that four variants of TCF7L2 gene are
all associated with T2DM, and indicates a multiplicative genetic model for all
the four polymorphisms, as well as suggests the TCF7L2 gene involved in near 1/5 
of all T2MD. Potential gene-gene and gene-environmental interactions by which
common variants in the TCF7L2 gene influence the risk of T2MD need further
exploration.

PMCID: PMC2653476
PMID: 19228405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Diabetologia. 2009 May;52(5):825-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1291-1. Epub 2009 Feb
19.

Interaction between prenatal growth and high-risk genotypes in the development of
type 2 diabetes.

Pulizzi N(1), Lyssenko V, Jonsson A, Osmond C, Laakso M, Kajantie E, Barker DJ,
Groop LC, Eriksson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
drpulizzi@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Dec;52(12):2671-2.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Early environmental factors and genetic variants have been
reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether there is an interaction between birthweight and 
common variants in the TCF7L2, HHEX, PPARG, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes in the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A total of 2,003 participants from the Helsinki Birth Cohort Study, 311 
of whom were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes by an OGTT, were genotyped for the
specified variants. Indices for insulin sensitivity and secretion were
calculated.
RESULTS: Low birthweight was associated with type 2 diabetes (p = 0.008) and
impaired insulin secretion (p = 0.04). Of the tested variants, the risk variant
in HHEX showed a trend towards a low birthweight (p = 0.09) and the risk variant 
in the CDKN2A/2B locus was associated with high birthweight (p = 0.01). The
TCF7L2 risk allele was associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Pooling
across all nine genes, each risk allele increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 
14%. [corrected] Risk variants in the HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes interacted 
with birthweight, so that the risk of type 2 diabetes was highest in those with
lower birthweight (p <or= 0.05). The interaction was also present in the pooled
data.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Low birthweight might affect the strength of the
association of some common variants (HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1) with type 2
diabetes. These findings need to be replicated in independent cohorts.

PMID: 19225753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004496. Epub 2009 Feb 16.

Genetic variants of Wnt transcription factor TCF-4 (TCF7L2) putative promoter
region are associated with small intestinal Crohn's disease.

Koslowski MJ(1), Kübler I, Chamaillard M, Schaeffeler E, Reinisch W, Wang G,
Beisner J, Teml A, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Winter S, Herrlinger KR, Rutgeerts P,
Vermeire S, Cooney R, Fellermann K, Jewell D, Bevins CL, Schwab M, Stange EF,
Wehkamp J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany.

Reduced expression of Paneth cell antimicrobial alpha-defensins, human defensin
(HD)-5 and -6, characterizes Crohn's disease (CD) of the ileum. TCF-4 (also named
TCF7L2), a Wnt signalling pathway transcription factor, orchestrates Paneth cell 
differentiation, directly regulates the expression of HD-5 and -6, and was
previously associated with the decrease of these antimicrobial peptides in a
subset of ileal CD. To investigate a potential genetic association of TCF-4 with 
ileal CD, we sequenced 2.1 kb of the 5' flanking region of TCF-4 in a small group
of ileal CD patients and controls (n = 10 each). We identified eight single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), of which three (rs3814570, rs10885394,
rs10885395) were in linkage disequilibrium and found more frequently in patients;
one (rs3814570) was thereby located in a predicted regulatory region. We carried 
out high-throughput analysis of this SNP in three cohorts of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) patients and controls. Overall 1399 healthy individuals, 785
ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, 225 CD patients with colonic disease only and
784 CD patients with ileal involvement were used to determine frequency
distributions. We found an association of rs3814570 with ileal CD but neither
with colonic CD or UC, in a combined analysis (allele positivity: OR 1.27, 95% CI
1.07 to 1.52, p = 0.00737), which was the strongest in ileal CD patients with
stricturing behaviour (allele frequency: OR 1.32, 95% CI 1.08 to1.62, p =
0.00686) or an additional involvement of the upper GIT (allele frequency: OR
1.38, 95% CI 1.03 to1.84, p = 0.02882). The newly identified genetic association 
of TCF-4 with ileal CD provides evidence that the decrease in Paneth cell
alpha-defensins is a primary factor in disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2637978
PMID: 19221600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Horm Metab Res. 2009 Feb;41(2):159-63. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1119408. Epub 2009 Feb
12.

Wnt-signalling and the metabolic syndrome.

Schinner S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Rheumatology, University Hospital
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. sven.schinner@uni-duesseldorf.de

The Wnt-signalling pathway plays a well-established role in embryogenesis and
tumourigenesis. However, recent data puts Wnt-signalling in the context of
metabolic disease. In vitro and in vivo data characterised the role of
Wnt-signalling molecules in the regulation of adipocyte differentiation
(adipogenesis). Furthermore, Wnts play a pivotal role in regulating pancreatic
beta-cell function and mass. In addition, studies found polymorphisms within the 
gene encoding TCF7L2, a Wnt-regulated transcription factor, to contribute an
increased risk to develop type 2 diabetes mellitus in humans. This review will
summarise recent aspects of Wnt-signalling in these pathophysiologic events and
discuss the contributions of dysregulation in Wnt-signalling to features of the
metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 19214925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Nov;41(5):535-43. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0407OC. 
Epub 2009 Feb 12.

beta-Catenin is not necessary for maintenance or repair of the bronchiolar
epithelium.

Zemke AC(1), Teisanu RM, Giangreco A, Drake JA, Brockway BL, Reynolds SD, Stripp 
BR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Regeneration, Department of Environmental and Occupational
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Signaling by Wnt/beta-catenin regulates self-renewal of tissue stem cells in the 
gut and, when activated in the embryonic bronchiolar epithelium, leads to stem
cell expansion. We have used transgenic and cell type-specific knockout
strategies to determine roles for beta-catenin-regulated gene expression in
normal maintenance and repair of the bronchiolar epithelium. Analysis of TOPGal
transgene activity detected beta-catenin signaling in the steady-state and
repairing bronchiolar epithelium. However, the broad distribution and phenotype
of signaling cells precluded establishment of a clear role for beta-catenin in
the normal or repairing state. Necessity of beta-catenin signaling was tested
through Cre-mediated deletion of Catnb exons 2-6 in airway epithelial cells.
Functional knockout of beta-catenin had no impact on expression of Clara cell
differentiation markers, mitotic index, or sensitivity of these cells to the
Clara cell-specific toxicant, naphthalene. Repair of the naphthalene-injured
airway proceeded with establishment of focal regions of beta-catenin-null
epithelium. The size of regenerative epithelial units, mitotic index, and
restoration of the ciliated cell population did not vary between wild-type and
genetically modified mice. Thus, beta-catenin was not necessary for maintenance
or efficient repair of the bronchiolar epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2778160
PMID: 19213872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Apr;89(4):1256-62. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.27058. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

TCF7L2, dietary carbohydrate, and risk of type 2 diabetes in US women.

Cornelis MC(1), Qi L, Kraft P, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 is the strongest type 2 diabetes (T2D) locus identified to
date, and evidence suggests it plays an important role in insulin synthesis,
processing, and secretion. Dietary factors that increase the insulin demand might
enhance the risk of T2D associated with TCF7L2 variants.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine whether the risk of T2D associated with
TCF7L2 is modified by the glycemic load (GL), glycemic index (GI), cereal fiber
content, and total carbohydrate content of the diet.
DESIGN: T2D cases (n = 1140) and controls (n = 1915) from the Nurses' Health
Study were genotyped for TCF7L2 (rs12255372). Dietary intake was assessed with a 
semiquantitative food-frequency questionnaire.
RESULTS: Significant differences in odds ratios (ORs) of T2D associated with the 
TCF7L2 genotype between high and low strata of GL (P = 0.03) and GI (P = 0.05)
were suggested. Compared with the GG genotype, multivariate-adjusted ORs (95% CI)
of T2D associated with the TT genotype were 2.71 (1.64, 4.46) and 2.69 (1.64,
4.43) among individuals in the highest tertile of GL and GI, respectively.
Corresponding ORs (95% CIs) among individuals in the lowest tertiles of GL and GI
were 1.66 (0.95, 2.88) and 1.82 (1.11, 3.01). The risk of T2D associated with the
TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphism did not significantly differ by cereal
fiber or carbohydrate intake.
CONCLUSION: Carbohydrate quality and quantity modified risk of T2D associated
with TCF7L2, which suggests that changes in risk attributable to the TCF7L2
variant are magnified under conditions of increased insulin demand.

PMCID: PMC2667467
PMID: 19211816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2009;47(4):383-6. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2009.077.

Risk loci for type 2 diabetes - quo vadis?

Weijers RN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Teaching Hospital OLVG, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. robw01@xs4all.nl

Reduced insulin sensitivity plays a role in the early pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes, and defects in insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells are
instrumental in hyperglycemic progression. There is strong evidence that genetic 
factors play an important role in both of these components. Several of the single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes associated with an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes are hypothesized to influence beta-cell function. The aim of the 
present study was to describe the function of the latter genes, to analyze the
implications of the SNP positions within or near these genes, and to evaluate the
suggested primary role of pancreatic beta-cells in the etiology of type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 19203201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;125(3):305-18. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0626-9. Epub 2009 Jan 
29.

Identification of susceptibility genes for complex diseases using pooling-based
genome-wide association scans.

Bossé Y(1), Bacot F, Montpetit A, Rung J, Qu HQ, Engert JC, Polychronakos C,
Hudson TJ, Froguel P, Sladek R, Desrosiers M.

Author information: 
(1)Laval Hospital Research Center, Laval University, Pavillon
Margeritte-d'Youville, chemin Sainte-Foy, Quebec, QC, Canada.
yohan.bosse@crhl.ulaval.ca

The success of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to identify risk loci of
complex diseases is now well-established. One persistent major hurdle is the cost
of those studies, which make them beyond the reach of most research groups.
Performing GWAS on pools of DNA samples may be an effective strategy to reduce
the costs of these studies. In this study, we performed pooling-based GWAS with
more than 550,000 SNPs in two case-control cohorts consisting of patients with
Type II diabetes (T2DM) and with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). In the T2DM study,
the results of the pooling experiment were compared to individual genotypes
obtained from a previously published GWAS. TCF7L2 and HHEX SNPs associated with
T2DM by the traditional GWAS were among the top ranked SNPs in the pooling
experiment. This dataset was also used to refine the best strategy to correctly
identify SNPs that will remain significant based on individual genotyping. In the
CRS study, the top hits from the pooling-based GWAS located within ten kilobases 
of known genes were validated by individual genotyping of 1,536 SNPs. Forty-one
percent (598 out of the 1,457 SNPs that passed quality control) were associated
with CRS at a nominal P value of 0.05, confirming the potential of pooling-based 
GWAS to identify SNPs that differ in allele frequencies between two groups of
subjects. Overall, our results demonstrate that a pooling experiment on
high-density genotyping arrays can accurately determine the minor allelic
frequency as compared to individual genotyping and produce a list of top ranked
SNPs that captures genuine allelic differences between a group of cases and
controls. The low cost associated with a pooling-based GWAS clearly justifies its
use in screening for genetic determinants of complex diseases.

PMID: 19184112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Diabetologia. 2009 Apr;52(4):614-20. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1266-2. Epub 2009
Jan 31.

TCF7L2 variants are associated with increased proinsulin/insulin ratios but not
obesity traits in the Framingham Heart Study.

Stolerman ES(1), Manning AK, McAteer JB, Fox CS, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Simches Research Building-CPZN 5.250, Diabetes Unit/Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene are associated with type 2
diabetes via impaired insulin secretion. One hypothesis is that variation in
TCF7L2 impairs insulin processing in the beta cell. In contrast, the association 
of related TCF7L2 polymorphisms with obesity is controversial in that it has only
been shown in cohorts susceptible to ascertainment bias. We reproduced the
association of diabetes-associated variants with proinsulin/insulin ratios, and
also examined the association of a TCF7L2 haplotype with obesity in the
Framingham Heart Study (FHS).
METHODS: We genotyped the TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 and
rs12255372 (previously associated with type 2 diabetes) and rs10885406 and
rs7924080 (which tag haplotype A [HapA], a haplotype reported to be associated
with obesity) in 2,512 FHS participants. We used age- and sex-adjusted linear
mixed-effects models to test for association with glycaemic traits,
proinsulin/insulin ratios and obesity measures.
RESULTS: As expected, the T risk allele of rs7903146 was associated with higher
fasting plasma glucose (p = 0.01). T/T homozygotes had a 23.5% increase in the
proinsulin/insulin ratio (p = 1 x 10(-7)) compared with C/C homozygotes. There
was no association of HapA with BMI (p = 0.98), waist circumference (p = 0.89),
subcutaneous adipose tissue (p = 0.32) or visceral adipose tissue (p = 0.92).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We confirmed that the risk allele of rs7903146 is
associated with hyperglycaemia and a higher proinsulin/insulin ratio. We did not 
detect any association of the TCF7L2 HapA with adiposity measures, suggesting
that this may have been a spurious association from ascertainment bias, possibly 
induced by the evaluation of obesity in separate groups of glycaemic cases and
controls.

PMCID: PMC3430962
PMID: 19183934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Feb;8(2):458-68. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0885. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

WIF1, a Wnt pathway inhibitor, regulates SKP2 and c-myc expression leading to G1 
arrest and growth inhibition of human invasive urinary bladder cancer cells.

Tang Y(1), Simoneau AR, Liao WX, Yi G, Hope C, Liu F, Li S, Xie J, Holcombe RF,
Jurnak FA, Mercola D, Hoang BH, Zi X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA 92868,
USA.

Epigenetic silencing of secreted wingless-type (Wnt) antagonists through
hypermethylation is associated with tobacco smoking and with invasive bladder
cancer. The secreted Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF1) has shown consistent
growth-inhibitory effect on various cancer cell lines. Therefore, we assessed the
mechanisms of action of WIF1 by either restoring WIF1 expression in invasive
bladder cancer cell lines (T24 and TSU-PR1) or using a recombinant protein
containing functional WIF1 domain. Both ectopic expression of WIF1 and treatment 
with WIF1 domain protein resulted in cell growth inhibition via G(1) arrest. The 
G(1) arrest induced by WIF1 is associated with down-regulation of SKP2 and c-myc 
and up-regulation of p21/WAF1 and p27/Kip1. Conversely, reexpression of SKP2 in
WIF1-overexpressing TSU-PR1 cells attenuated the WIF1-induced G(1) arrest.
Furthermore, inhibition of nuclear Wnt signaling by either dominant-negative LEF1
or short hairpin RNA of TCF4 also reduced SKP2 expression. The human SKP2 gene
contains two TCF/LEF1 consensus binding sites within the promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation/real-time PCR analysis revealed that both WIF1 and
dominant-negative LEF1 expression decreased the in vivo binding of TCF4 and
beta-catenin to the SKP2 promoter. Together, our results suggest that mechanisms 
of WIF1-induced G(1) arrest include (a) SKP2 down-regulation leading to p27/Kip1 
accumulation and (b) c-myc down-regulation releasing p21/WAF1 transcription.
Additionally, we show that WIF1 inhibits in vivo bladder tumor growth in nude
mice. These observations suggest a mechanism for transformation of bladder
epithelium on loss of WIF1 function and provide new targets such as SKP2 for
intervention in WIF1-deficient bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC2768341
PMID: 19174556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Diabetologia. 2009 Mar;52(3):457-62. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1250-2. Epub 2009
Jan 27.

The risk allele load accelerates the age-dependent decline in beta cell function.

Haupt A(1), Staiger H, Schäfer SA, Kirchhoff K, Guthoff M, Machicao F, Gallwitz
B, Stefan N, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine IV (Diabetology,
Endocrinology, Nephrology, Angiology, and Clinical Chemistry), Eberhard Karls
University, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 10, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Among the novel type 2 diabetes risk loci identified by
genome-wide association studies, TCF7L2, HHEX, SLC30A8 and CDKAL1 appear to
affect beta cell function. In the present study we examined the effect of these
genes' risk alleles on the age-dependent decline in insulin secretion.
METHODS: The SNPs rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs7754840(CDKAL1), rs7923837 (HHEX) and
rs13266634 (SLC30A8) were genotyped in 1,412 non-diabetic patients, who were
subsequently grouped according to their number of risk alleles. All participants 
underwent an OGTT. Insulin secretion was assessed by validated indices and
proinsulin conversion by calculating AUC(proinsulin)/AUC(insulin).
RESULTS: The number of risk alleles revealed a Gaussian distribution, with most
participants carrying four risk alleles. Stratification into groups with low
(LAL, up to three alleles), median (MAL, four alleles) and high (HAL, five to
eight alleles) allele load resulted in MAL and HAL participants displaying
significantly lower insulin secretion and proinsulin conversion than LAL
participants (p <or= 0.0014 and p = 0.0185, respectively). In the overall cohort,
age was negatively associated with insulin secretion and proinsulin conversion
(both p < 0.0001). MAL and HAL participants showed a significantly more
pronounced decline in insulin secretion with increasing age than LAL participants
(p <or= 0.0325; analysis of covariance), and after stratification for BMI this
relationship was maintained in obese, but not non-obese, participants. Proinsulin
conversion decreased with increasing age in MAL and HAL, but not LAL,
participants (p <or= 0.0003 vs p = 0.2).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The risk allele load significantly accelerates the
age-dependent decline in beta cell function, and this might be of particular
importance in obese people.

PMID: 19172244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1362-6.

Allele-specific PCR assay to genotype SNP rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene for rapid
screening of diabetes susceptibility.

Dutra LA(1), Costa PG, Velasco LF, Amato AA, Barra GB.

Author information: 
(1)Sabin Institute and Laboratory of Clinical Analysis, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study is to validate a rapid and simple
allele-specific PCR that genotypes TCF7/L2 rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism with
standard PCR instruments.
METHODS: Two forward primers with variations in their 3' nucleotides were
designed in such a way that each was specific for one of the two variants. They
were combined with a common reverse primer into two PCR reactions. Specific
amplification indicates the presence of the allele. One hundred and four DNA
samples were genotyped by this method. To evaluate the assay, the polymorphism
spanning region of 63 DNA samples representing the three possible genotypes was
sequenced.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 allele assignments derived from the allele-specific PCR
were in complete agreement with sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The assay described here is a suitable strategy for the TCF7/L2
rs7903146 (C/T) genotyping also allowing rapid and reliable identification.

PMID: 19169495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):894-905. doi: 10.2337/db08-1187. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

TCF7L2 regulates late events in insulin secretion from pancreatic islet
beta-cells.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Loder MK, McDonald A, Tarasov AI, Carzaniga R, Kronenberger
K, Barg S, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College, London, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2009 Apr;58(4):800-2.

OBJECTIVE: Polymorphisms in the human TCF7L2 gene are associated with reduced
insulin secretion and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the
mechanisms by which TCF7L2 affect insulin secretion are still unclear. We define 
the effects of TCF7L2 expression level on mature beta-cell function and suggest a
potential mechanism for its actions.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: TCF7L2 expression in rodent islets and beta-cell
lines was altered using RNAi or adenoviral transduction. Beta-cell gene profiles 
were measured by quantitative real-time PCR and the effects on intracellular
signaling and exocytosis by live cell imaging, electron microscopy, and patch
clamp electrophysiology.
RESULTS: Reducing TCF7L2 expression levels by RNAi decreased glucose- but not
KCl-induced insulin secretion. The glucose-induced increments in both ATP/ADP
ratio and cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) were increased compared
with controls. Overexpression of TCF7L2 exerted minor inhibitory effects on
glucose-regulated changes in [Ca2+]i and insulin release. Gene expression
profiling in TCF7L2-silenced cells revealed increased levels of mRNA encoding
syntaxin 1A but decreased Munc18-1 and ZnT8 mRNA. Whereas the number of
morphologically docked vesicles was unchanged by TCF7L2 suppression, secretory
granule movement increased and capacitance changes decreased, indicative of
defective vesicle fusion.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 is involved in maintaining expression of beta-cell genes
regulating secretory granule fusion. Defective insulin exocytosis may thus
underlie increased diabetes incidence in carriers of the at-risk TCF7L2 alleles.

PMCID: PMC2661588
PMID: 19168596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Exp Diabetes Res. 2008;2008:728763. doi: 10.1155/2008/728763. Epub 2009 Jan 20.

Islet specific Wnt activation in human type II diabetes.

Lee SH(1), Demeterco C, Geron I, Abrahamsson A, Levine F, Itkin-Ansari P.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The Wnt pathway effector gene TCF7L2 has been linked to type II diabetes, making 
it important to study the role of Wnt signaling in diabetes pathogenesis. We
examined the expression of multiple Wnt pathway components in pancreases from
normal individuals and type II diabetic individuals. Multiple members of the Wnt 
signaling pathway, including TCF7L2, Wnt2b, beta-catenin, pGSK3beta, TCF3,
cyclinD1, and c-myc, were undetectable or expressed at low levels in islets from 
nondiabetic individuals, but were also upregulated specifically in islets of type
II diabetic patients. Culture of pancreatic tissue and islet isolation led to Wnt
activation that was reversed by the Wnt antagonist sFRP, demonstrating that Wnt
activation in that setting was due to soluble Wnt factors. These data support a
model in which the Wnt pathway plays a dynamic role in the pathogenesis of type
II diabetes and suggest manipulation of Wnt signaling as a new approach to
beta-cell-directed diabetes therapy.

PMCID: PMC2628766
PMID: 19165345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2329-32. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9452-3. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

In vitro modulation of TCF7L2 gene expression in human pancreatic cells.

Khalooghi K(1), Hashemi S, Mehraban N, Amiri P, Bazzaz JT, Larijani B, Amoli MM.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Centre, Tehran University and Medical
Sciences, Dr. Shariati Hospital, North Karegar St., 14114 Tehran, Iran.

Several studies have recently reported strong association between type 2 diabetes
and variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, which has been 
confirmed by several other genome-wide studies. However, the physiological
implications of this transcription factor on the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes 
is not yet known. The aim of this study was to investigate the alteration in
TCF7L2 gene expression in human pancreatic cell line in response to various
factors in vitro. MIA Paca-2 cell line (Human Pancreas cell line) was cultured in
the presence of curcumin, lipopolysaccaride and glucose (low and high
concentration). TCF7L2 gene expression was determined using quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. Treatment with curcumin significantly increased TCF7L2 gene
expression to 3.24 fold (1.7-log fold) (P = 0.003) compared to the controls while
treatment with LPS decreased TCF7L2 gene expression to 0.88-fold (-0.18-log). On 
the other hand, glucose increased TCF7L2 gene expression in pancreatic cell line.
Our data suggest a role for TCF7L2 in glucose homeostasis. The contrary effect of
curcumin and LPS on expression of TCF7L2 in pancreatic cells supports a role for 
TCF7L2 in their survival and function in inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 19156536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Br J Nutr. 2009 Feb;101(4):478-81. doi: 10.1017/S0007114508020369. Epub 2008 Jul 
17.

Whole-grain consumption and transcription factor-7-like 2 ( TCF7L2) rs7903146:
gene-diet interaction in modulating type 2 diabetes risk.

Fisher E(1), Boeing H, Fritsche A, Doering F, Joost HG, Schulze MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany. fisher@dife.de

Whole grains are known to influence postprandial glucose response and insulin
demand and are inversely associated with diabetes risk. Genetic variation of the 
transcription factor-7-like 2 encoding gene (TCF7L2) is assumed to promote an
early insulin secretory defect and has been consistently attributed to the risk
of developing type 2 diabetes. The present study examined the hypothesis that the
protective effect of whole grains might be attenuated in the presence of the
rs7903146 risk-conferring T-allele. We employed a case-cohort study of 2318
randomised individuals and 724 incident type 2 diabetes cases from the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam cohort.
Multivariate Cox regression was used to estimate relative risks of diabetes
including product terms testing for the genotype-specific effect modification of 
dietary whole grain. Dietary intake of whole grains was assessed by a validated
FFQ. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 T-allele was associated with type 2 diabetes (hazard
ratio=1.51; 95 % CI 1.21, 1.87) and modified the inverse association between
whole-grain intake and diabetes risk (P=0.016 for interaction). While whole-grain
intake was inversely associated with diabetes risk among rs7903146 CC homozygote 
carriers (hazard ratio for 50 g portion per d=0.86; 95 % CI 0.75, 0.99), the
T-allele negated the protective effect of whole-grain intake (hazard ratio among 
T-allele carriers for 50 g portion per d=1.08; 95 % CI 0.96, 1.23). These data
provide evidence that the beneficial effect of whole-grain intake on diabetes
risk is modified by TCF7L2 rs7903146.

PMID: 19149908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Nutr. 2009 Mar;139(3):439-46. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.096461. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids modulate the effect of TCF7L2 gene variants on
postprandial lipemia.

Warodomwichit D(1), Arnett DK, Kabagambe EK, Tsai MY, Hixson JE, Straka RJ,
Province M, An P, Lai CQ, Borecki I, Ordovas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been recently associated with
diabetes risk, and it may exert its effect through metabolic syndrome
(MetS)-related traits and be subjected to modification by environmental factors. 
We investigated the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), rs7903146
and rs12255372, within the TCF7L2 locus on postprandial lipemia and other
MetS-related traits and their modulation by dietary fat. Data were collected from
1083 European Americans participating in the Genetics of Lipid Lowering Drugs and
Diet Network Study. Carriers of the minor T allele at the C/T rs7903146 SNP had
higher fasting plasma glucose (P = 0.012), lower homeostasis model assessment of 
beta cell function (P = 0.041), higher plasma VLDL (P = 0.035), and lower large
LDL particle (P = 0.007) concentrations and higher risk of MetS (P = 0.011) than 
CC individuals. Moreover, we identified significant interactions between this SNP
and PUFA intake modulating fasting VLDL particle concentrations (P = 0.016) and
postprandial triglycerides (TG) (P = 0.028), chylomicrons (P = 0.025), total VLDL
(P = 0.026), and large VLDL (P = 0.018) concentrations. Thus, only T allele
carriers with a PUFA intake > or = 7.36% of energy had elevated fasting plasma
VLDL concentrations and postprandial TG-rich lipoproteins. These variables did
not differ in T allele carriers and noncarriers in the low-PUFA intake group.
Moreover, these significant interactions were due exclusively to (n-6) PUFA
intake. In summary, high (n-6) PUFA intakes (> or = 6.62% of energy intake) were 
associated with atherogenic dyslipidemia in carriers of the minor T allele at the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP and may predispose them to MetS, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC2714378
PMID: 19141698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Feb;89(2):558-67. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.26720. Epub 2009
Jan 13.

Prolonged saturated fat-induced, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
elevation is associated with adipokine imbalance and liver injury in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis: dysregulated enteroadipocyte axis as a novel feature of fatty
liver.

Musso G(1), Gambino R, Pacini G, De Michieli F, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Gradenigo Hospital, Turin, Italy. giovanni_musso@yahoo.it

BACKGROUND: Genetic and acquired mechanisms underlying the association of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) with diabetes are unknown.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) was recently linked to
adipocyte metabolism and obesity-related metabolic disorders, including NAFLD,
induced by an excess of saturated fatty acids (SFAs), but its role in vivo, as
well as underlying mechanisms, is unknown. We hypothesized that altered GIP
secretion may contribute to the pathogenesis of NAFLD.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed GIP response to SFA ingestion and its effect on glucose
and lipid metabolism and on liver injury in patients with nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH).
DESIGN: Thirty-two nonobese, nondiabetic patients with NASH and 32 healthy
controls matched for age, body mass index, and sex underwent a 7-d dietary
record, an oral-glucose-tolerance test (OGTT), and a high-fat-load test.
OGTT-derived indexes of glucose homeostasis were calculated; circulating
lipoproteins, total antioxidant status, GIP, adiponectin, resistin, and
cytokeratin-18 fragments (markers of hepatocyte apoptosis) after a high-fat meal 
were assessed. All subjects were genotyped for transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) polymorphism.
RESULTS: Patients with NASH exhibited a prolonged GIP elevation after fat
ingestion. GIP response correlated directly with hepatic steatosis, postprandial 
resistin, and free fatty acid (FFA) increase and inversely with beta cell
function and incretin effect. Dietary polyunsaturated:saturated fatty acid ratio 
and TCF7L2 polymorphism independently predicted postprandial GIP response.
Cytokeratin-18 fragments increased significantly postprandially in both groups
but more consistently in patients with NASH; their increase was predicted by
postprandial adiponectin and FFA responses.
CONCLUSIONS: GIP response to SFA ingestion is prolonged in nondiabetic patients
with NASH and is correlated with liver disease, an unfavorable dynamic adipokine 
profile, and beta cell dysfunction, which provides a rationale for GIP antagonism
in these subjects.

PMID: 19141695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Mar;23(3):402-11. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0370. Epub 2009 Jan
8.

GnRH-regulated expression of Jun and JUN target genes in gonadotropes requires a 
functional interaction between TCF/LEF family members and beta-catenin.

Salisbury TB(1), Binder AK, Grammer JC, Nilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, 639 Fulmer Hall, Washington State University 
99164-4660, USA.

GnRH regulates gonadotrope function through a complex transcriptional network
that includes three members of the immediate early gene family: Egr1, Jun, and
Atf3. These DNA-binding proteins act alone or in pairs to confer hormonal
responsiveness to Cga, Lhb, Fshb, and Gnrhr. Herein we suggest that the
transcriptional response of Jun requires a functional interaction between the
T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family of DNA-binding proteins
and beta-catenin (officially CTNNB1), a coactivator of TCF/LEF. Supporting data
include demonstration that GnRH increases activity of TOPflash, a
TCF/LEF-dependent luciferase reporter, in LbetaT2 cells, a gonadotrope-derived
cell line. Additional cotransfection experiments indicate that a
dominant-negative form of TCF7L2 (TCFDN) that binds DNA, but not beta-catenin,
blocks GnRH induction of TOPflash. Overexpression of AXIN, an inhibitor of
beta-catenin, also reduces GnRH stimulation of TOPflash. Transduction of LbetaT2 
cells with TCFDN adenoviruses diminishes GnRH stimulation of Jun mRNA without
altering expression of Egr1 and Atf3, two other immediate early genes that confer
GnRH responsiveness. Reduction of beta-catenin in LbetaT2 cells, through stable
expression of short hairpin RNA, also selectively compromises GnRH regulation of 
Jun expression and levels of JUN protein. Finally, overexpression of TCFDN
attenuates GnRH regulation of Cga promoter activity, a known downstream target of
JUN. Together, these results indicate that GnRH regulation of Jun transcription
requires a functional interaction between TCF/LEF and beta-catenin and that
alteration of either impacts expression of JUN downstream targets such as Cga.

PMCID: PMC2654513
PMID: 19131506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Neurosci Res. 2009 May 15;87(7):1532-46. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21989.

Expression and molecular diversity of Tcf7l2 in the developing murine cerebellum 
and brain.

Nazwar TA(1), Glassmann A, Schilling K.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut, Anatomie and Zellbiologie,
Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The Wingless family of secreted proteins impinges on multiple aspects of
vertebrate nervous system development, from early global patterning and cell fate
decision to synaptogenesis. Here, we mapped the developmental expression of the
Tcf7l2, which is key to the canonical Wingless signaling cascade, in the
developing cerebellum. The exclusive and transient expression of Tcf7l2 in
ventricular and Olig2-defined precursor cells within the cerebellar anlage, and
its predominant expression in postmitotic neurons in the midbrain/inferior
colliculus allowed us to ask whether cell type-specific differences are also
reflected in splice isoform variability. We also included in this analysis
intestinal epithelia, where Tcf7l2 function has been intensively studied. Our
data reveal extensive variability of Tcf7l2 splicing in the central nervous
system. Additional variability in brain-expressed Tcf7l2 is generated by a length
polymorphism of expressed mRNAs in a stretch of normally nine adenines found at
the beginning of exon 18, reminiscent of variability observed at the same site in
cancers with microsatellite instability. A consensus emerging from our data is
that the expression of isoforms comprising or lacking the C-clamp motif, which
has been linked by in vitro studies to the regulation of cell growth, is indeed
tightly correlated with the proliferative status in vivo.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19125404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hepatology. 2009 Feb;49(2):426-35. doi: 10.1002/hep.22659.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism modulates glucose and lipid
homeostasis, adipokine profile, and hepatocyte apoptosis in NASH.

Musso G(1), Gambino R, Pacini G, Pagano G, Durazzo M, Cassader M.

Author information: 
(1)Gradenigo Hospital, Turin, Italy.

Genetic factors underlying the association of NAFLD with diabetes and
atherosclerosis are unknown. Recent human studies suggest transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism predisposes to diabetes through modulation of
beta-cell function and modulates lipid levels in familial dyslipidemia. Emerging 
experimental evidence connects TCF7L2 to adipocyte metabolism and lipid
homeostasis, as well. We tested if TCF7L2 polymorphism is a risk factor for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and if it modulates liver injury,
glucose homeostasis, lipoprotein, and adipokine profiles in NASH. TCF7L2 genotype
and dietary habits of 78 nondiabetic normolipidemic NAFLD subjects and 156 age-, 
body mass index-, sex-matched healthy controls were assessed. In 39 biopsy-proven
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and matched controls TCF7L2 polymorphism was 
correlated to liver histology and oral glucose tolerance test-derived parameters 
of glucose homeostasis. Patients with NASH and controls consumed a high-fat meal 
and TCF7L2 genotype was correlated to postprandial circulating lipoproteins,
adipokines, and cytokeratin-18 fragments. The TCF7L2 CT/TT genotype was more
frequent in NAFLD and predicted the presence and severity of liver disease, of
beta-cell dysfunction, of reduced incretin effect and hepatic insulin resistance 
in NASH; it also modulated postprandial hepatocyte apoptosis, lipoproteins, and
adipokine profiles in both groups.CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 polymorphism predisposes to 
NAFLD and significantly impacts liver injury, glucose homeostasis, and
postprandial lipoprotein and adipokine responses to fat ingestion. This
polymorphism also modulates a fat-induced increase in circulating markers of
hepatocyte apoptosis in NASH. Targeting postprandial lipemia, at least in at-risk
TCF7L2 genotypes, may improve liver disease and glucose dysmetabolism in these
patients.

PMID: 19105201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Acta Diabetol. 2009 Sep;46(3):217-26. doi: 10.1007/s00592-008-0080-5. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

Association between insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity and type 2 diabetes
susceptibility variants identified in genome-wide association studies.

Ruchat SM(1), Elks CE, Loos RJ, Vohl MC, Weisnagel SJ, Rankinen T, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) risk have been identified by genome wide association studies (GWAS). The
objective of the present study was to investigate the impact of these SNPs on
T2DM intermediate phenotypes in order to clarify the physiological mechanisms
through which they exert their effects on disease etiology. We analysed 23 SNPs
in 9 T2DM genes (CDKAL1, CDKN2B, HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, TCF2, TCF7L2
and WFS1) in a maximum of 712 men and women from the Quebec Family Study. The
participants underwent a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and were
measured for glucose, insulin and C-peptide levels. Indices of insulin
sensitivity and insulin secretion were derived from fasting and OGTT
measurements. We confirmed the significant associations of variants in CDKAL1,
CDKN2B, HHEX/IDE, KCNJ11 and TCF7L2 with insulin secretion and also found
associations of some of these variants with insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance. IGF2BP2 and SLC30A8 SNPs were not associated with insulin secretion
but were with insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance (0.002 <or= P <or= 0.02).
To examine the joint effects of these variants and their contribution to T2DM
endophenotypes variance, stepwise regression models were used and the model R (2)
was computed. The variance in the phenotypes explained by combinations of
variants ranged from 2.0 to 8.5%. Diabetes-associated variants in CDKAL1, CDKN2B,
HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 are associated with physiological
alterations leading to T2DM, such as glucose intolerance, impaired insulin
secretion or insulin resistance, supporting their role in the disease aetiology. 
These variants were found to account for 2.0-8.5% of the variance of T2DM-related
traits.

PMID: 19082521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Feb;17(2):323-9. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.557. Epub
2008 Dec 4.

Association analyses between type 2 diabetes genes and obesity traits in pigs.

Du ZQ(1), Fan B, Zhao X, Amoako R, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

To investigate candidate genes involved in human type 2 diabetes (T2D) for
obesity-related phenotypes in pigs. Statistical association analyses of genes
with fat deposition were realized in a pig reference family constructed by two
breeds, Berkshire and Yorkshire. Extensive sequencing was then attempted to
discover the causative polymorphism. Genes implied in human T2D development,
TCF7L2, WFS1, FTO, SLC30A8, and GCKR, were mapped on Sus scrofa chromosomes 14,
8, 6, 4, and 3, respectively. Only TCF7L2 was significantly associated with five 
fat traits in pigs. Further investigation demonstrated that one haplotype (HapB),
but not the HapA (homologous to the region for human T2D susceptibility where
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7903146 is located), is significantly
associated with the fat-related traits. In HapB, two SNPs in TCF7L2 exon 8 and
intron 10 are significantly associated with five fat traits, and may be in
linkage disequilibrium with the causative variant with additive effects on all
four backfat traits, and the total lipid percentage. Pigs of genotype TT for the 
SNP in exon 8 have only one transcript isoform (the one without exon 4), and
lower backfat depth. Candidate gene analyses could provide novel ideas about how 
these genes function in T2D susceptibility in human, and support that the pig can
be a suitable model for human obesity and T2D research. Further replication of
this research in other pig populations should be considered, so that the
possibility of utilizing these genetic markers in pig breeding or in animal model
research can be explored.

PMID: 19057525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):505-10. doi: 10.2337/db08-0906. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Adiposity-related heterogeneity in patterns of type 2 diabetes susceptibility
observed in genome-wide association data.

Timpson NJ(1), Lindgren CM, Weedon MN, Randall J, Ouwehand WH, Strachan DP,
Rayner NW, Walker M, Hitman GA, Doney AS, Palmer CN, Morris AD, Hattersley AT,
Zeggini E, Frayling TM, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

OBJECTIVE: This study examined how differences in the BMI distribution of type 2 
diabetic case subjects affected genome-wide patterns of type 2 diabetes
association and considered the implications for the etiological heterogeneity of 
type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We reanalyzed data from the Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium genome-wide association scan (1,924 case subjects, 2,938
control subjects: 393,453 single-nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) after
stratifying case subjects (into "obese" and "nonobese") according to median BMI
(30.2 kg/m(2)). Replication of signals in which alternative case-ascertainment
strategies generated marked effect size heterogeneity in type 2 diabetes
association signal was sought in additional samples.
RESULTS: In the "obese-type 2 diabetes" scan, FTO variants had the strongest type
2 diabetes effect (rs8050136: relative risk [RR] 1.49 [95% CI 1.34-1.66], P = 1.3
x 10(-13)), with only weak evidence for TCF7L2 (rs7901695 RR 1.21 [1.09-1.35], P 
= 0.001). This situation was reversed in the "nonobese" scan, with FTO
association undetectable (RR 1.07 [0.97-1.19], P = 0.19) and TCF7L2 predominant
(RR 1.53 [1.37-1.71], P = 1.3 x 10(-14)). These patterns, confirmed by
replication, generated strong combined evidence for between-stratum effect size
heterogeneity (FTO: P(DIFF) = 1.4 x 10(-7); TCF7L2: P(DIFF) = 4.0 x 10(-6)).
Other signals displaying evidence of effect size heterogeneity in the genome-wide
analyses (on chromosomes 3, 12, 15, and 18) did not replicate. Analysis of the
current list of type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants revealed nominal evidence
for effect size heterogeneity for the SLC30A8 locus alone (RR(obese) 1.08
[1.01-1.15]; RR(nonobese) 1.18 [1.10-1.27]: P(DIFF) = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the impact of differences in case
ascertainment on the power to detect and replicate genetic associations in
genome-wide association studies. These data reinforce the notion that there is
substantial etiological heterogeneity within type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2628627
PMID: 19056611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Dec 4;9:106. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-106.

TCF7L2 variant genotypes and type 2 diabetes risk in Brazil: significant
association, but not a significant tool for risk stratification in the general
population.

Marquezine GF(1), Pereira AC, Sousa AG, Mill JG, Hueb WA, Krieger JE.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, University of São Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
g.marq2@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene are strongly associated with
large increments in type 2 diabetes risk in different populations worldwide. In
this study, we aimed to confirm the effect of the TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146
on diabetes risk in a Brazilian population and to assess the use of this genetic 
marker in improving diabetes risk prediction in the general population.
METHODS: We genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) rs7903146 of the 
TCF7L2 gene in 560 patients with known coronary disease enrolled in the MASS II
(Medicine, Angioplasty, or Surgery Study) Trial and in 1,449 residents of
Vitoria, in Southeast Brazil. The associations of this gene variant to diabetes
risk and metabolic characteristics in these two different populations were
analyzed. To access the potential benefit of using this marker for diabetes risk 
prediction in the general population we analyzed the impact of this genetic
variant on a validated diabetes risk prediction tool based on clinical
characteristics developed for the Brazilian general population.
RESULTS: SNP rs7903146 of the TCF7L2 gene was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes in the MASS-II population (OR = 1.57 per T allele, p = 0.0032),
confirming, in the Brazilian population, previous reports of the literature.
Addition of this polymorphism to an established clinical risk prediction score
did not increased model accuracy (both area under ROC curve equal to 0.776).
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele is associated with a 1.57 increased risk
for type 2 diabetes in a Brazilian cohort of patients with known coronary heart
disease. However, the inclusion of this polymorphism in a risk prediction tool
developed for the general population resulted in no improvement of performance.
This is the first study, to our knowledge, that has confirmed this recent
association in a South American population and adds to the great consistency of
this finding in studies around the world. Finally, confirming the biological
association of a genetic marker does not guarantee improvement on already
established screening tools based solely on demographic variables.

PMCID: PMC2632659
PMID: 19055834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Apr;117(4):186-90. doi:
10.1055/s-0028-1100419. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Loci of TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q and the susceptibility of their
genetic polymorphisms to type 2 diabetes.

Nordman S(1), Ostenson CG, Efendic S, Gu HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Sweden.

TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q23-25 reside within the linkage region for 
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Previous studies including ours have demonstrated that
genetic polymorphisms in these three loci are associated with T2D, respectively. 
But, it is unclear whether TCF7L2, independently or interactively with HHEX and
IDE, confer the susceptibility to T2D. In the present study, we first replicated 
genetic association study of the TCF7L2 gene in a Swedish cohort including 528
non-diabetic healthy controls and 243 T2D patients and then evaluated combining
effect from common risk polymorphisms in TCF7L2-HHEX-IDE loci. T2D patients were 
diagnosed in the intermediate study time. To avoid influence from anti-diabetic
treatment, baseline data in all T2D patients were used for analysis. We found
that SNPs rs7901695, rs4506565, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
strongly associated with T2D (p<0.004). In rs7903146, T2D patients carrying
genotypes CT or TT had higher fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels (p=0.042) and
lower HOMA-beta index (p=0.015) and BMI (p=0.015) compared to the patients
carrying CC genotype. Furthermore, the risk alleles from TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism either with IDE rs2251101 polymorphism (p=0.0257, OR=1.398) or with 
HHEX rs1544210 polymorphism (p=0.0024, OR=1.514) were significantly associated
with T2D. When risk alleles from three loci were combined, the association with
T2D remained significant (p=0.0018, OR=1.506). The present study thus provides
evidence that TCF7L2, as the main gene, together with HHEX and IDE loci have
combining effects on genetic predisposition to T2D.

PMID: 19053027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Feb;94(2):504-10. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2694. Epub
2008 Dec 2.

Single nucleotide transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms in
antiislet autoantibody-negative patients at onset of diabetes.

Yu J(1), Steck AK, Babu S, Yu L, Miao D, McFann K, Hutton J, Eisenbarth GS,
Klingensmith G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
jeesuk_yu@yahoo.com

CONTEXT: There is controversy as to whether type 2 diabetes genetic
susceptibility contributes to type 1 diabetes, and it is not known what
proportion of islet autoantibody-negative new onset subjects have type 2 diabetes
risk alleles.
OBJECTIVES: We designed this study to evaluate whether two type 2
diabetes-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with the development of islet
autoantibody-negative diabetes vs. islet autoantibody-positive diabetes in young 
patients and whether these SNPs are associated with specific clinical phenotypes.
DESIGN: Autoantibody against glutamic acid decarboxylase 65, islet cell antibody 
512bdc (form of IA-2), insulin, ZnT8 transporter, and cytoplasmic islet cell
antibody were assayed in patients with new onset diabetes seen at the Barbara
Davis Center using sera obtained within 2 wk of diagnosis. We genotyped two
noncoding variants in the TCF7L2 gene, rs12255372 and rs7903146, in diabetic
subjects and normal controls.
RESULTS: A total of 140 patients (15.7%) were negative for all islet
autoantibodies among 893 subjects less than age 25 at the onset of diabetes. The 
allele and genotype frequencies of two SNPs showed that these are associated
(odds ratio up to 4) with the development of diabetes in the
autoantibody-negative diabetic cohort, but not in the autoantibody-positive
diabetic cohort.
CONCLUSION: TCF7L2 type 2 diabetes susceptibility alleles are associated with
islet autoantibody-negative but not autoantibody-positive new onset diabetes in
young patients.

PMCID: PMC2646512
PMID: 19050058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;87(1):1-2. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.93. Epub 2008 Dec 2.

Dendritic cells: transcriptional control of plasmacytoid dendritic cell
development by E2-2.

Esashi E, Watowich SS.

PMID: 19048021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):493-8. doi: 10.2337/db07-1785. Epub 2008 Nov 25.

Replication study of candidate genes associated with type 2 diabetes based on
genome-wide screening.

Tabara Y(1), Osawa H, Kawamoto R, Onuma H, Shimizu I, Miki T, Kohara K, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research and Education, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon City, Ehime, Japan. tabara@m.ehime-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: The present study was conducted to confirm possible associations
between candidate genes from genome-wide association studies and type 2 diabetes 
in Japanese diabetic patients and a community-based general population. A total
of 11 previously reported single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8, and KCNJ11 genes were analyzed.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Candidate SNPs were genotyped in 506 type 2 diabetic
patients and 402 control subjects and meta-analyzed with six previous association
studies in Japanese patients. Associations with fasting plasma insulin levels
were investigated in a general population sample (n = 1,963, 61 +/- 13 years).
RESULTS: In our case-control subjects, susceptibility to type 2 diabetes was
replicated in TCF7L2 (rs12255372), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, rs7754840), HHEX
(rs7923837), IGF2BP2 (rs4402960 and rs1470579), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), and
SLC30A8 (rs13266634). In addition to these polymorphisms, meta-analysis confirmed
the association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility with KCNJ11 rs5219, TCF7L2
rs7903146, and HHEX rs1111875. The TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism showed the
highest odds ratio (OR) for type 2 diabetes (OR 1.714 [1.298-2.263]). Odds ratio 
of other polymorphisms ranged from 1.13 to 1.41. The risk allele of CDKAL1
rs7756992 was significantly associated with lower insulin levels in type 2
diabetic patients after adjustment for other confounding factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Type 2 diabetes susceptibility of seven candidate genes was
confirmed in Japanese. Conservation of susceptible loci for type 2 diabetes was
independent of ethnic background.

PMCID: PMC2628625
PMID: 19033397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 20;359(21):2220-32. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801869.

Clinical risk factors, DNA variants, and the development of type 2 diabetes.

Lyssenko V(1), Jonsson A, Almgren P, Pulizzi N, Isomaa B, Tuomi T, Berglund G,
Altshuler D, Nilsson P, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
valeri.lyssenko@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;5(4):187-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar 26;360(13):1360; author reply 1361.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar 26;360(13):1360; author reply 1361.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus is thought to develop from an interaction
between environmental and genetic factors. We examined whether clinical or
genetic factors or both could predict progression to diabetes in two prospective 
cohorts.
METHODS: We genotyped 16 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and examined
clinical factors in 16,061 Swedish and 2770 Finnish subjects. Type 2 diabetes
developed in 2201 (11.7%) of these subjects during a median follow-up period of
23.5 years. We also studied the effect of genetic variants on changes in insulin 
secretion and action over time.
RESULTS: Strong predictors of diabetes were a family history of the disease, an
increased body-mass index, elevated liver-enzyme levels, current smoking status, 
and reduced measures of insulin secretion and action. Variants in 11 genes
(TCF7L2, PPARG, FTO, KCNJ11, NOTCH2, WFS1, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, JAZF1, and
HHEX) were significantly associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes
independently of clinical risk factors; variants in 8 of these genes were
associated with impaired beta-cell function. The addition of specific genetic
information to clinical factors slightly improved the prediction of future
diabetes, with a slight increase in the area under the
receiver-operating-characteristic curve from 0.74 to 0.75; however, the magnitude
of the increase was significant (P=1.0x10(-4)). The discriminative power of
genetic risk factors improved with an increasing duration of follow-up, whereas
that of clinical risk factors decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: As compared with clinical risk factors alone, common genetic
variants associated with the risk of diabetes had a small effect on the ability
to predict the future development of type 2 diabetes. The value of genetic
factors increased with an increasing duration of follow-up.

2008 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 19020324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(11-12):972-82. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0339-2. Epub 2008 Nov
18.

Common coding variant in the TCF7L2 gene and study of the association with type 2
diabetes in Japanese subjects.

Kunika K(1), Tanahashi T, Numata S, Ueno S, Ohmori T, Nakamura N, Tsugawa K,
Miyawaki K, Moritani M, Inoue H, Itakura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Information, Institute for Genome Research, The University
of Tokushima, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Genetic variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene affect the
risk of type 2 diabetes in populations with multiple ethnic groups. However, a
comprehensive survey of this gene has not been done for a Japanese population.
Thus, we conducted this gene-based association study, in which the common genetic
variants were analyzed. Using 24 Japanese type 2 diabetic subjects, we first
screened a 9.5 kb region, which included the entire coding sequence, to assess
potential functional variants of TCF7L2. Sequencing revealed a common coding
variant (Pro477Thr) in exon 14 of TCF7L2 that was not enrolled in the public SNP 
database. Nineteen SNPs and the microsatellite DG10S478 were genotyped across the
gene in 2,877 unrelated Japanese subjects. This independent screen identified the
previously reported rs7903146 with a strongest association (allele P = 0.0001,
odds ratio = 1.59 [95% confidence interval 1.25-2.01]), but there was no
significant association between Pro477Thr and type 2 diabetes (allele P = 0.64). 
Expression of the Pro477Thr variant did not alter TCF7L2 expression in 30
lymphoblast cells. Although a genotypic effect of Pro477Thr on expression of
TCF7L2 was not apparent, Pro477Thr was identified as a common variant of TCF7L2
in 2,877 Japanese subjects. Further functional studies are required to determine 
the possible effect of this coding variant on type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 19012045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2008;20(8):935-46.

Progesterone regulation of the endometrial WNT system in the ovine uterus.

Satterfield MC(1), Song G, Hayashi K, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

WNT signalling regulates cell proliferation, differentiation, polarity and
organisation. The present study investigated the effects of progesterone (P4) on 
the endometrial WNT system in relation to blastocyst development and growth in
sheep. Ewes received daily intramuscular injections of either corn oil (CO)
vehicle or 25 mg P4 from 36 h after mating (Day 0) until hysterectomy on Day 9 or
12. Another group received P4 until Day 8 and 75 mg mifepristone (RU486) from Day
8 to Day 12. Early P4 treatment increased blastocyst growth on Days 9 and 12,
whereas no blastocysts were recovered from P4 + RU486-treated ewes. Levels of
WNT2 mRNA in the stroma and WNT11 and WNT7A mRNAs in the endometrial luminal
epithelia (LE) were reduced in P4 + RU486-treated ewes on Day 9, whereas WNT11
mRNA was reduced in the endometria of both P4- and P4 + RU486-treated ewes on Day
12. On Day 12, WNT2 mRNA was increased in the stroma, WNT7A mRNA was increased in
the LE and WNT5A mRNA was increased in the LE and stroma of P4 + RU486- compared 
with P4-treated ewes. DKK1 mRNA was absent in the endometrial stroma of P4 +
RU486-treated ewes. Expression of transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2) was
transiently increased in endometrial epithelia of P4-treated ewes on Day 9, but
decreased in these ewes on Day 12. MSX1 mRNA was decreased by P4 treatment on Day
9 and levels of both MSX1 and MSX2 mRNA were higher in P4 + RU486-treated ewes on
Day 12. Thus, P4 modulates the endometrial WNT system and elicits a transient
decline in selected WNT pathways and signalling components, which is hypothesised
to alter tight and adherens junctions, thereby stimulating blastocyst growth and 
development.

PMID: 19007558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 12;28(46):12010-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3800-08.2008.

Molecular correlates of laminar differences in the macaque dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus.

Murray KD(1), Rubin CM, Jones EG, Chalupa LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of California, Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

In anthropoid primates, cells in the magnocellular and parvocellular layers of
the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN) are distinguished by unique retinal 
inputs, receptive field properties, and laminar terminations of their axons in
visual cortex. To identify genes underlying these phenotypic differences, we
screened RNA from magnocellular and parvocellular layers of adult macaque dLGN
for layer-specific differences in gene expression. Real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR and in situ hybridization were used to confirm gene expression 
in adult and fetal macaque. Cellular localization of gene expression revealed 11 
new layer-specific markers, of which 10 were enriched in magnocellular layers
(BRD4, CAV1, EEF1A2, FAM108A1, INalpha, KCNA1, NEFH, NEFL, PPP2R2C, and SFRP2)
and one was enriched in parvocellular and koniocellular layers (TCF7L2). These
markers relate to functions involved in development, transcription, and cell
signaling, with Wnt/beta-catenin and neurofilament pathways figuring prominently.
A subset of markers was differentially expressed in the fetal dLGN during a
developmental epoch critical for magnocellular and parvocellular pathway
formation. These results provide new evidence for the molecular differentiation
of magnocellular and parvocellular streams through the primate dLGN.

PMCID: PMC2613947
PMID: 19005066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Diabetologia. 2009 Feb;52(2):253-61. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1196-4. Epub 2008
Nov 11.

Type 2 diabetes-associated genetic variants discovered in the recent genome-wide 
association studies are related to gestational diabetes mellitus in the Korean
population.

Cho YM(1), Kim TH, Lim S, Choi SH, Shin HD, Lee HK, Park KS, Jang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, 28 Yongon-Dong Chongno-Gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: New genetic variants associated with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus have been discovered in recent genome-wide association (GWA)
studies. The aim of the present study was to examine the association between
these diabetogenic variants and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: The study included 869 Korean women with GDM and 345 female and 287 male
Korean non-diabetic controls. We genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) rs7756992 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1; rs564398, rs1333040, rs10757278 and
rs10811661 in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B region; rs8050136 in FTO; rs1111875, rs5015480
and rs7923837 in HHEX; rs4402960 in IGF2BP2; and rs13266634 in SLC30A8. In
addition, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in TCF7L2; rs5215 and rs5219 in KCNJ11; and
rs3856806 and rs1801282 in PPARG were genotyped. The genotype frequencies in the 
GDM patients were compared with those in the non-diabetic controls.
RESULTS: Compared with controls (men and women combined), GDM was associated with
rs7756992 and rs7754840 (OR 1.55, 95% CI 1.34-1.79, p = 4.17 x 10(-9)) in CDKAL1;
rs10811661 (OR 1.49, 95% CI 1.29-1.72, p = 1.05 x 10(-7)) in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B
region; rs1111875 (OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.09-1.49, p = 0.003), rs5015480, and
rs7923837 in HHEX; rs4402960 (OR 1.18, 95% CI 1.01-1.38, p = 0.03) in IGF2BP2;
rs13266634 (OR 1.24, 95% CI 1.07-1.43, p = 0.005) in SLC30A8; and rs7903146 (OR
1.58, 95% CI 1.03-2.43, p = 0.038) in TCF7L2. The risk alleles of the SNPs
rs7756992 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1; rs10811661 in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B region; and
rs1111875, rs5015480 and rs7923837 in HHEX were associated with significant
decreases in the insulin AUC during a 100 g OGTT performed at the time of
diagnosis of GDM.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Some of the type 2 diabetes-associated genetic
variants that were discovered in the recent GWA studies are also associated with 
GDM in Koreans.

PMID: 19002430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cell Probes. 2009 Feb;23(1):52-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2008.10.001. Epub 2008
Nov 1.

Rapid and cost effective genotyping method for polymorphisms in PPARG, PPARGC1
and TCF7L2 genes.

Habalová V(1), Klimcáková L, Zidzik J, Tkác I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Safárik University, Tr.
SNP 1, 040 66 Kosice, Slovakia. viera.habalova@upjs.sk

Polymorphisms (rs1801282, rs8192678, rs7903146) of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG), peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PPARGC1A) and transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) have recently been associated with different diseases, mainly type 2
diabetes. An assay using unlabeled probes and the LightCycler or Rotor-Gene
instruments was developed for genotyping of these three polymorphisms. Asymmetric
polymerase chain reaction was used, followed by melting analysis of the unlabeled
probe/ssDNA amplicon duplex. Samples with the target genotypes were accurately
detected and easily distinguishable. Thus, genotyping using unlabeled probes is a
rapid, accurate and cost effective closed-tube method. These assays demonstrated 
100% specificity and sensitivity for the identification of selected polymorphisms
in PPARG, PPARGC1A and TCF7L2 genes.

PMID: 18996470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mutat Res. 2009 Jan 15;660(1-2):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.001. Epub
2008 Oct 15.

Colon tumor mutations and epigenetic changes associated with genetic
polymorphism: insight into disease pathways.

Slattery ML(1), Wolff RK, Curtin K, Fitzpatrick F, Herrick J, Potter JD, Caan BJ,
Samowitz WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Variation in genes associated with serum levels of proteins may be useful for
examining specific disease pathways. Using data from a large study of colon
cancer, we examine genetic variants in insulin, inflammation, estrogen,
metabolizing enzymes, and energy homeostasis genes to explore associations with
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG Island methylator phenotype (CIMP),
mutations of p53 in exons 5 through 8, and mutations in codons 12 and 13 of
Ki-ras. Insulin-related genes were associated with CIMP-positive and MSI tumors, 
with the strongest associations among aspirin users. The Fok1 vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) polymorphism was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors; the
Poly A and CDX2 VDR polymorphisms were associated only with Ki-ras-mutated
tumors. NAT2 was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors but not with
MSI tumors. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with p53 mutated
tumors. Most associations varied by recent aspirin/NSAID use: IL6 rs1800796 and
rs1800795 polymorphisms were associated inversely with tumor mutations in the
presence of aspirin/NSAIDs; POMC significantly reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated
tumors when aspirin/NSAIDs were not used; the TCF7L2 rs7903146 was associated
with reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated tumors in the presence of aspirin and
increased risk in the absence of aspirin. These data, although exploratory,
identify specific tumor subsets that may be associated with specific
exposures/polymorphism combinations. The important modifying effects of
aspirin/NSAIDs on associations with genetic polymorphisms reinforce the
underlying role of inflammation in the etiology of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2907671
PMID: 18992263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jan;94(1):145-50. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1336. Epub
2008 Nov 4.

Common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants associate with gestational diabetes.

Lauenborg J(1), Grarup N, Damm P, Borch-Johnsen K, Jørgensen T, Pedersen O,
Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pregnant Women with Diabetes, Department of Obstetrics, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
jeannet@lauenb.org

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to examine the association between gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) and 11 recently identified type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Type 2 diabetes risk variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1,
SLC30A8, HHEX/IDE, CDKN2A/2B, IGF2BP2, FTO, TCF2, PPARG, KCNJ11, and WFS1 loci
were genotyped in a cohort of women with a history of GDM (n = 283) and
glucose-tolerant women of the population-based Inter99 cohort (n = 2446).
RESULTS: All the risk alleles in the 11 examined type 2 diabetes risk variants
showed an odds ratio (OR) greater than 1 for the GDM group compared with the
control group ranging from 1.13 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.88-1.46] to 1.44 
(95% CI 1.19-1.74) except for the WFS1 rs10010131 variant with OR 0.87 (95% CI
0.73-1.05). Combined analysis of all 11 variants showed a highly significant
additive effect of multiple risk alleles on risk of GDM [OR 1.18 (95% CI
1.10-1.27)] per risk allele, P = 3.2 x 10(-6)). Applying receiver-operating
characteristic showed an area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve
of 0.62 for the genetic test alone and 0.73 when combining information on age,
body mass index, and genotypes of the 11 gene variants.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence in a prior GDM group of several previously proven
type 2 diabetes risk alleles equals the findings from association studies on type
2 diabetes. This supports the hypothesis that GDM and type 2 diabetes are two of 
the same entity.

PMID: 18984664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1185-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.115. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Celecoxib-induced degradation of T-cell factors-1 and -4 in human colon cancer
cells.

Takahashi-Yanaga F(1), Yoshihara T, Jingushi K, Miwa Y, Morimoto S, Hirata M,
Sasaguri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. yanaga@clipharm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

We examined the effect of celecoxib on the expression of T-cell factors (TCFs) to
clarify the mechanism by which celecoxib suppress beta-catenin/TCF-dependent
transcriptional activity without reducing the level of beta-catenin protein,
using HCT-116 cells. Celecoxib suppressed the expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in a 
time-dependent manner. Pretreatment of cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 
inhibited the loss of TCF-1 and TCF-4 induced by celecoxib, suggesting that
celecoxib induced the proteasome-dependent degradation of TCF-1 and TCF-4.
Beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcriptional activity was significantly decreased
after the treatment with celecoxib for 6 h and the pretreatment of the cells with
MG132 attenuated the effect of celecoxib. Further, celecoxib also suppressed the 
expression of TCF-1 and TCF-4 in another colon cancer cell line, DLD-1. Our
results suggest that TCF-1 and TCF-4 degradation may involve the inhibition of
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway induced by celecoxib.

PMID: 18983819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2009;69(2):282-7. doi: 10.1080/00365510802538188.

Comparison of genetic risk in three candidate genes (TCF7L2, PPARG, KCNJ11) with 
traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes in a population-based study--the
HUNT study.

Thorsby PM(1), Midthjell K, Gjerlaugsen N, Holmen J, Hanssen KF, Birkeland KI,
Berg JP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Laboratory, Endocrine Centre, Aker-Ullevål Diabetes Research Centre,
Aker University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 
p.m.thorsby@medisin.uio.no

We studied the impact of genetic and traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes
in a large, population-based study from Nord-Trøndelag county in Norway (HUNT),
in both cross-sectional and prospective design.MATERIAL AND METHODS: 65,905
individuals participated in the HUNT study. We studied a randomly selected group 
of 869 individuals with self-reported diabetes or non-fasting serum glucose
>or=11.1 mmol/L and 2,080 non-diabetic control subjects with non-fasting serum
glucose <5.5 mmol/L. Four candidate polymorphisms in the three genes TCF7L2
(rs12255372 and rs7903146), PPARG (rs1801282), KCNJ11 (rs5219) and traditional
risk factors were studied.
RESULTS: Risk alleles of the TCF7L2 gene showed increased risk of diabetes even
when controlled for traditional diabetes risk factors (diabetes in family, waist 
circumference, physical activity, BMI, SBP and total and HDL-cholesterol) in both
a cross-sectional and prospective setting (cross-sectional: rs12255372 OR 1.61
(1.31-1.99), rs7903146 OR 1.48 (1.20-1.83) and prospective: rs12255372 OR 1.59
(1.22-2.07), rs7903146 OR 1.47 (1.11-1.93)). The risk alleles of TCF7L2 indicated
impaired beta-cell function in patients and control subjects. The population
attributable risks for diabetes with TCF7L2 risk alleles were 15 % and with
diabetes in a first-degree relative 31 %.
CONCLUSION: The risk alleles of the TCF7L2 gene (rs12255372 and rs7903146) were
strongly associated with type 2 diabetes, even after controlling for traditional 
risk factors in both a cross-sectional and prospective setting. These risk
alleles were associated with indices of reduced beta-cell function.

PMID: 18972257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;24(9):486-90. doi: 10.1080/09513590802196379.

Genetic variants in TCF7L2 and KCNJ11 genes in a Greek population with polycystic
ovary syndrome.

Christopoulos P(1), Mastorakos G, Gazouli M, Panidis D, Deligeoroglou E, Katsikis
I, Papadias K, Diamandi-Kandarakis E, Creatsas G.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, University
of Athens, Athens, Greece. dr_christopoulos@yahoo.gr

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), the most common reproductive endocrine disorder
of premenopausal women, is strongly associated with hyperinsulinemia and type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Given the phenotypic overlap between PCOS and T2DM, our
objective was to investigate whether the TCF7L2 rs7903146(C/T) and the KCNJ11
E23K variants are involved in susceptibility to PCOS and related traits in a
Greek population. A total of 183 PCOS patients and 148 healthy controls
participated. All participants were Greeks. Blood was taken before hormonal
therapy. PCOS patients and healthy controls were genotyped for the TCF7L2 and
KCNJ11 variants. The T allele of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant was found to be
marginally over-represented in Greek patients with PCOS. There was no association
between KCNJ11 E23K polymorphism and PCOS in the present study. In addition,
there were no associations observed between hormone levels and insulin resistance
in PCOS carriers of TCF7L2 rs7903146 and KCNJ11 E23K variants. These data provide
evidence that the rs7903146 variant of the TCF7L2 gene might influence PCOS
predisposition, while no association is observed between the E23K variant of
KCNJ11 and susceptibility to PCOS and related traits.

PMID: 18958766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Organogenesis. 2008 Apr;4(2):81-6.

The what, where, when and how of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in pancreas development.

Murtaugh LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah; Department of Human Genetics; Salt Lake City, Utah USA.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, conserved across the animal kingdom, is
critical for the development of numerous tissues. Several recent studies have
focused on the roles that this pathway plays at different stages of pancreatic
organogenesis, including specification, proliferation, differentiation and
function. Whereas, during early endoderm development, inhibition of the pathway
is required for pancreatic specification, subsequent growth and differentiation
of the fetal organ depends on the pathway being active. This appears especially
true for exocrine acinar cells, the specification and differentiation of which
also depend on ß-catenin function. Whether the pathway plays an important role in
development or function of endocrine islet cells, including insulin-producing
ß-cells, remains controversial. This question is particularly important in light 
of recent studies that implicate a downstream component of the pathway, TCF7L2,
in human ß-cell function. This review will cover recent work on Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in pancreas development, emphasizing those points of controversy that
most urgently require further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2572215
PMID: 18953422  [PubMed]


226. Diabetes. 2009 Jan;58(1):285-9. doi: 10.2337/db08-0569. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) polymorphism and context-specific risk of 
type 2 diabetes in African American and Caucasian adults: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities study.

Yan Y(1), North KE, Ballantyne CM, Brancati FL, Chambless LE, Franceschini N,
Heiss G, Kottgen A, Pankow JS, Selvin E, West SL, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Although variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
are consistently associated with type 2 diabetes, large population-based studies 
of African Americans are lacking. Moreover, few studies have investigated the
effects of TCF7L2 on type 2 diabetes in the context of metabolic risk factors of 
type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated the association between the TCF7L2
rs7903146 polymorphism and type 2 diabetes in 2,727 African American and 9,302
Caucasian participants without diabetes who were inducted into the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study in 1987-1989 and followed for 9 years.
RESULTS: A total of 485 and 923 cases of type 2 diabetes were identified in
African Americans and Caucasians, respectively. Compared with homozygous CC
individuals, heterozygous CT and homozygous TT individuals had higher cumulative 
incidence of type 2 diabetes over 9 years of follow-up: 11.3% (95% CI 10.2-12.4) 
vs. 21.1% (20.8-21.4) and 27.9% (19.3-36.5) in African Americans, respectively,
and 9.7% (8.8-10.6) vs. 11.3% (10.2-12.4) and 13.6% (11.1-16.1), respectively, in
Caucasians. Individuals with the risk allele had the highest hazards of diabetes 
if they were obese and had low HDL cholesterol, followed by individuals with any 
one and none of the traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides the first significant evidence of association
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and type 2 diabetes risk in a large
African American population and also demonstrates that the diabetes risk conveyed
by the rs7903146 risk allele is substantially increased in the context of some
metabolic risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Our study findings need to be
replicated in other large, population-based studies.

PMCID: PMC2606888
PMID: 18931037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Dec;19(10):349-55. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2008.08.004. 
Epub 2008 Oct 14.

Wnt signaling: relevance to beta-cell biology and diabetes.

Welters HJ(1), Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 1
Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA. hannah.welters@joslin.harvard.edu

Interest in the importance of Wnt signaling in diabetes has risen after
identification of the transcription factor TCF7L2, a component of this pathway,
as a strong risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Here, we review emerging new
evidence that Wnt signaling influences endocrine pancreas development and
modulates mature beta-cell functions including insulin secretion, survival and
proliferation. Alterations in Wnt signaling might also impact other metabolic
tissues involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes, with TCF7L2 proposed to
modulate adipogenesis and regulate GLP-1 production. Together, these studies
point towards a role for Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes,
highlighting the importance of further investigation of this pathway to develop
new therapies for this disease.

PMID: 18926717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell. 2008 Oct 3;135(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.016.

Transcription factor E2-2 is an essential and specific regulator of plasmacytoid 
dendritic cell development.

Cisse B(1), Caton ML, Lehner M, Maeda T, Scheu S, Locksley R, Holmberg D, Zweier 
C, den Hollander NS, Kant SG, Holter W, Rauch A, Zhuang Y, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) represent a unique immune cell type
specialized in type I interferon (IFN) secretion in response to viral nucleic
acids. The molecular control of PDC lineage specification has been poorly
understood. We report that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor (E
protein) E2-2/Tcf4 is preferentially expressed in murine and human PDCs.
Constitutive or inducible deletion of murine E2-2 blocked the development of PDCs
but not of other lineages and abolished IFN response to unmethylated DNA.
Moreover, E2-2 haploinsufficiency in mice and in human Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
patients was associated with aberrant expression profile and impaired IFN
response of the PDC. E2-2 directly activated multiple PDC-enriched genes,
including transcription factors involved in PDC development (SpiB, Irf8) and
function (Irf7). These results identify E2-2 as a specific transcriptional
regulator of the PDC lineage in mice and humans and reveal a key function of E
proteins in the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC2631034
PMID: 18854153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Diabetologia. 2008 Dec;51(12):2242-51. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1151-4. Epub 2008 
Oct 14.

The search for putative unifying genetic factors for components of the metabolic 
syndrome.

Sjögren M(1), Lyssenko V, Jonsson A, Berglund G, Nilsson P, Groop L,
Orho-Melander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
CRC house 91, Malmö, Sweden. marketa.sjogren@med.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The metabolic syndrome is a cluster of factors contributing to
increased risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes but unifying
mechanisms have not been identified. Our aim was to study whether common
variations in 17 genes previously associated with type 2 diabetes or components
of the metabolic syndrome and variants in nine genes with inconsistent
association with at least two components of the metabolic syndrome would also
predict future development of components of the metabolic syndrome, individually 
or in combination.
METHODS: Genetic variants were studied in a large prospective study of 16,143
non-diabetic individuals (mean follow-up time 23 years) from the Malmö Preventive
Project. In this study, development of at least three of obesity (BMI >or= 30
kg/m(2)), dyslipidaemia (triacylglycerol >or= 1.7 mmol/l and/or lipid-lowering
treatment), hypertension (blood pressure >or= 140/90 mmHg and/or antihypertensive
medication) and hyperglycaemia (fasting plasma glucose >or= 5.6 mmol/l and/or
known diabetes) was defined as development of the metabolic syndrome. The risk of
developing at least three components of the metabolic syndrome or the individual 
components was calculated by logistic regression adjusted for age at baseline,
follow-up time and sex.
RESULTS: Polymorphisms in TCF7L2 (rs7903146, OR 1.10, 95% CI 1.04-1.17, p =
0.00097), FTO (rs9939609, OR 1.08, 95% CI 1.02-1.14, p = 0.0065), WFS1
(rs10010131, OR 1.07, 95% CI 1.02-1.13, p = 0.0078) and IGF2BP2 (rs4402960, OR
1.07, 95% CI 1.01-1.13, p = 0.021) predicted the development of at least three
components of the metabolic syndrome in both univariate and multivariate
analysis; in the case of TCF7L2, WFS1 and IGF2BP this was due to their
association with hyperglycaemia (p < 0.00001, p = 0.0033 and p = 0.027,
respectively) and for FTO it was due to its association with obesity (p = 0.004).
A polymorphism in the GCKR gene predicted dyslipidaemia (rs1260326, OR 1.15, 95% 
CI 1.09-1.22, p < 0.00001) but not the metabolic syndrome. None of the studied
polymorphisms was associated with more than two components of the metabolic
syndrome. A composite genotype score of the 17 polymorphisms associated with type
2 diabetes predicted the development of at least three components of the
metabolic syndrome (OR 1.04, p < 0.00001) and the development of hyperglycaemia
(OR 1.06, p < 0.00001). Carriers of >or=19 risk alleles had 51 and 72% increased 
risk of developing at least three components of the metabolic syndrome and
hyperglycaemia, respectively, compared with carriers of <or=12 risk alleles (p < 
0.00001 for both).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Polymorphisms in susceptibility genes for type 2
diabetes (TCF7L2, WFS1, IGF2BP2) and obesity (FTO) predispose to the metabolic
syndrome by increasing the risk of one specific component of the metabolic
syndrome. The findings argue against a unifying genetic component for the
metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 18853134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neurology. 2008 Oct 14;71(16):e39-41. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000327614.16569.08.

Pearls & Oy-sters: Oculopalatal tremor with one-and-a-half syndrome after pontine
hemorrhage.

Aladdin Y(1), Scozzafava J, Muayqil T, Saqqur M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, University of Alberta Hospital, 2E3 Walter McKenzie
Center, 8440-112 St., Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

PMID: 18852435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7368-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00744-08. Epub 2008 Oct 
13.

A genome-wide screen for beta-catenin binding sites identifies a downstream
enhancer element that controls c-Myc gene expression.

Yochum GS(1), Cleland R, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute and Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239, USA.
yochumg@ohsu.edu

Mutations in components of the Wnt signaling pathway initiate colorectal
carcinogenesis by deregulating the beta-catenin transcriptional coactivator.
beta-Catenin activation of one target in particular, the c-Myc proto-oncogene, is
required for colon cancer pathogenesis. beta-Catenin is known to regulate c-Myc
expression via sequences upstream of the transcription start site. Here, we
report that a more robust beta-catenin binding region localizes 1.4 kb downstream
from the c-Myc transcriptional stop site. This site was discovered using a
genome-wide method for identifying transcription factor binding sites termed
serial analysis of chromatin occupancy. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-scanning
assays demonstrate that the 5' enhancer and the 3' binding element are the only
beta-catenin and TCF4 binding regions across the c-Myc locus. When placed
downstream of a simian virus 40-driven promoter-luciferase construct, the 3'
element activated luciferase transcription when introduced into HCT116 cells.
c-Myc transcription is negligible in quiescent HCT116 cells but is induced when
cells reenter the cell cycle after the addition of mitogens. Using these cells,
we found that beta-catenin and TCF4 occupancy at the 3' enhancer precede
occupancy at the 5' enhancer. Association of c-Jun, beta-catenin, and TCF4
specifically with the downstream enhancer underlies mitogen stimulation of c-Myc 
transcription. Our findings indicate that a downstream enhancer element provides 
the principal regulation of c-Myc expression.

PMCID: PMC2593444
PMID: 18852287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetologia. 2008 Dec;51(12):2224-32. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1161-2. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene help to differentiate autoimmune from
non-autoimmune diabetes in young (15-34 years) but not in middle-aged (40-59
years) diabetic patients.

Bakhtadze E(1), Cervin C, Lindholm E, Borg H, Nilsson P, Arnqvist HJ, Bolinder J,
Eriksson JW, Gudbjörnsdottir S, Nyström L, Agardh CD, Landin-Olsson M, Sundkvist 
G, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences-Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University
Diabetes Center, Malmö, Sweden. ekaterine.bakhtadze@med.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Type 1 diabetes in children is characterised by autoimmune
destruction of pancreatic beta cells and the presence of certain risk genotypes. 
In adults the same situation is often referred to as latent autoimmune diabetes
in adults (LADA). We tested whether genetic markers associated with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes could help to discriminate between autoimmune and non-autoimmune 
diabetes in young (15-34 years) and middle-aged (40-59 years) diabetic patients.
METHODS: In 1,642 young and 1,619 middle-aged patients we determined: (1)
HLA-DQB1 genotypes; (2) PTPN22 and INS variable-number tandem repeat (VNTR)
polymorphisms; (3) two single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs7903146 and rs10885406)
in the TCF7L2 gene; (4) glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) and IA-2-protein
tyrosine phosphatase-like protein (IA-2) antibodies; and (5) fasting plasma
C-peptide.
RESULTS: Frequency of risk genotypes HLA-DQB1 (60% vs 25%, p = 9.4 x 10(-34); 45%
vs 18%, p = 1.4 x 10(-16)), PTPN22 CT/TT (34% vs 26%, p = 0.0023; 31% vs 23%, p =
0.034), INS VNTR class I/I (69% vs 53%, p = 1.3 x 10(-8); 69% vs 51%, p = 8.5 x
10(-5)) and INS VNTR class IIIA/IIIA (75% vs 63%, p = 4.3 x 10(-6); 73% vs 60%, p
= 0.008) was increased in young and middle-aged GAD antibodies (GADA)-positive
compared with GADA-negative patients. The type 2 diabetes-associated genotypes of
TCF7L2 CT/TT of rs7903146 were significantly more common in young GADA-negative
than in GADA-positive patients (53% vs 43%; p = 0.0004). No such difference was
seen in middle-aged patients, in whom the frequency of the CT/TT genotypes of
TCF7L2 was similarly increased in GADA-negative and GADA-positive groups (55% vs 
56%).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene help to
differentiate young but not middle-aged GADA-positive and GADA-negative diabetic 
patients, suggesting that young GADA-negative patients have type 2 diabetes and
that middle-aged GADA-positive patients are different from their young
GADA-positive counterparts and share genetic features with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18839133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2008 Sep 26. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN: Effect of TCF7L2 polymorphism on the genetic susceptibility to obesity
in the Tunisian population.

Bouhaha R(1), Kamoun HA, Ennafaa H, Baroudi T, Sassi R, Elgaaied A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Immunology and Human Pathologies, Faculty of Sciences 
of Tunis, 2092 Tunis, Tunisia.

Cet article a du être retiré conformément à la ligne de conduite d'Elsevier
concernant le retrait d'articles. Vous pouvez consulter le site
(http://www.elsevier.com/locate/withdrawalpolicy) pour de plus amples
renseignements. L'éditeur vous prie d'accepter ses excuses pour ce désagrément.

PMID: 18823720  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


234. Surg Endosc. 2009 Apr;23(4):700-4. doi: 10.1007/s00464-008-0001-2. Epub 2008 Sep 
21.

TCF7L2 expression in diabetic patients undergoing bariatric surgery.

Hindle AK(1), Brody F, Tevar R, Kluk B, Hill S, McCaffrey T, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The George Washington University Medical Center,
Washington, DC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The cause of diabetes in morbidly obese patients is multifactorial,
including genetic, social, and dietary components. Transcription factor 7-like 2 
(TCF7L2) is a gene that is related to the development of diabetes. This pilot
study examines TCF7L2 expression in liver samples obtained from morbidly obese
patients undergoing bariatric surgery. TCF7L2 expression is compared between
diabetic and nondiabetic patients.
METHODS: Liver samples were obtained from 20 morbidly obese patients undergoing
bariatric surgery. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was
extracted from tissue samples using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Inc, Carlsbad,
CA). Using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,CA),
cDNA was synthesized. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was done
using SYBR Green qPCR Reagents (Stratagene, Cedar Creek TX) and the 7300
Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City CA). Preoperative
demographic and gene expression data were correlated using univariate analysis
and logistic regression models. Only associations with a p-value less than 0.05
were considered significant.
RESULTS: For the entire group, there was no correlation between body mass index
(BMI) and TCF7L2 expression. In morbidly obese nondiabetic patients, there was a 
positive correlation between TCF7L2 expression and BMI (R(2)=0.21). In morbidly
obese diabetic patients, there was an inverse correlation between TCF7L2
expression and BMI (R(2)=0.58). There was no significant relationship between
TCF7L2 expression and age or glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).
CONCLUSIONS: The cause of diabetes is multifactorial but the data from our pilot 
study documents the relationship of TCF7L2 with type 2 diabetes in morbidly obese
patients.

PMID: 18806947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Nov;19(11):4875-87. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-05-0506. Epub 2008
Sep 17.

Snail and Slug promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition through
beta-catenin-T-cell factor-4-dependent expression of transforming growth
factor-beta3.

Medici D(1), Hay ED, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Members of the Snail family of transcription factors have been shown to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a fundamental mechanism of embryogenesis
and progressive disease. Here, we show that Snail and Slug promote formation of
beta-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF)-4 transcription complexes that bind to the
promoter of the TGF-beta3 gene to increase its transcription. Subsequent
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta3 signaling increases LEF-1 gene expression 
causing formation of beta-catenin-lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)-1 complexes that
initiate EMT. TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 stimulates this signaling mechanism by
up-regulating synthesis of Snail and Slug. TGF-beta1- and TGF-beta2-induced EMT
were found to be TGF-beta3 dependent, establishing essential roles for multiple
TGF-beta isoforms. Finally, we determined that beta-catenin-LEF-1 complexes can
promote EMT without upstream signaling pathways. These findings provide evidence 
for a unified signaling mechanism driven by convergence of multiple TGF-beta and 
TCF signaling molecules that confers loss of cell-cell adhesion and acquisition
of the mesenchymal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2575183
PMID: 18799618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Pathol. 2008 Dec;216(4):521-32. doi: 10.1002/path.2404.

Transcription factor Egr1 acts as an upstream regulator of beta-catenin
signalling through up-regulation of TCF4 and p300 expression during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Watanabe J, Kawaguchi M, Okayasu
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 pathway is involved in early signalling for
trans-differentiation towards the morular phenotype of endometrial carcinoma
cells, but little is known about the upstream regulators. Here we show that
transcription factor early growth response 1 (Egr1) acts as an initial mediator
through up-regulating the expression of TCF4 and p300. In an endometrial
carcinoma cell line with abundant oestrogen receptor alpha, Egr1 expression at
both mRNA and protein levels was significantly increased by serum and
17beta-oestradiol stimuli. Serum-stimulated cells also showed increased
expression of TCF4 and p300, while inhibition of Egr1 by specific siRNAs resulted
in decreased expression. Transfection of Egr1 led to transactivation of TCF4 as
well as p300 genes, through specific binding to a promoter region, and thus in
turn resulted in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin mediated by the
up-regulating TCF4. The overexpression also caused inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300-mediated transcription, probably through sequestration of 
p300. Egr1 promoter activity was increased by serum but not 17beta-oestradiol, in
contrast to the marked repression associated with TCF4, p300, and Egr1 itself,
indicating that the regulation involves several feedback loops. In clinical
samples, cells immunopositive for nuclear Egr1, as well as beta-catenin and TCF4,
were found to be sporadically distributed in glandular components of endometrial 
carcinoma with morules. A significant positive correlation between nuclear
beta-catenin and TCF4 was observed, but no such link was evident for Egr1,
probably due to the existence of negative feedback regulation. Together, these
data indicate that Egr1 may participate in modulation of the
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling pathway as an initial event during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells, through its impact on
several signalling networks.

PMID: 18798221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2389-400. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838470.

Development of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells depends on the combined action 
of the basic helix-loop-helix factor E2-2 and the Ets factor Spi-B.

Nagasawa M(1), Schmidlin H, Hazekamp MG, Schotte R, Blom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2386-8.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are central players in the innate and adaptive
immune response against viral infections. The molecular mechanism that underlies 
pDC development from progenitor cells is only beginning to be elucidated.
Previously, we reported that the Ets factor Spi-B and the inhibitors of DNA
binding protein 2 (Id2) or Id3, which antagonize E-protein activity, are
crucially involved in promoting or impairing pDC development, respectively. Here 
we show that the basic helix-loop-helix protein E2-2 is predominantly expressed
in pDC, but not in their progenitor cells or conventional DC. Forced expression
of E2-2 in progenitor cells stimulated pDC development. Conversely, inhibition of
E2-2 expression by RNA interference impaired the generation of pDC suggesting a
key role of E2-2 in development of these cells. Notably, Spi-B was unable to
overcome the Id2 enforced block in pDC development and moreover Spi-B transduced 
pDC expressed reduced Id2 levels. This might indicate that Spi-B contributes to
pDC development by promoting E2-2 activity. Consistent with notion, simultaneous 
overexpression of E2-2 and Spi-B in progenitor cells further stimulated pDC
development. Together our results provide additional insight into the
transcriptional network controlling pDC development as evidenced by the joint
venture of E2-2 and Spi-B.

PMID: 18792017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2386-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838763.

E-box protein E2-2 is a crucial regulator of plasmacytoid DC development.

Esashi E(1), Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Cancer Immunology Research, University
of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
eesashi@mdanderson.org

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2389-400.

DC play central roles in priming both innate and adaptive immune responses.
Multiple DC subsets have been identified on the basis of their phenotype and
function. Plasmacytoid DC (pDC) are professional IFN-producing cells that play an
essential role in anti-viral immunity. A series of recent studies demonstrates
that the regulation of pDC development is different from other types of DC. In
this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, new insight is provided into
how human pDC development is regulated by various transcription factors, in
particular by the Ets family protein Spi-B and E-box protein E2-2.

PMCID: PMC3652573
PMID: 18792016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Sep;8(6):519-32.

Genes, environment, and interactions in prevention of type 2 diabetes: a focus on
physical activity and lifestyle changes.

Qi L(1), Hu FB, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

Type 2 diabetes is one of the fastest growing public health problems worldwide.
Both environmental (e.g. physical activity, obesity, and diet) and genetic
factors are involved in the development of type 2 diabetes. The associations
between physical activity and diabetes risk have been assessed by a number of
prospective studies and clinical trials. The results from these studies
consistently indicate that the regular physical activity during occupation,
commuting, leisure time or daily life reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes by
15-60%; and lifestyle intervention, including counselling for physical activity, 
nutrition, and body weight, can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes by 40-60%
among adults with impaired glucose tolerance and by about 20% among general
individuals. In the past decade, studies using traditional linkage analysis and
candidate-gene association approach have found dozens of genes harboring common
variants that were related to the common-form type 2 diabetes. However, most
reported associations are lack of reproducibility, except TCF7L2, PPARG, CAPN10, 
and KCNJ11. Since 2007, seven genome-wide association (GWA) studies emerged to
generate a list of new diabetes genes. The genetic effects are largely of
moderate size. These findings provide novel insight into the diabetes etiology
and pave new avenue for predicting the disease risk using genetic information. In
addition, data especially those from intervention trials display preliminary but 
promising evidence that the genetic variants might interact with physical
activity in predisposing to type 2 diabetes. The gene-environment interactions
merit extensive exploration in large, prospective studies.

PMID: 18781959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Hum Mutat. 2008 Nov;29(11):E242-51. doi: 10.1002/humu.20859.

TCF4 deletions in Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome.

Giurgea I(1), Missirian C, Cacciagli P, Whalen S, Fredriksen T, Gaillon T, Rankin
J, Mathieu-Dramard M, Morin G, Martin-Coignard D, Dubourg C, Chabrol B, Arfi J,
Giuliano F, Claude Lambert J, Philip N, Sarda P, Villard L, Goossens M, Moncla A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U841, IMRB, Département de Génétique, Equipe 11, Créteil, F-94000,
France. irina.giurgea@inserm.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a probably underdiagnosed, syndromic mental
retardation disorder, marked by hyperventilation episodes and characteristic
dysmorphism (large beaked nose, wide mouth, fleshy lips, and clubbed fingertips).
PHS was shown to be caused by de novo heterozygous mutations of the TCF4 gene,
located in 18q21. We selected for this study 30 unrelated patients whose
phenotype overlapped PHS but which had been initially addressed for Angelman,
Mowat-Wilson, or Rett syndromes. In 10 patients we identified nine novel
mutations (four large cryptic deletions, including one in mosaic, and five small 
deletions), and a recurrent one. So far, a total of 20 different TCF4 gene
mutations have been reported, most of which either consist in deletion of
significant portions of the TCF4 coding sequence, or generate premature stop
codons. No obvious departure was observed between the patients harboring point
mutations and large deletions at the 18q21 locus, further supporting TCF4
haploinsufficiency as the molecular mechanism underling PHS. In this report, we
also further specify the phenotypic spectrum of PHS, enlarged to behavior, with
aim to increase the rate and specificity of PHS diagnosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18781613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Cell. 2008 Sep 9;14(3):226-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.08.004.

RUNX3 attenuates beta-catenin/T cell factors in intestinal tumorigenesis.

Ito K(1), Lim AC, Salto-Tellez M, Motoda L, Osato M, Chuang LS, Lee CW, Voon DC, 
Koo JK, Wang H, Fukamachi H, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore
138673.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2009 Mar 3;15(3):240.

In intestinal epithelial cells, inactivation of APC, a key regulator of the Wnt
pathway, activates beta-catenin to initiate tumorigenesis. However, other
alterations may be involved in intestinal tumorigenesis. Here we found that
RUNX3, a gastric tumor suppressor, forms a ternary complex with beta-catenin/TCF4
and attenuates Wnt signaling activity. A significant fraction of human sporadic
colorectal adenomas and Runx3(+/-) mouse intestinal adenomas showed inactivation 
of RUNX3 without apparent beta-catenin accumulation, indicating that RUNX3
inactivation independently induces intestinal adenomas. In human colon cancers,
RUNX3 is frequently inactivated with concomitant beta-catenin accumulation,
suggesting that adenomas induced by inactivation of RUNX3 may progress to
malignancy. Taken together, these data demonstrate that RUNX3 functions as a
tumor suppressor by attenuating Wnt signaling.

PMID: 18772112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Obes (Lond). 2008 Oct;32(10):1521-4. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2008.146. Epub 2008
Sep 2.

Evidence for an influence of TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 on insulin resistance 
and sensitivity indices in overweight children and adolescents during a lifestyle
intervention.

Reinehr T(1), Friedel S, Mueller TD, Toschke AM, Hebebrand J, Hinney A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nutrition Medicine, Vestische Hospital for Children
and Adolescents, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany.
T.Reinehr@kinderklinik-datteln.de

OBJECTIVE: The T allele of the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 in TCF7L2
(transcription factor 7 like 2 gene) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The aim of this study was to analyze whether there is an allele-dosage effect on 
changes of insulin resistance and sensitivity indices in overweight children
participating in a lifestyle intervention.
METHODS: We genotyped rs7903146 in 236 overweight children (mean age 10.7 years, 
mean body mass index (BMI) 28.1 kg/m2) completing a 1-year lifestyle
intervention. Degree of overweight as BMI-SDS, homeostasis model assessment for
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the insulin sensitivity index QUICKI were
measured before and after intervention.
RESULTS: Lifestyle intervention resulted in an overweight reduction of
-0.29+/-0.02 BMI-SDS. HOMA-IR (-0.63+/-0.22) and QUICKI (+0.008+/-0.003) indices 
improved significantly (P<0.05) in the course of the intervention in the 155
children with a decrease of BMI-SDS. There was an additive negative effect of T
allele on changes of HOMA-IR (P=0.041) and QUICKI (P=0.001) in linear regression 
analyses adjusted to changes of weight status, age, gender and pubertal stage.
CONCLUSION: Overweight children showed a negative dosage-allele effect per T
allele at single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 in TCF7L2 concerning an
improvement of insulin resistance and sensitivity after overweight reduction in a
lifestyle intervention. This finding further suggests that this polymorphism
might be involved in glucose metabolism.

PMID: 18762805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Hum Pathol. 2009 Jan;40(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.06.006. Epub 2008
Aug 27.

Frameshift mutations of Wnt pathway genes AXIN2 and TCF7L2 in gastric carcinomas 
with high microsatellite instability.

Kim MS(1), Kim SS, Ahn CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.

Frameshift mutations of genes with mononucleotide repeats are features of
colorectal and gastric cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI).
Deregulation of Wnt pathway is involved in the mechanisms of cancer development, 
and mutations of the Wnt-pathway genes have frequently been detected in cancers, 
indicating somatic mutations are important deregulation mechanisms of the Wnt
signaling in cancer development. Both AXIN2 and TCF7L2 genes in the Wnt pathway
possess mononucleotide repeats in their coding sequences and are considered as
candidate tumor suppressor genes. The aim of this study was to see whether AXIN2 
and TCF7L2 are altered by frameshift mutations in gastric carcinomas with MSI.
For this, we analyzed human AXIN2 exon 8 and TCF7L2 exon 14 in 32 gastric
carcinomas with high MSI, 13 gastric carcinomas with low MSI, and 47 gastric
carcinomas without MSI by a single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis.
Overall, we detected 9 AXIN2 and 6 TCF7L2 frameshift mutations in the
mononucleotide repeats in the cancers with MSH-H, and all of them were found in
MSH-H cancers (AXIN2, 28.1%; TCF7L2, 18.8%). Of the 32 high MSI cancers, 13
cancers (40.6%) harbored at least one of AXIN2 and TCF7L2 mutation, whereas 19
cancers (59.4%) harbored neither. The present data indicate that frameshift
mutations in both AXIN2 and TCF7L2 genes are common in gastric carcinomas with
high MSI and suggest that these mutations may contribute to development of
gastric cancers with high MSI by deregulating the Wnt signaling in the affected
cancer cells.

PMID: 18755497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Diabetes Care. 2008 Sep;31(9):e66. doi: 10.2337/dc08-0756.

Variation in the CDKAL1 gene is associated with the titer of antibodies to GAD.

Haupt A, Guthoff M, Gallwitz B, Haring HU, Fritsche A.

PMID: 18753662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):1989-92. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1124-7. Epub 2008 
Aug 22.

Beta cell glucose sensitivity is decreased by 39% in non-diabetic individuals
carrying multiple diabetes-risk alleles compared with those with no risk alleles.

Pascoe L(1), Frayling TM, Weedon MN, Mari A, Tura A, Ferrannini E, Walker M; RISC
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical School, Newcastle University, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Novel type 2 diabetes-susceptibility loci have been identified
with evidence that individually they mediate the increased diabetes risk through 
altered pancreatic beta cell function. The aim of this study was to test the
cumulative effects of diabetes-risk alleles on measures of beta cell function in 
non-diabetic individuals.
METHODS: A total of 1,211 non-diabetic individuals underwent metabolic assessment
including an OGTT, from which measures of beta cell function were derived.
Individuals were genotyped at each of the risk loci and then classified according
to the total number of risk alleles that they carried. Initial analysis focused
on CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 loci, which were individually associated with a
decrease in beta cell function in our cohort. Risk alleles for CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8,
IGF2BP2 and KCNJ11 loci were subsequently included into the analysis.
RESULTS: The diabetes-risk alleles for CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 showed an
additive model of association with measures of beta cell function. Beta cell
glucose sensitivity was decreased by 39% in those individuals with five or more
risk alleles compared with those individuals with no risk alleles (geometric mean
[SEM]: 84 [1.07] vs 137 [1.11] pmol min(-1) m(-2) (mmol/l)(-1), p = 1.51 x
10(-6)). The same was seen for the 30 min insulin response (p = 4.17 x 10(-7)).
The relationship remained after adding in the other four susceptibility loci (30 
min insulin response and beta cell glucose sensitivity, p < 0.001 and p = 0.003, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study shows how individual type 2 diabetes-risk 
alleles combine in an additive manner to impact upon pancreatic beta cell
function in non-diabetic individuals.

PMID: 18719881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):1993-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1129-2. Epub 2008
Aug 19.

Association of variants of the TCF7L2 gene with increases in the risk of type 2
diabetes and the proinsulin:insulin ratio in the Spanish population.

González-Sánchez JL(1), Martínez-Larrad MT, Zabena C, Pérez-Barba M, Serrano-Ríos
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid,
Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has
been related to type 2 diabetes in multiple ethnic groups. Here, we investigate
whether three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TCF7L2 gene are
associated with an impaired proinsulin:insulin ratio.
METHODS: In this study we examined the associations between SNPs rs7901695,
rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene and metabolic variables affecting
type 2 diabetes in a population-based study of 706 unrelated individuals (47% men
and 53% women; aged 35-74 years) from the province of Segovia in central Spain
(Castille), including 180 individuals with type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: The minor allele frequency of rs7901695, rs7903146 and rs12255372 was
significantly higher in diabetic patients compared with that in non-diabetic
individuals. The T (minor) allele of the variant rs7903146 was significantly
associated with a greater OR for type 2 diabetes adjusted for age, sex and BMI in
logistic regression analysis: OR 1.29 (95% CI 1.06-1.57, p = 0.01). This risk
allele was also associated with an increased proinsulin:insulin ratio after OGTT.
Similar results were obtained for the other TCF7L2 SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide further evidence supporting the
belief that the TCF7L2 gene is a major determinant of type 2 diabetes risk in
Spain, as in other southern European populations. The association with increased 
proinsulin:insulin ratio after an OGTT suggests that TCF7L2 might be involved in 
insulin synthesis and processing.

PMID: 18712344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. OMICS. 2008 Dec;12(4):237-44. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0044.

Dissecting the nutrigenomics, diabetes, and gastrointestinal disease interface:
from risk assessment to health intervention.

Ferguson LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. l.ferguson@auckland.ac.nz

The promise of nutrigenomics is of personalized nutrition that will lead to
optimization or maintenance of good health and/or prevention of the development
of chronic diseases. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a leading health problem 
throughout the world. Adherence to a Mediterranean-style diet, regulation of
carbohydrate intake, and regular exercise may be desirable. Four key genes were
originally identified: KCNJ11, potassium inwardly rectifying channel, subfamily
J, member 11 gene; PPAR-gamma, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma; 
TCF2, transcription factor 2, hepatic; WFS1, Wolfram syndrome 1. However,
genome-wide association studies are accelerating our knowledge of the genetics of
complex diseases, and have identified seven other key genes in T2DM: CDKAL1, CDK5
regulatory subunit associated protein-like 1; CDKN2, cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A; FTO, fat mass and obesity associated; HHEX, haematopoietically
expressed homeobox; IDE, insulin-degrading enzyme; IGF2BP2, insulin-like growth
factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2; SLC30A8, solute carrier family 30 (zinc
transporter), member 8; TCF7L2, transcription factor 7-like 2 (T-cell specific,
HMG-box). Gene-nutrient or gene-environment interactions may be important. For
example, the PPAR-gamma variant genotype is responsive to different types and
levels of lipids, while the effect of the FTO variant can be partly overcome by
exercise. Several of these genes act through their effect on the gastrointestinal
tract. There are analytical challenges in analyzing the high-dimensional datasets
relating genes, nutrients, and other variables to their influence on health and
disease processes. An even greater challenge may be in implementing population
level changes in diet and behavior to fully exploit the potential of this field.

PMID: 18710364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Aug 16;9:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-80.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms do not predict susceptibility to diabetes in tropical
calcific pancreatitis but may interact with SPINK1 and CTSB mutations in
predicting diabetes.

Mahurkar S(1), Bhaskar S, Reddy DN, Prakash S, Rao GV, Singh SP, Thomas V,
Chandak GR.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Group, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, 
Hyderabad, India. mahurkar@ccmb.res.in

BACKGROUND: Tropical calcific pancreatitis (TCP) is a type of chronic
pancreatitis unique to developing countries in tropical regions and one of its
important features is invariable progression to diabetes, a condition called
fibro-calculous pancreatic diabetes (FCPD), but the nature of diabetes in TCP is 
controversial. We analysed the recently reported type 2 diabetes (T2D) associated
polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene using a case-control approach, under the
hypothesis that TCF7L2 variants should show similar association if diabetes in
FCPD is similar to T2D. We also investigated the interaction between the TCF7L2
variants and N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations, since they are strong
predictors of risk for TCP.
METHODS: Two polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were
analyzed by direct sequencing in 478 well-characterized TCP patients and 661
healthy controls of Dravidian and Indo-European ethnicities. Their association
with TCP with diabetes (FCPD) and without diabetes was tested in both populations
independently using chi-square test. Finally, a meta analysis was performed on
all the cases and controls for assessing the overall significance irrespective of
ethnicity. We dichotomized the whole cohort based on the presence or absence of
N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations and further subdivided them into TCP and FCPD
patients and compared the distribution of TCF7L2 variants between them.
RESULTS: The allelic and genotypic frequencies for both TCF7L2 polymorphisms, did
not differ significantly between TCP patients and controls belonging to either of
the ethnic groups or taken together. No statistically significant association of 
the SNPs was observed with TCP or FCPD or between carriers and non-carriers of
N34S SPINK1 and L26V CTSB mutations. The minor allele frequency for rs7903146 was
different between TCP and FCPD patients carrying the N34S SPINK1 variant but did 
not reach statistical significance (OR = 1.59, 95% CI = 0.93-2.70, P = 0.09),
while, TCF7L2variant showed a statistically significant association between TCP
and FCPD patients carrying the 26V allele (OR = 1.69, 95% CI = 1.11-2.56, P =
0.013).
CONCLUSION: Type 2 diabetes associated TCF7L2 variants are not associated with
diabetes in TCP. Since, TCF7L2 is a major susceptibility gene for T2D, it may be 
hypothesized that the diabetes in TCP patients may not be similar to T2D. Our
data also suggests that co-existence of TCF7L2 variants and the SPINK1 and CTSB
mutations, that predict susceptibility to exocrine damage, may interact to
determine the onset of diabetes in TCP patients.

PMCID: PMC2529279
PMID: 18706099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Metabolism. 2008 Sep;57(9):1227-31. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2008.04.016.

TCF7L2 gene expression in human visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue is
differentially regulated but not associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Kovacs P(1), Berndt J, Ruschke K, Klöting N, Schön MR, Körner A, Stumvoll M,
Blüher M.

Author information: 
(1)Junior Research Group N06, Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research
Leipzig, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
peter.kovacs@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Variants in the TCF7L2 gene have been associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM), but the causal variant(s) is still unknown. We studied the TCF7L2
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in paired samples of visceral and subcutaneous
adipose tissue from 49 subjects using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and its relation to obesity and T2DM. All subjects were genotyped for
the previously described TCF7L2 diabetes risk variants. Independent of age, sex, 
obesity, and diabetes status, we found >3-fold higher TCF7L2 mRNA expression in
subcutaneous compared with visceral adipose tissue. There was no correlation
between visceral and subcutaneous TCF7L2 expression. No differences in adipose
tissue TCF7L2 mRNA expression levels were found between diabetic and nondiabetic 
subjects, or between lean and obese subjects (all Ps > .05). In addition, there
was no association between TCF7L2 genetic variants and mRNA expression. Based on 
our data, TCF7L2 mRNA expression is fat-depot specific but does not seem to
provide the mechanistic link explaining genetic association with T2DM.

PMID: 18702948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Diabetologia. 2008 Oct;51(10):1771-80. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1084-y. Epub 2008 
Aug 12.

The WNT signalling pathway and diabetes mellitus.

Jin T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
tianru.jin@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2008 Oct;51(10):1768-70.

The WNT signalling pathway is involved in many physiological and
pathophysiological activities. WNT ligands bind to Frizzled receptors and
co-receptors (LDL receptor-related protein 5/6), triggering a cascade of
signalling events. The major effector of the canonical WNT signalling pathway is 
the bipartite transcription factor beta-catenin/T cell transcription factor
(beta-cat/TCF), formed by free beta-cat and one of the four TCFs. The WNT pathway
is involved in lipid metabolism and glucose homeostasis, and mutations in LRP5
may lead to the development of diabetes and obesity. beta-Cat/TCF is also
involved in the production of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 in the
intestinal endocrine L cells. More recently, genome-wide association studies have
identified TCF7L2 as a diabetes susceptibility gene, and individuals carrying
certain TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms could be more susceptible to the
development of type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, beta-cat is able to interact with
forkhead box transcription factor subgroup O (FOXO) proteins. Since FOXO and TCF 
proteins compete for a limited pool of beta-cat, enhanced FOXO activity during
ageing and oxidative stress may attenuate WNT-mediated activities. These
observations shed new light on the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes as an
age-dependent disease.

PMID: 18696049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):3122-8. doi: 10.2337/db08-0425. Epub 2008 Aug 11.

Predicting type 2 diabetes based on polymorphisms from genome-wide association
studies: a population-based study.

van Hoek M(1), Dehghan A, Witteman JC, van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG, Oostra BA, 
Hofman A, Sijbrands EJ, Janssens AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):2911-4.

OBJECTIVE: Prediction of type 2 diabetes based on genetic testing might improve
identification of high-risk subjects. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies
identified multiple new genetic variants that associate with type 2 diabetes. The
predictive value of genetic testing for prediction of type 2 diabetes in the
general population is unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated 18 polymorphisms from recent GWA
studies on type 2 diabetes in the Rotterdam Study, a prospective,
population-based study among homogeneous Caucasian individuals of 55 years and
older (genotyped subjects, n = 6,544; prevalent cases, n = 686; incident cases
during follow-up, n = 601; mean follow-up 10.6 years). The predictive value of
these polymorphisms was examined alone and in addition to clinical
characteristics using logistic and Cox regression analyses. The discriminative
accuracy of the prediction models was assessed by the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curves (AUCs).
RESULTS: Of the 18 polymorphisms, the ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B-rs1412829, FTO,
IGF2BP2, JAZF1, SLC30A8, TCF7L2, and WFS1 variants were associated with type 2
diabetes risk in our population. The AUC was 0.60 (95% CI 0.57-0.63) for
prediction based on the genetic polymorphisms; 0.66 (0.63-0.68) for age, sex, and
BMI; and 0.68 (0.66-0.71) for the genetic polymorphisms and clinical
characteristics combined.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that 9 of 18 well-established genetic risk variants were
associated with type 2 diabetes in a population-based study. Combining genetic
variants has low predictive value for future type 2 diabetes at a
population-based level. The genetic polymorphisms only marginally improved the
prediction of type 2 diabetes beyond clinical characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2570410
PMID: 18694974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Diabetes Care. 2008 Oct;31(10):2056-61. doi: 10.2337/dc08-0368. Epub 2008 Aug 8.

Predicting diabetes: clinical, biological, and genetic approaches: data from the 
Epidemiological Study on the Insulin Resistance Syndrome (DESIR).

Balkau B(1), Lange C, Fezeu L, Tichet J, de Lauzon-Guillain B, Czernichow S,
Fumeron F, Froguel P, Vaxillaire M, Cauchi S, Ducimetière P, Eschwège E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U780-IFR69, Villejuif, France/University Paris-Sud, Orsay, France.
beverley.balkau@inserm.fr

OBJECTIVE: To provide a simple clinical diabetes risk score and to identify
characteristics that predict later diabetes using variables available in the
clinic setting as well as biological variables and polymorphisms.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Incident diabetes was studied in 1,863 men and 1,954
women, 30-65 years of age at baseline, with diabetes defined by treatment or by
fasting plasma glucose >or=7.0 mmol/l at 3-yearly examinations over 9 years.
Sex-specific logistic regression equations were used to select variables for
prediction.
RESULTS: A total of 140 men and 63 women developed diabetes. The predictive
clinical variables were waist circumference and hypertension in both sexes,
smoking in men, and diabetes in the family in women. Discrimination, as measured 
by the area under the receiver operating curves (AROCs), were 0.713 for men and
0.827 for women, a little higher than for the Finish Diabetes Risk (FINDRISC)
score, with fewer variables in the score. Combining clinical and biological
variables, the predictive equation included fasting glucose, waist circumference,
smoking, and gamma-glutamyltransferase for men and fasting glucose, BMI,
triglycerides, and diabetes in family for women. The number of TCF7L2 and IL6
deleterious alleles was predictive in both sexes, but after including the above
clinical and biological variables, this variable was only predictive in women (P 
< 0.03) and the AROC statistics increased only marginally.
CONCLUSIONS: The best clinical predictor of diabetes is adiposity, and baseline
glucose is the best biological predictor. Clinical and biological predictors
differed marginally between men and women. The genetic polymorphisms added little
to the prediction of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2551654
PMID: 18689695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 7;8:77. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-77.

Cold-inducible RNA binding protein (CIRP), a novel XTcf-3 specific target gene
regulates neural development in Xenopus.

van Venrooy S(1), Fichtner D, Kunz M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (TH), 76131 Karlsruhe,
Germany. stephanie.vanvenrooy@zi2.uka.de

BACKGROUND: As nuclear mediators of wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Lef/Tcf
transcription factors play important roles in development and disease. Although
it is well established, that the four vertebrate Lef/Tcfs have unique functional 
properties, most studies unite Lef-1, Tcf-1, Tcf-3 and Tcf-4 and reduce their
function to uniformly transduce wnt/beta-catenin signaling for activating wnt
target genes. In order to discriminate target genes regulated by XTcf-3 from
those regulated by XTcf-4 or Lef/Tcfs in general, we performed a subtractive
screen, using neuralized Xenopus animal cap explants.
RESULTS: We identified cold-inducible RNA binding protein (CIRP) as novel XTcf-3 
specific target gene. Furthermore, we show that knockdown of XTcf-3 by injection 
of an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide results in a general broadening of the
anterior neural tissue. Depletion of XCIRP by antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide injection leads to a reduced stability of mRNA and an enlargement
of the anterior neural plate similar to the depletion of XTcf-3.
CONCLUSION: Distinct steps in neural development are differentially regulated by 
individual Lef/Tcfs. For proper development of the anterior brain XTcf-3 and the 
Tcf-subtype specific target XCIRP appear indispensable. Thus, regulation of
anterior neural development, at least in part, depends on mRNA stabilization by
the novel XTcf-3 target gene XCIRP.

PMCID: PMC2527318
PMID: 18687117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cas Lek Cesk. 2008;147(7):381-6.

[Gene expression profiling in prediction of tumor response to neoadjuvant
concomitant chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally advanced rectal carcinoma:
pilot study].

[Article in Slovak]

Garajová I(1), Slabý O, Svoboda M, Fabian P, Silák J, Smerdová T, Kocák I,
Ruzicková J, Hoch J, Vyzula R.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika komplexní onkologické péce, Masarykuv onkologický ustav, Brno.
garajova@mou.cz

BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant concomitant chemoradiotherapy has become a standard
treatment of locally advanced rectal adenocarcinomas (LARA). It can reduce tumor 
volume, thus increases a feasibility of sphincter-sparing surgery, shows less
acute toxicity, improves local control rate. It is based on fluoropyrimidines
(5-fluorouracil, capecitabine) with concurrent radiotherapy. The aim of the study
was to evaluate the capability of gene expression method to identify
nonresponders (NR) pretherapeutically.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 17 patients with LARA, clinical stage II, III according to
IUCC were enrolled into our pilot study. Response to therapy was determined
clinically by transrectal ultrasonography and CT/MRI before and after therapy and
histopathologically by TRG (tumor regression grade) according to Mandard.
Patients with TRG 1-2 were included to responders group (R) and patients with TRG
4-5 composed NR group. Gene expression levels of 440 genes were obtained by
low-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Gene expression data analysis based on
SAM (Significance Analysis of Microarrays) and t-test methods identified 8 genes 
(RB1, RBBP4, HYOUI, JUNB, MDM4, CANX, MMP2, TCF7L2) significantly upregulated in 
NR.
CONCLUSIONS: Validation of identified changes on the mRNA level (Real-Time PCR)
and on protein level (immunohistochemistry) is ongoing. We suggest that
low-density oligonucleotide microarray technology could contribute to
individualize the therapy of patients with LARA.

PMID: 18678097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Expert Opin Med Diagn. 2008 Aug;2(8):991-1002. doi: 10.1517/17530059.2.8.991.

The clinical utility of genetic risk variants in type 2 diabetes.

Gulcher J(1), Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)Decode Genetics, Inc., Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland
jeffrey.gulcher@decode.is.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes is one of the first success stories in the
application of genome-wide linkage and association studies to find genetic
variants contributing to its risk.
OBJECTIVE: Are the genetic markers found so far useful in predicting which
individuals are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes? Can they find which
patients with prediabetes are more likely to convert to type 2 diabetes and
therefore may benefit the most from lifestyle or pharmacologic prevention
strategies?
METHODS: The literature pertaining to the discovery and replications of genes
contributing to type 2 diabetes was focused on.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Substantial risk for type 2 diabetes is represented by the
top 8 genes, including TCF7L2, and in certain circumstances may be useful for
prevention strategies targeted to those with highest risk.

PMID: 23495871  [PubMed]


256. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Jul 26;9:72. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-72.

Weak or no association of TCF7L2 variants with Type 2 diabetes risk in an Arab
population.

Alsmadi O(1), Al-Rubeaan K, Mohamed G, Alkayal F, Al-Saud H, Al-Saud NA,
Al-Daghri N, Mohammad S, Meyer BF.

Author information: 
(1)Saudi Diagnostic Laboratory, Research Centre, King Faisal Specialist Hopital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. oalsmadi@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: The rs7903146 and rs12255372 variants of TCF7L2 have been strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk in most populations studied to date.
Meta-analysis of 27 different studies has resulted in a global OR of 1.46
[1.42-1.51] (rs7903146 variant). Thus far, despite a high incidence of T2D, the
role of this variant in Arabs has not been established.
METHODS: We performed a case-control association study using 522 Saudi T2D
patients (WHO criteria), and 346 controls (age > 60; fasting plasma glucose < 7
mmol/L). Genotyping was performed by pyrosequencing. Statistical analyses were
performed using SPSS version 13.0 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).
RESULTS: For rs7903146, the T allele frequency of the cases (0.415) was not
different from that observed in the controls (0.405). The crude odds ratio (OR)
was 1.04 with a 95% CI of 0.86-1.27 (P = 0.675). For rs12255372, the T allele
frequency of the cases (0.368) was not different from that observed in the
controls (0.355). Retrospective power calculations based upon an OR of 1.46
reported in a comprehensive meta-analysis of TCF7L2 risk, indicated this study
was sufficiently powered (96.92%; alpha = 0.05) to detect an effect of similar
magnitude to that reported for rs7903146.
CONCLUSION: Our study is consistent with weak or no association of T2D in Arabs
with the two TCF7L2 variants, however it cannot rule out an effect of other SNPs 
in this gene. Future studies in this population are required to confirm our
findings and may indicate the presence of yet to be defined genetic risk factors 
for T2D.

PMCID: PMC2515290
PMID: 18655717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1989-99. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007121291. Epub 2008
Jul 23.

TCF7L2 variants associate with CKD progression and renal function in
population-based cohorts.

Köttgen A(1), Hwang SJ, Rampersaud E, Coresh J, North KE, Pankow JS, Meigs JB,
Florez JC, Parsa A, Levy D, Boerwinkle E, Shuldiner AR, Fox CS, Kao WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology &
Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1840-2.

Genetic variants may increase susceptibility to both diabetes and kidney disease.
Whether known diabetes-associated variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene are associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression and
markers of kidney function is unknown. Participants of the Atherosclerosis Risk
in Communities Study (ARIC; n = 11,061 self-identified white and n = 4014 black),
Framingham Heart Offspring Cohort (FHS; n = 2468), and Heredity and Phenotype
Intervention Heart Study (HAPI; n = 861) were genotyped at five (ARIC) and two
(FHS) common TCF7L2 variants. The diabetes-conferring risk alleles at rs7903146
and rs7901695 were significantly associated with CKD progression among ARIC
participants overall and among those without baseline diabetes. The overall
adjusted hazard ratios per rs7903146 T allele were 1.17 (95% confidence interval 
[CI] 1.04 to 1.32) for white individuals and 1.20 (95% CI 1.03 to 1.41) for black
individuals. Similarly, the overall hazard ratios per rs7901695 C allele were
1.19 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.34) for white individuals and 1.27 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.48)
for black individuals. The FHS cohort supported these results: The rs7903146 T
allele was significantly associated with lower estimated GFR (P = 0.01) and
higher cystatin C (P = 0.004) in adjusted analyses overall and among those
without diabetes. In the HAPI cohort, the rs7901695 C allele was significantly
associated with lower estimated GFR in adjusted analyses (P = 0.049), as were
several variants upstream and downstream of TCF7L2 (P < 0.003). No identified
variant in the ARIC or FHS cohorts was associated with albuminuria. In
conclusion, several population-based samples suggest that variants in the TCF7L2 
gene are associated with reduced kidney function or CKD progression, overall and 
specifically among participants without diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2551569
PMID: 18650481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2008 Oct;54(1):1-17. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00454.x. Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Exported proteins in probiotic bacteria: adhesion to intestinal surfaces, host
immunomodulation and molecular cross-talking with the host.

Sánchez B(1), Bressollier P, Urdaci MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Biochimie Appliquée, UMR 5248 CBMN
CNRS-Université Bordeaux 1-ENITAB, 33175 Gradignan Cedex, France.
b-sanchez@enitab.fr

The group of exported proteins of a bacterium are those proteins that are sorted 
from the cytoplasm to the bacterial surface or to the surroundings of the
microorganism. In probiotic bacteria, these proteins are of special relevance
because they might determine important traits such as adhesion to intestinal
surfaces and molecular cross-talking with the host. Current knowledge about the
presence and biological relevance of exported proteins produced by the main
genera of probiotic bacteria in the gastrointestinal environment is reviewed in
this minireview. As will be seen, some of these proteins are involved in host
adhesion or are able to modify certain signalization pathways within host cells, 
whereas others are important for the physiology of probiotic bacteria in the
gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 18631181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Aug 15;146A(16):2053-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32419.

Disruption of the TCF4 gene in a girl with mental retardation but without the
classical Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Kalscheuer VM(1), Feenstra I, Van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Smeets DF, Menzel C,
Ullmann R, Musante L, Ropers HH.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
kalscheu@molgen.mpg.de

We have characterized a de novo balanced translocation t(18;20)(q21.1;q11.2) in a
female patient with mild to moderate mental retardation (MR) and minor facial
anomalies. Breakpoint-mapping by fluorescence in situ hybridization indicated
that on chromosome 18, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TCF4 gene 
is disrupted by the breakpoint. TCF4 plays a role in cell fate determination and 
differentiation. Only recently, mutations in this gene have been shown to result 
in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS), defined by severe MR, epilepsy, mild growth
retardation, microcephaly, daily bouts of hyperventilation starting in infancy,
and distinctive facial features with deep-set eyes, broad nasal bridge, and wide 
mouth with widely spaced teeth. Breakpoint mapping on the derivative chromosome
20 indicated that here the rearrangement disrupted the chromodomain helicase DNA 
binding protein 6 (CHD6) gene. To date, there is no indication that CHD6 is
involved in disease. Our study indicates that TCF4 gene mutations are not always 
associated with classical PHS but can give rise to a much milder clinical
phenotype. Thus, the possibility exists that more patients with a less severe
encephalopathy carry a mutation in this gene.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18627065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 15;105(28):9697-702. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804709105. Epub 2008 Jul 10.

A genome-wide RNAi screen for Wnt/beta-catenin pathway components identifies
unexpected roles for TCF transcription factors in cancer.

Tang W(1), Dodge M, Gundapaneni D, Michnoff C, Roth M, Lum L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Wnt family of secreted proteins coordinate cell fate decision-making in a
broad range of developmental and homeostatic contexts. Corruption of Wnt signal
transduction pathways frequently results in degenerative diseases and cancer. We 
have used an iterative genome-wide screening strategy that employs multiple
nonredundant RNAi reagents to identify mammalian genes that participate in
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway response. Among the genes that were assigned high
confidence scores are two members of the TCF/LEF family of DNA-binding proteins
that control the transcriptional output of the pathway. Surprisingly, we found
that the presumed cancer-promoting gene TCF7L2 functions instead as a
transcriptional repressor that restricts colorectal cancer (CRC) cell growth.
Mutations in TCF7L2 identified from cancer genome sequencing efforts abolish its 
ability to function as a transcriptional regulator and result in increased CRC
cell growth. We describe a growth-promoting transcriptional program that is
likely activated in CRC tumors with compromised TCF7L2 function. Taken together, 
the results from our screen and studies focused on members of the TCF/LEF gene
family refine our understanding of how aberrant Wnt pathway activation sustains
CRC growth.

PMCID: PMC2453074
PMID: 18621708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;93(10):4013-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0855. Epub 
2008 Jul 8.

Impact of TCF7L2 rs7903146 on insulin secretion and action in young and elderly
Danish twins.

Wegner L(1), Hussain MS, Pilgaard K, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Vaag A, Poulsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. lwgn@steno.dk

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the regulation and metabolic effects of TCF7L2 gene
expression in human sc fat and skeletal muscle and the impact of the TCF7L2,
rs7903146, T-allele on gene expression and measures of glucose metabolism
including insulin secretion and peripheral and hepatic insulin action.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The rs7903146 was genotyped in 1) a population-based
sample of 587 twins (55-64 yr) with glucose tolerance ranging from normal to type
2 diabetes and 2) a population of 196 nondiabetic young (22-31 yr) and elderly
(57-66 yr) twins. All subjects underwent oral glucose tolerance tests, and
population 2 was additionally examined with iv glucose tolerance tests and
hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamps.
RESULTS: Elderly T-allele carriers had decreased plasma insulin responses and
lower disposition index, whereas insulinogenic index was similar between genotype
groups. Elderly nondiabetic T-allele carriers had increased peripheral insulin
sensitivity (P = 0.03). Young T-allele carriers had impaired hepatic insulin
sensitivity (P = 0.04) independent of plasma insulin levels. TCF7L2 gene
expression in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue was not explained by genotype,
sex, aerobic capacity, birth, or adult anthropometry and was not associated with 
in vivo glucose metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs7903146 T-allele associates with hepatic insulin resistance
and diminished glucose-stimulated plasma insulin secretion. Our study does not
provide evidence of a role of TCF7L2 gene expression in sc fat tissue and muscle 
tissue in the regulation of glucose homeostasis. This suggests that the primary
defect of rs7903146 T-allele carriers is impairment of insulin secretion rather
than a defect in insulin action in peripheral tissues.

PMID: 18611970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2008 Jul;50(7):481. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03022.x.

Hyperventilation and the Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.

Ouvrier R.

PMID: 18611190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;83(1):130; author reply 131. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.06.002.

Personalized genetics: a responsible approach.

Stephan D, Agus D, Nierenberg M, Silver E.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Mar;82(3):593-9.

PMCID: PMC2443841
PMID: 18606304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Mol Model. 2008 Oct;14(10):879-86. doi: 10.1007/s00894-008-0331-y. Epub 2008
Jul 5.

Computational models for the shuttling motion of the macrocycle in rotaxane-based
molecular switches.

Hirva P(1), Haukka M, Pakkanen TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Joensuu, B.O.Box 111, FI-80101,
Joensuu, Finland. pipsa.hirva@joensuu.fi

The shuttling motion of a macrocycle in rotaxane-based molecular switching
devices has been studied by computational density functional methods. In the test
case, energy profiles corresponding to the dethreading process of different types
of guest molecules in a cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) host verified the
experimental preference of the tetrathiafulvalene recognition site over the
dioxynaphthalene site in a Stoddart-Heath type molecular device. Furthermore,
modification of the redox state of either the macrocycle or the guest molecule
resulted in considerable changes in the computational energy profiles, which can 
be utilized in explaining the behavior of the host-guest system. In order to
study the effect of chemical oxidation/reduction in the guest molecule, we have
investigated a prototypical shaft including two octahedral ruthenium complexes
linked by a conjugated C(14) carbon chain, where the shuttling motion can be
triggered by changing the electronic environment of the active complexes with
ligand exchange reactions. The computational results also indicated effective
communication between the macrocycle and the conjugated carbon chain, therefore
showing the importance of non-covalent host-guest interactions in the control of 
the motion.

PMID: 18604570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;22(11):2383-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0135. Epub 2008 Jul
3.

The Wnt signaling pathway effector TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Jin T(1), Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Physiology, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. tianru.jin@utoronto.ca

Since the relationship between TCF7L2 (also known as TCF-4) polymorphisms and
type 2 diabetes mellitus was identified in 2006, extensive genome-wide
association examinations in different ethnic groups have further confirmed this
relationship. As a component of the bipartite transcription factor
beta-catenin/TCF, TCF7L2 is important in conveying Wnt signaling during embryonic
development and in regulating gene expression during adulthood. Although we still
do not know mechanistically how the polymorphisms within the intron regions of
TCF7L2 affect the risk of type 2 diabetes, this transcriptional regulator was
shown to be involved in stimulating the proliferation of pancreatic beta-cells
and the production of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 in intestinal 
endocrine L cells. In this review, we introduce background knowledge of TCF7L2 as
a component of the Wnt signaling pathway, summarize recent findings demonstrating
the association between TCF7L2 polymorphisms and the risk of type 2 diabetes,
outline experimental evidence of the potential function of TCF7L2 in pancreatic
and intestinal endocrine cells, and present our perspective views.

PMID: 18599616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Jul 3;9:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-59.

Impact of nine common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms in Asian Indian Sikhs:
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala), IGF2BP2, TCF7L2 and FTO variants confer a significant risk.

Sanghera DK(1), Ortega L, Han S, Singh J, Ralhan SK, Wander GS, Mehra NK,
Mulvihill JJ, Ferrell RE, Nath SK, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Dharambir-Sanghera@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified several 
unsuspected genes associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) with previously unknown
functions. In this investigation, we have examined the role of 9 most significant
SNPs reported in GWA studies: [peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2
(PPARG2; rs 1801282); insulin-like growth factor two binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2; 
rs 4402960); cyclin-dependent kinase 5, a regulatory subunit-associated
protein1-like 1 (CDK5; rs7754840); a zinc transporter and member of solute
carrier family 30 (SLC30A8; rs13266634); a variant found near cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A; rs10811661); hematopoietically expressed homeobox
(HHEX; rs 1111875); transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2; rs 10885409);
potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 11(KCNJ11; rs 5219); and
fat mass obesity-associated gene (FTO; rs 9939609)].
METHODS: We genotyped these SNPs in a case-control sample of 918 individuals
consisting of 532 T2D cases and 386 normal glucose tolerant (NGT) subjects of an 
Asian Sikh community from North India. We tested the association between T2D and 
each SNP using unconditional logistic regression before and after adjusting for
age, gender, and other covariates. We also examined the impact of these variants 
on body mass index (BMI), waist to hip ratio (WHR), fasting insulin, and glucose 
and lipid levels using multiple linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Four of the nine SNPs revealed a significant association with T2D;
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala) [odds ratio (OR) 0.12; 95% confidence interval (CI)
(0.03-0.52); p = 0.005], IGF2BP2 [OR 1.37; 95% CI (1.04-1.82); p = 0.027], TCF7L2
[OR 1.64; 95% CI (1.20-2.24); p = 0.001] and FTO [OR 1.46; 95% CI (1.11-1.93); p 
= 0.007] after adjusting for age, sex and BMI. Multiple linear regression
analysis revealed significant association of two of nine investigated loci with
diabetes-related quantitative traits. The 'C' (risk) allele of CDK5 (rs 7754840) 
was significantly associated with decreased HDL-cholesterol levels in both NGT (p
= 0.005) and combined (NGT and T2D) (0.005) groups. The less common 'C' (risk)
allele of TCF7L2 (rs 10885409) was associated with increased LDL-cholesterol (p =
0.010) in NGT and total and LDL-cholesterol levels (p = 0.008; p = 0.003,
respectively) in combined cohort.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is first study reporting the role of some
recently emerged loci with T2D in a high risk population of Asian Indian origin. 
Further investigations are warranted to understand the pathway-based functional
implications of these important loci in T2D pathophysiology in different
ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC2481250
PMID: 18598350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Oct;40(10):722-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1078730. Epub 2008 Jul
2.

Variants of the PPARG, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and TCF7L2 genes confer risk of
type 2 diabetes independently of BMI in the German KORA studies.

Herder C(1), Rathmann W, Strassburger K, Finner H, Grallert H, Huth C, Meisinger 
C, Gieger C, Martin S, Giani G, Scherbaum WA, Wichmann HE, Illig T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Diabetes Research, German Diabetes Centre, Leibniz
Centre at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
christian.herder@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies identified novel gene variants that are
associated with type 2 diabetes. However, results were not always consistent
across different populations. Thus, the aims of this study were (i) to replicate 
findings from previous GWA studies in mainly Northern European populations using 
data from the German KORA 500 K diabetes project and (ii) to assess the impact of
BMI on associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and type 2
diabetes. The KORA 500 K diabetes project includes 433 cases with validated type 
2 diabetes and 1 438 nondiabetic controls from two population-based KORA surveys.
Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 500 K Array 
Set. We investigated associations between SNPs and type 2 diabetes in 10 genes
that have been reported to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes or were in
complete or near-complete linkage disequilibrium with these variants. SNPs in the
CDKAL1 gene showed the strongest association with type 2 diabetes [range of age
and sex-adjusted odds ratios (OR): 1.30-1.39, p-values 0.0008-0.0004]. In
addition, we found evidence for association of SNPs in the genes PPARG, IGF2BP2, 
HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO with type 2 diabetes in the same directions as previously
described (p<0.05), but not for WFS1, CDKN2A/B, KCNJ11, or EXT2. Adjustment for
BMI slightly strengthened the link between CDKAL1 and type 2 diabetes, but had
almost no impact on the other associations. We conclude that gene variants of
CDKAL1, PPARG, IGF2BP2, HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO predispose to type 2 diabetes in
the German KORA 500 K study population. These associations appear to be
independent of BMI.

PMID: 18597214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Signal. 2008 Sep;20(9):1632-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.05.003. Epub
2008 May 18.

Smad2 functions as a co-activator of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway
independent of Smad4 through histone acetyltransferase activity of p300.

Hirota M(1), Watanabe K, Hamada S, Sun Y, Strizzi L, Mancino M, Nagaoka T,
Gonzales M, Seno M, Bianco C, Salomon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Both canonical Wnt/beta-catenin and TGFbeta/Smad signaling pathways coordinately 
regulate pattern formation during embryogenesis as well as tumor progression.
Evidence of cross-talk between these two pathways has been reported. Here we
demonstrated that the Activin-like kinase 4 (Alk4)/Smad2 pathway facilitates the 
transcriptional activity of the oncogenic Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf4 pathway through a
novel Smad4-independent mechanism. Upon activation, Smad2 physically interacted
with Tcf4, beta-catenin and the co-activator p300 to enhance transcriptional
activity of beta-catenin/Tcf4 through the histone acetyltransferase activity of
p300. Transactivation by Smad2 was independent of a Smad-binding element (SBE)
and Smad4. Indeed, the enhancement of beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity 
by activated Smad2 was negatively regulated by the presence of Smad4. Moreover, a
tumor-derived missense mutant of Smad2, lacking the ability to bind to Smad4 was 
still able to enhance the Tcf4 transcriptional reporter in the presence of
beta-catenin and Tcf4. Our findings suggest that Smad2 may function as an
activator of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf4 signaling through a
SBE/Smad4-independent pathway.

PMCID: PMC2578836
PMID: 18595660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5177-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6234.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha obstructs a Wnt signaling pathway by inhibiting
the hARD1-mediated activation of beta-catenin.

Lim JH(1), Chun YS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Chongno-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Although a splice variant of mouse mARD1s was found to acetylate and destabilize 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), human hARD1 has no such activities.
Nonetheless, hARD1 has been reported to bind directly with HIF-1alpha. Here, we
addressed the functional significance of the hARD1-HIF-1alpha interaction.
Because hARD1 acetylates and activates beta-catenin, we examined whether
HIF-1alpha regulates the hARD1-mediated activation of Wnt signaling. It was found
that HIF-1alpha binds hARD1 through the oxygen-dependent degradation domain and, 
in so doing, dissociates hARD1 from beta-catenin, which prevents beta-catenin
acetylation. In LiCl-stimulated HEK293 or cancer cell lines with active Wnt
signaling, beta-catenin acetylation and activity were suppressed in hypoxia, and 
these suppressions were mediated by HIF-1alpha. Moreover, HIF-1alpha disruption
of hARD1/beta-catenin repressed TCF4 activity, resulting in c-Myc suppression and
p21(cip1) induction. In addition, we confirmed that the HIF-1alpha NH(2) terminal
inactivates TCF4 by directly binding beta-catenin. In conclusion, HIF-1alpha was 
found to inactivate the Wnt signaling by binding to hARD1 or beta-catenin, which 
may contribute to the hypoxia-induced growth arrest of tumor cells.

PMID: 18593917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;198(1):17-28. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0085.

Mechanisms underlying proglucagon gene expression.

Jin T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
tianru.jin@utoronto.ca

The proglucagon gene (gcg) encodes a number of peptide hormones that are of
cell-type specifically expressed in the pancreatic islets, the distal ileum and
the large intestine, as well as certain brain neuronal cells. These hormones are 
important in controlling blood glucose homeostasis, intestinal cell
proliferation, and satiety. More importantly, the major hormone generated in the 
pancreas (i.e. glucagon) exerts opposite effects to the ones that are produced in
the intestines (i.e. glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and GLP-2). To understand
the mechanisms underlying cell-type-specific gcg expression may lead to the
identification of novel drug targets to control endogenous hormone production for
therapeutic purposes. Extensive in vitro examinations have shown that more than a
half dozen of homeodomain (HD) proteins are able to interact with the gcg gene
promoter and activate its expression. In vivo 'knock-out' mouse studies, however,
cannot demonstrate the role of some of them (i.e. Cdx-2, Brn-4, and Nkx6.2) in
the development of pancreatic islet alpha-cells, suggesting that these HD
proteins may exert some redundant functions in the genesis of gcg-producing
cells. Investigations have also revealed that gcg expression is controlled by
both protein kinase A and Epac signaling pathways in response to cAMP elevation, 
and cell-type specifically controlled by insulin and the effectors of the Wnt
signaling pathway. This review summarizes our current understanding on the
mechanisms underlying gcg transcription and presented my interpretations on how
the interactions between different signaling networks regulate gcg expression.

PMID: 18577568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Feb;19(2):140-5. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.02.009. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

The effect of WNT5B IVS3C>G on the susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in UK
Caucasian subjects.

Salpea KD(1), Gable DR, Cooper JA, Stephens JW, Hurel SJ, Ireland HA, Feher MD,
Godsland IF, Humphries SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, British Heart
Foundation Laboratories, The Rayne Building, Royal Free and University College
Medical School, 5 University Street, London, WC1E 6JF, UK. k.salpea@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The wnt signaling pathway regulates adipogenesis and insulin
secretion. The WNT5B gene has been reported to confer susceptibility to type 2
diabetes (T2D) in the Japanese population, and we therefore evaluated this in
Caucasian subjects with respect to obesity status.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Two thousand seven hundred and one Caucasian middle-aged men
from the prospective Northwick Park Heart Study II (NPHSII) of whom 153 developed
T2D over 15 years and 1268 Caucasian middle-aged patients with T2D (60% male)
were genotyped using a TaqMan assay for the IVS3C>G variant (rs2270031) in the
WNT5B gene. The frequency of the G allele was 0.026 (0.022-0.031) in controls and
0.031 (0.025-0.039) in patients with diabetes, p=0.24. In the prospective
analysis, G allele carriers with BMI below 26 kg/m(2) had significantly higher
T2D hazard risk [3.46 (1.34-8.96), p=0.01]. Comparing T2D cases with NPHSII
controls, the G allele was associated with a significantly higher T2D odds ratio 
(OR) of 1.50 (1.06-2.12), p=0.02 in subjects with BMI lower than 30 kg/m(2).
Increasing BMI had a smaller effect on risk in G allele carriers. The effect on
risk was not explained by genotype being associated with any classical T2D risk
factor. When the combined effect of this SNP and the TCF7L2 IVS3C>T SNP
(rs7903146) was evaluated, a 2.07 (1.40-3.07), p<0.0001 fold higher OR was
observed in carriers of both the rare alleles.
CONCLUSION: Variation in WNT5B predisposes to T2D in the absence of obesity. The 
increase in risk conferred by the presence of both WNT5B and TCF7L2 variants
strengthens the role of wnt signaling in T2D.

PMID: 18555673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Oct;40(10):713-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1078720. Epub 2008 Jun
10.

TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 and predisposition for type 2 diabetes mellitus in 
obese children.

Roth CL(1), Hinney A, Reinehr T, Schreiner F, Nguyen TT, Müller T, Scholl C,
Woelfle J, Karpushova A, Schäfer H, Nöthen MM, Hebebrand J.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology, Seattle Children's Hospital Research Institute, 1900
Ninth Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101, USA. christian.roth@seattlechildrens.org

Polymorphism RS7903146 in transcription factor 7-like2 gene ( TCF7L2) is
associated with type 2-diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in adults. Concerned with
predisposition for diabetes mellitus in obese children, we tested if risk
genotypes TC and TT of rs7903146 are more common in obese children with increased
homeostasis model assessment insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) compared to obese
controls with normal HOMA-IR. As exploratory analysis, we also calculated
beta-cell function for these risk genotypes and measured glucagon-like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) in a subgroup. The cohort was 401 obese children (BMI > 2SDS; 211 female;
59% presenting increased HOMA-IR) from two German outpatient obesity referral
centers. Genotype distributions in patients presenting increased HOMA-IR (TT:
10.18%, CT: 35.65%, CC: 54.17%) and in patients with normal HOMA-IR (TT: 8.66%,
CT: 42.67%, CC: 48.67%) provided no significant effect of these two risk
genotypes (p > 0.2). Correction for possible confounder's gender, age, pubertal
stage, and BMI revealed no association with glucose metabolism parameters
including GLP-1. However, exploratory HOMA-B% index was comparatively higher in
TT-homozygotes (p=0.021) as compared to CC-homozygotes. We conclude that even
though TT and CT genotypes were not higher in patients presenting elevated
HOMA-IR, the higher HOMA-B% index in TT-homozygotes indicates TCF7L2 to be a
susceptibility gene for the development of impaired glucose tolerance in obese
children as demonstrated in several adult cohort studies.

PMID: 18546086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2008 Jul;11(4):385-92. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e328304d970.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 gene and increased risk of type 2 diabetes: an 
update.

Lyssenko V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
Malmoe, Sweden. Valeri.Lyssenko@med.lu.se

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to provide a comprehensive
evaluation of the most important type 2 diabetes gene to date, transcription
factor 7 like-2.
RECENT FINDINGS: An important step to find genetic causes of type 2 diabetes in
2006 was the identification of the fact that variants in the gene encoding
transcription factor 7 like-2 reproducibly increase susceptibility to type 2
diabetes in almost all populations studied. This gene has since then emerged as
the most important type 2 diabetes gene. Genetic variants in transcription factor
7 like-2 confer a strong risk of type 2 diabetes possibly mediated by altering
expression of transcription factor 7 like-2 in pancreatic islets. Risk variants
in the transcription factor 7 like-2 influence insulin secretions both in vitro
and in vivo. The risk T allele of this single nucleotide polymorphism also seems 
to have effects on the enteroinsular axis and the relationship between the
incretin hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide and its target
hormones, glucagon and insulin. Given transcription factor 7 like-2s' central
role in the Wnt signaling pathway, it would be important to define whether the
variant is associated with increased or decreased Wnt signaling.
SUMMARY: The fact that transcription factor 7 like-2 is by far the strongest type
2 diabetes susceptibility gene to date emphasizes the importance of exploring the
potential of manipulating this pathway in future treatment of the disease.

PMID: 18541996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2008 Jul;11(4):371-7. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e32830349a1.

New gene variants alter type 2 diabetes risk predominantly through reduced
beta-cell function.

Perry JR(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Over the past 18 months, the number of gene loci robustly
associated with type 2 diabetes has risen from three to 18. In this study, we
focus on explaining the genome-wide approach that has led to most of these
discoveries and discuss some of the early insights the new gene loci have
provided into the aetiology of type 2 diabetes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent genome-wide association studies have provided an
important resource for furthering our understanding of type 2 diabetes disease
mechanisms. Genes previously unsuspected of playing a role in diabetes are now
implicated in the disease process. These include genes in cell cycling control
(CDKN2A/2B, CDKAL1), transcription factors (TCF7L2, HHEX), and ion channels
(SLC30A8). These variants are all associated with insulin-secretory defects in
the general population and show little if any relationship to insulin resistance.
Two common variants (near or in FTO and MC4R) alter diabetes risk through a
primary effect on obesity.
SUMMARY: Recent genome-wide association studies show that there are now 18 gene
loci associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes. Most of these T2D gene loci
affect insulin secretion.

PMID: 18541994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 1;68(11):4258-68. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5805.

Defective claudin-7 regulation by Tcf-4 and Sox-9 disrupts the polarity and
increases the tumorigenicity of colorectal cancer cells.

Darido C(1), Buchert M, Pannequin J, Bastide P, Zalzali H, Mantamadiotis T,
Bourgaux JF, Garambois V, Jay P, Blache P, Joubert D, Hollande F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 5203, Institut de Génomique 
Fonctionnelle, INSERM U661, Université Montpellier 1, 2, Montpellier, France.

Tight junctions have recently emerged as essential signaling regulators of
proliferation and differentiation in epithelial tissues. Here, we aimed to
identify the factors regulating claudin-7 expression in the colon, and analyzed
the consequences of claudin-7 overexpression in colorectal carcinoma (CRC). In
healthy human colonic crypts, claudin-7 expression was found to be low in the
stem/progenitor cell compartment, where Tcf-4 activity is high, but strong in
differentiated and postmitotic cells, where Tcf-4 is inactive. In contrast,
claudin-7 was overexpressed in areas with high Tcf-4 target gene levels in CRC
samples. In vitro, Tcf-4 was able to repress claudin-7 expression, and the high
mobility group-box transcription factor Sox-9 was identified as an essential
mediator of this effect. Claudin-7 was strongly expressed in the intestine of
Sox-9-deficient mice and in CRC cells with low Sox transcriptional activity.
Sox-9 overexpression in these cells reinstated claudin-7 repression, and residual
claudin-7 was no longer localized along the basolateral membrane, but was instead
restricted to tight junctions. Using HT-29Cl.16E CRC cell spheroids, we found
that Sox-9-induced polarization was completely reversed after virus-mediated
claudin-7 overexpression. Claudin-7 overexpression in this context increased
Tcf-4 target gene expression, proliferation, and tumorigenicity after injection
in nude mice. Our results indicate that Tcf-4 maintains low levels of claudin-7
at the bottom of colonic crypts, acting via Sox-9. This negative regulation seems
to be defective in CRC, possibly due to decreased Sox-9 activity, and the
resulting claudin-7 overexpression promotes a loss of tumor cell polarization and
contributes to tumorigenesis.

PMID: 18519685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jul 1;146A(13):1713-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32304.

A further example of a distinctive autosomal recessive syndrome comprising
neonatal diabetes mellitus, intestinal atresias and gall bladder agenesis.

Chappell L(1), Gorman S, Campbell F, Ellard S, Rice G, Dobbie A, Crow Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

We report a patient born to consanguineous parents as a further example of a
recently described phenotype comprising neonatal diabetes, intestinal atresias
and gall bladder agenesis. Other reports have described cases with overlapping
patterns including malrotation, biliary atresia and pancreatic hypoplasia (e.g.
as described by Martínez-Frías). We propose that these cases may represent
variations of the same syndrome. It is likely that this disorder is inherited as 
an autosomal recessive trait. Our case is the first to have neonatal diabetes
without a demonstrable structural pancreatic abnormality, showing that a deficit 
in pancreatic function is involved. We sequenced genes with a recognized role in 
monogenic forms of diabetes, including KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, IPF1, HNF1beta,
NeuroD1 and TCF7L2, as well as a novel candidate gene, HNF6, known to be involved
in hepatobiliary and pancreatic development, but did not identify mutations.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18512226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 15;123(4):838-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23570.

Prediction of the immunogenic potential of frameshift-mutated antigens in
microsatellite instable cancer.

Speetjens FM(1), Lauwen MM, Franken KL, Janssen-van Rhijn CM, van Duikeren S,
Bres SA, van de Velde CJ, Melief CJ, Kuppen PJ, van der Burg SH, Morreau H,
Offringa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Microsatellite instable (MSI) cancers express frameshift-mutated antigens, the
C-terminal polypeptides of which are foreign to the immune system. Consequently, 
these antigens constitute a unique pool of tumor-specific antigens that can be
exploited for patient diagnosis and selective, immune-mediated targeting of
cancers. However, other than their sequence, very little is known about the
characteristics of the majority of these proteins. We therefore developed a
methodology for predicting their immunogenic behavior that is based on a
gene-expression system, in which each of the proteins was fused to a short
C-terminal polypeptide comprising two epitopes that can be readily detected by
T-cells and antibodies, respectively. In this manner, accumulation of the
antigens and processing of peptides derived thereof into MHC can be monitored
systematically. The antigens, which accumulate in the cells in which they are
synthesized, are of primary interest for cancer immunotherapy, because peptide
epitopes derived thereof can be presented by dendritic cells in addition to the
tumor cells themselves. As a result, these antigens constitute the best targets
for a coordinated immune response by both CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells, which increases 
the likelihood that tumor-induced immunity would be detectable against these
antigens in cancer patients, as well as the potential value of these antigens as 
components of anticancer vaccines. Our data indicate that, of 15
frameshift-mutated antigens examined in our study, 4 (TGFbetaR2-1, MARCKS-1,
MARCKS-2 and CDX2-2) are of primary interest, and 4 additional antigens (TAF1B-1,
PCNXL2-2, TCF7L2-2 and Baxalpha+1) are of moderate interest for further tumor
immunological research.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18506693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1100-10. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1025-9. Epub 2008
May 27.

Newly identified loci highlight beta cell dysfunction as a key cause of type 2
diabetes: where are the insulin resistance genes?

Florez JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit and Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. jcflorez@partners.org

Although type 2 diabetes has been traditionally understood as a metabolic
disorder initiated by insulin resistance, it has recently become apparent that an
impairment in insulin secretion contributes to its manifestation and may play a
prominent role in its early pathophysiology. The genetic dissection of Mendelian 
and, more recently, polygenic types of diabetes confirms the notion that primary 
defects in insulin synthesis, processing and/or secretion often give rise to the 
common form of this disorder. This concept, first advanced with the discovery and
physiological characterisation of various genetic subtypes of MODY, has been
extended to other forms of monogenic diabetes (e.g. neonatal diabetes). It has
also led to the identification of common risk variants via candidate gene
approaches (e.g. the E23K polymorphism in KCNJ11 or common variants in the MODY
genes), and it has been validated by the description of the robust physiological 
effects conferred by polymorphisms in the TCF7L2 gene. More recently, the
completion and integration of genome-wide association scans for this disease has 
uncovered a number of heretofore unsuspected variants, several of which also
affect insulin secretion. This review provides an up-to-date account of genetic
loci that influence risk of common type 2 diabetes via impairment of beta cell
function, outlines their presumed mechanisms of action, and places them in the
context of gene-gene and/or gene-environment interactions. Finally, a strategy
for the analogous discovery of insulin resistance genes is proposed.

PMID: 18504548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. BMC Med Genet. 2008 May 22;9:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-46.

Polymorphisms near EXOC4 and LRGUK on chromosome 7q32 are associated with Type 2 
Diabetes and fasting glucose; the NHLBI Family Heart Study.

Laramie JM(1), Wilk JB, Williamson SL, Nagle MW, Latourelle JC, Tobin JE,
Province MA, Borecki IB, Myers RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA. laramiej@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The chromosome 7q32 region is linked to metabolic syndrome and
obesity related traits in the Family Heart Study. As part of a fine mapping study
of the region, we evaluated the relationship of polymorphisms to fasting glucose 
levels and Type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Thirty-nine HapMap defined tag SNPs in a 1.08 Mb region and a novel
deletion polymorphism were genotyped in 2,603 participants of the NHLBI Family
Heart Study (FHS). Regression modeling, adjusting for BMI, age, sex, smoking and 
the TCF7L2 polymorphism, was used to evaluate the association of these
polymorphisms with T2D and fasting glucoses levels.
RESULTS: The deletion polymorphism confers a protective effect for T2D, with
homozygous deletion carriers having a 53% reduced risk compared to non-deleted
carriers. Among non-diabetics, the deletion was significantly associated with
lower fasting glucose levels in men (p = 0.038) but not women (p = 0.118). In
addition, seven SNPs near the deletion were significantly associated (p < 0.01)
to diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Chromosome 7q32 contains both SNPs and a deletion that were
associated to T2D. Although the deletion region contains several islands of
strongly conserved sequence, it is not known to contain a transcribed gene. The
closest nearby gene, EXOC4, is involved in insulin-stimulated glucose transport
and may be a candidate for this association. Further work is needed to determine 
if the deletion represents a functional variant or may be in linkage
disequilibrium with a functional mutation influencing EXOC4 or another nearby
gene.

PMCID: PMC2409301
PMID: 18498660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. BMC Med Genet. 2008 May 22;9:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-45.

The genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes may be modulated by obesity status:
implications for association studies.

Cauchi S(1), Nead KT, Choquet H, Horber F, Potoczna N, Balkau B, Marre M,
Charpentier G, Froguel P, Meyre D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR8090, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Génomique et Physiologie
Moléculaire des Maladies Métaboliques, Lille, France. Stephane.Cauchi@good.ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: Considering that a portion of the heterogeneity amongst previous
replication studies may be due to a variable proportion of obese subjects in
case-control designs, we assessed the association of genetic variants with type 2
diabetes (T2D) in large groups of obese and non-obese subjects.
METHODS: We genotyped RETN, KCNJ11, HNF4A, HNF1A, GCK, SLC30A8, ENPP1, ADIPOQ,
PPARG, and TCF7L2 polymorphisms in 1,283 normoglycemic (NG) and 1,581 T2D obese
individuals as well as in 3,189 NG and 1,244 T2D non-obese subjects of European
descent, allowing us to examine T2D risk over a wide range of BMI.
RESULTS: Amongst non-obese individuals, we observed significant T2D associations 
with HNF1A I27L [odds ratio (OR) = 1.14, P = 0.04], GCK -30G>A (OR = 1.23, P =
0.01), SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.87, P = 0.04), and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.89, P = 
4.5 x 10-23), and non-significant associations with PPARG Pro12Ala (OR = 0.85, P 
= 0.14), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.00, P = 0.97) and ENPP1 K121Q (OR = 0.99, P = 
0.94). In obese subjects, associations with T2D were detected with PPARG Pro12Ala
(OR = 0.73, P = 0.004), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.26, P = 0.02), ENPP1 K121Q (OR 
= 1.30, P = 0.003) and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.30, P = 1.1 x 10-4), and
non-significant associations with HNF1A I27L (OR = 0.96, P = 0.53), GCK -30G>A
(OR = 1.15, P = 0.12) and SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.95, P = 0.44). However, a
genotypic heterogeneity was only found for TCF7L2 rs7903146 (P = 3.2 x 10-5) and 
ENPP1 K121Q (P = 0.02). No association with T2D was found for KCNJ11, RETN, and
HNF4A polymorphisms in non-obese or in obese individuals.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants modulating insulin action may have an increased
effect on T2D susceptibility in the presence of obesity, whereas genetic variants
acting on insulin secretion may have a greater impact on T2D susceptibility in
non-obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC2412856
PMID: 18498634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1146-52. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1039-3. Epub 2008
May 21.

Exon sequencing and association analysis of polymorphisms in TCF7L2 with type 2
diabetes in a Chinese population.

Ren Q(1), Han XY, Wang F, Zhang XY, Han LC, Luo YY, Zhou XH, Ji LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing, 100044, China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recently, variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene have been found to be consistently associated with type 2 diabetes in
different populations. In this study, we hypothesized that TCF7L2 also
contributed to genetic susceptibility for type 2 diabetes in a Chinese
population.
METHODS: We looked for new variants by direct sequencing of all exons and
intron-exon junctions of TCF7L2 in 100 Chinese type 2 diabetic patients, and then
we genotyped five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by Snapshot technology
in 1,000 Chinese individuals.
RESULTS: By sequencing, we identified six SNPs (c.1,637C>A; c.1,674C>G;
c.1,709G>A; c.1,846C>G; c.1,888C>T; and c.1,876T>G), and three of them led to
non-synonymous polymorphisms (c.1,637C>A, His-->Gln or Pro-->Thr; c.1,674C>G,
Pro-->Arg; and c.1,709G>A, Ala-->Thr). All of them are rare except c.1,637C>A,
which had a frequency of 0.23 for the minor A allele in 98 sequenced individuals.
In a case-control study, one of the newly discovered SNPs (c.1,637C>A), together 
with four reported ones (rs7903146, rs12255372, rs290487 and rs3814573) were
genotyped. Comparison between allele and genotype frequencies of these SNPs in
patients and controls showed marginal association for rs7903146 and rs290487 with
type 2 diabetes (p = 0.063, OR 1.982, 95% CI 1.128-3.485; p = 0.071, OR 1.237,
95% CI 0.983-1.557, respectively). No association was found for rs12255372,
rs3814573, c.1,637C>A and type 2 diabetes (p = 0.278-1.000).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: With the current sample size, we did not find any
mutation in the coding sequence of TCF7L2 that confers a genetic risk for type 2 
diabetes in a Chinese population, and did not replicate some of the major
positive results obtained in other populations.

PMID: 18493736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(16):4963-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00266-08. Epub 2008 May 
19.

Feedback regulation between zipcode binding protein 1 and beta-catenin mRNAs in
breast cancer cells.

Gu W(1), Wells AL, Pan F, Singer RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA. wgu@aecom.yu.edu

ZBP1 (zipcode binding protein 1) is an RNA-binding protein involved in many
posttranscriptional processes, such as RNA localization, RNA stability, and
translational control. ZBP1 is abundantly expressed in embryonic development, but
its expression is silenced in most adult tissues. Reactivation of the ZBP1 gene
has been reported in various human tumors. In this study, we identified a
detailed molecular mechanism of ZBP1 transactivation in breast cancer cells. We
show that beta-catenin, a protein that functions in both cell adhesion and
transcription, specifically binds to the ZBP1 promoter via a conserved
beta-catenin/TCF4 response element and activates its gene expression. ZBP1
activation is also closely correlated with nuclear translocation of beta-catenin 
in human breast tumors. We further demonstrate feedback regulation by finding
that ZBP1 physically associates with beta-catenin mRNA in vivo and increases its 
stability. These experiments suggest that in breast cancer cells, the expression 
of ZBP1 and the expression of beta-catenin are coordinately regulated.
beta-Catenin mediates the transcription of the ZBP1 gene, while ZBP1 promotes the
stability of beta-catenin mRNA.

PMCID: PMC2519696
PMID: 18490442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochem Soc Trans. 2008 Jun;36(Pt 3):357-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0360357.

TCF7L2 controls insulin gene expression and insulin secretion in mature
pancreatic beta-cells.

Loder MK(1), da Silva Xavier G, McDonald A, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, Sir
Alexander Fleming Building, Exhibition Road, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ,
UK. m.loder@imperial.ac.uk

Genetic studies have linked the risk of Type 2 diabetes with SNPs (single
nucleotide polymorphisms) in the gene encoding the Wnt signalling-associated
transcription factor, TCF7L2 (T-cell factor 7-like 2). The risk alleles have been
associated with reduced glucose and GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide 1)-stimulated
insulin secretion. Recent evidence has suggested that inheritance of the at-risk 
T allele at SNP rs7903146 may increase the expression of TCF7L2 in adult human
islets. However, the cellular mechanisms by which changes in TCF7L2 levels may
affect insulin secretion are unclear. In the present paper, we describe the use
of RNA silencing to investigate the role of TCF7L2 on insulin secretion and gene 
expression in rodent islets. We find that reduced TCF7L2 expression reduces
glucose-simulated insulin secretion and insulin gene expression while slightly
potentiating glucose stimulated changes in intracellular free Ca(2+)
concentrations.

PMID: 18481957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Causes Control. 2008 Nov;19(9):975-80. doi: 10.1007/s10552-008-9164-3.
Epub 2008 May 14.

Association of the TCF7L2 polymorphism with colorectal cancer and adenoma risk.

Hazra A(1), Fuchs CS, Chan AT, Giovannucci EL, Hunter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. ahazra@hsph.harvard.edu

We evaluated the association of a polymorphism in TCF7L2 (RS12255372) in the WNT 
signaling pathway, which previously has been strongly associated with risk of
Type II Diabetes, with colorectal cancer (CRC) and adenoma in the prospective
Nurses' Health Study (NHS) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS)
cohorts. Hyperinsulinemia may be related to the risk of colon adenoma and cancer,
therefore this variant associated with reduced insulin secretion would be
predicted to be inversely associated with colorectal cancer. Overall, in the NHS 
and HPFS, there was suggestive evidence for an inverse association associated
with homozygosity for the minor allele of RS12255372 (TCF7L2 TT) and CRC
(conditional and covariate adjusted OR = 0.63, 95% CI: 0.37-1.08; P for
heterogeneity 0.52 for the association in women and men). In summary, the
marginal association of the TCF7L2 SNP with CRC might be due to chance, but
warrants further laboratory and epidemiological investigation.

PMCID: PMC2719293
PMID: 18478343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2226-33. doi: 10.2337/db07-1583. Epub 2008 May 9.

Implication of genetic variants near TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B,
IGF2BP2, and FTO in type 2 diabetes and obesity in 6,719 Asians.

Ng MC(1), Park KS, Oh B, Tam CH, Cho YM, Shin HD, Lam VK, Ma RC, So WY, Cho YS,
Kim HL, Lee HK, Chan JC, Cho NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified six novel genes
for type 2 diabetes and obesity and confirmed TCF7L2 as the major type 2 diabetes
gene to date in Europeans. However, the implications of these genes in Asians are
unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 13 associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms from these genes in 3,041 patients with type 2 diabetes and 3,678
control subjects of Asian ancestry from Hong Kong and Korea.
RESULTS: We confirmed the associations of TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, and FTO with risk for type 2 diabetes, with odds ratios
ranging from 1.13 to 1.35 (1.3 x 10(-12) < P(unadjusted) < 0.016). In addition,
the A allele of rs8050136 at FTO was associated with increased BMI in the control
subjects (P(unadjusted) = 0.008). However, we did not observe significant
association of any genetic variants with surrogate measures of insulin secretion 
or insulin sensitivity indexes in a subset of 2,662 control subjects. Compared
with subjects carrying zero, one, or two risk alleles, each additional risk
allele was associated with 17% increased risk, and there was an up to 3.3-fold
increased risk for type 2 diabetes in those carrying eight or more risk alleles. 
Despite most of the effect sizes being similar between Asians and Europeans in
the meta-analyses, the ethnic differences in risk allele frequencies in most of
these genes lead to variable attributable risks in these two populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the important but differential contribution of 
these genetic variants to type 2 diabetes and obesity in Asians compared with
Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2494677
PMID: 18469204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Sep;51(3):349-55. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21595.

Wnt10b induces chemotaxis of osteosarcoma and correlates with reduced survival.

Chen K(1), Fallen S, Abaan HO, Hayran M, Gonzalez C, Wodajo F, MacDonald T,
Toretsky JA, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma (OS) is a primary malignant tumor of the bone that
typically presents in the second decade of life and has a poor prognosis,
especially in metastatic cases. Wnt signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of 
tumors such as colon cancer and malignant melanoma. Wnt signaling controls normal
bone formation during embryogenesis and homeostasis in adult organisms, thus we
evaluated Wnt signaling in OS.
PROCEDURE: We surveyed the expression of Wnts, their receptors, Frizzleds and
LRPs, and soluble Wnt inhibitors (sFRPs) in four OS cell lines by RT-PCR. We also
tested biological response of OS cell lines to exogenous Wnts by measuring
beta-catenin stabilization, Dvl phosphorylation, TOPFLASH activity and
chemotaxis. Human OS tumor microarrays were evaluated for expression of Wnt10b by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: All cell lines tested showed expression of at least three Wnts and one
Frizzled. Exogenous Wnt3a and Wnt10b treatment induced Dvl phosphorylation,
beta-catenin stabilization and TCF4 transcriptional activity in both metastatic
and non-metastatic murine OS cell lines. Metastatic OS cell lines showed better
chemotaxis response to Wnts than the non-metastatic OS cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry studies of 44 human OS samples demonstrated that Wnt10b
expression correlated with decreased overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These results further supports a possible autocrine or paracrine Wnt
pathway in metastatic potential of OS.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18465804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2008 May 7;3(5):e2031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002031.

Post genome-wide association studies of novel genes associated with type 2
diabetes show gene-gene interaction and high predictive value.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Durand E, Proença C, Marre M, Hadjadj S, Choquet H, De
Graeve F, Gaget S, Allegaert F, Delplanque J, Permutt MA, Wasson J, Blech I,
Charpentier G, Balkau B, Vergnaud AC, Czernichow S, Patsch W, Chikri M, Glaser B,
Sladek R, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Recently, several Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies in
populations of European descent have identified and validated novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), highly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Our aims were to validate these markers in other European and non-European
populations, then to assess their combined effect in a large French study
comparing T2D and normal glucose tolerant (NGT) individuals.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the same French population analyzed in our
previous GWA study (3,295 T2D and 3,595 NGT), strong associations with T2D were
found for CDKAL1 (OR(rs7756992) = 1.30[1.19-1.42], P = 2.3x10(-9)), CDKN2A/2B
(OR(rs10811661) = 0.74[0.66-0.82], P = 3.5x10(-8)) and more modestly for IGFBP2
(OR(rs1470579) = 1.17[1.07-1.27], P = 0.0003) SNPs. These results were replicated
in both Israeli Ashkenazi (577 T2D and 552 NGT) and Austrian (504 T2D and 753
NGT) populations (except for CDKAL1) but not in the Moroccan population (521 T2D 
and 423 NGT). In the overall group of French subjects (4,232 T2D and 4,595 NGT), 
IGFBP2 and CXCR4 synergistically interacted with (LOC38776, SLC30A8, HHEX) and
(NGN3, CDKN2A/2B), respectively, encoding for proteins presumably regulating
pancreatic endocrine cell development and function. The T2D risk increased
strongly when risk alleles, including the previously discovered T2D-associated
TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP, were combined (8.68-fold for the 14% of French individuals 
carrying 18 to 30 risk alleles with an allelic OR of 1.24). With an area under
the ROC curve of 0.86, only 15 novel loci were necessary to discriminate French
individuals susceptible to develop T2D.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In addition to TCF7L2, SLC30A8 and HHEX, initially
identified by the French GWA scan, CDKAL1, IGFBP2 and CDKN2A/2B strongly
associate with T2D in French individuals, and mostly in populations of Central
European descent but not in Moroccan subjects. Genes expressed in the pancreas
interact together and their combined effect dramatically increases the risk for
T2D, opening avenues for the development of genetic prediction tests.

PMCID: PMC2346547
PMID: 18461161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Curr Diab Rep. 2008 Apr;8(2):149-55.

TCF7L2 genetic defect and type 2 diabetes.

Cauchi S, Froguel P.

After two decades of limited success, the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes
(T2D) is finally being revealed. Within only 2 years, an avalanche of studies
identified several genes expressed in pancreatic beta cells and involved in the
control of insulin secretion, such as transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), a
key element of the Wnt signaling pathway. In Europeans, genome-wide association
scans showed that TCF7L2 has been the most important locus predisposing to T2D so
far. For the first time, a gene is consistently involved in T2D susceptibility in
all major ethnic groups. At the individual level, carrying the TCF7L2 risk allele
increases T2D risk 50%. However, at the population level, the attributable risk
is lower than 25% and varies with the allele frequency. The presence of the
TCF7L2 rs7903146 risk allele increases TCF7L2 gene expression in beta cells,
possibly impairing glucagon-like peptide-1-induced insulin secretion and/or the
production of new mature beta cells. The tremendous association of TCF7L2
polymorphisms with T2D provides new insights into future genetic predisposition
tests but remains the tip of the T2D genetic iceberg.

PMID: 18445358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2220-5. doi: 10.2337/db07-1319. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Association analysis in african americans of European-derived type 2 diabetes
single nucleotide polymorphisms from whole-genome association studies.

Lewis JP(1), Palmer ND, Hicks PJ, Sale MM, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Divers J,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Several whole-genome association studies have reported identification 
of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in various European-derived study
populations. Little investigation of these loci has been reported in other ethnic
groups, specifically African Americans. Striking differences exist between these 
populations, suggesting they may not share identical genetic risk factors. Our
objective was to examine the influence of type 2 diabetes genes identified in
whole-genome association studies in a large African American case-control
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 loci
(e.g., TCF7L2, IDE/KIF11/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, PKN2, IGF2BP2, FLJ39370, and
EXT2/ALX4) associated with type 2 diabetes in European-derived populations were
genotyped in 993 African American type 2 diabetic and 1,054 African American
control subjects. Additionally, 68 ancestry-informative markers were genotyped to
account for the impact of admixture on association results.
RESULTS: Little evidence of association was observed between SNPs, with the
exception of those in TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in African Americans. One
TCF7L2 SNP (rs7903146) showed compelling evidence of association with type 2
diabetes (admixture-adjusted additive P [P(a)] = 1.59 x 10(-6)). Only the
intragenic SNP on 11p12 (rs9300039, dominant P [P(d)] = 0.029) was also
associated with type 2 diabetes after admixture adjustments. Interestingly, four 
of the SNPs are monomorphic in the Yoruba population of the HAPMAP project, with 
only the risk allele from the populations of European descent present.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that these variants do not significantly contribute 
to interindividual susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in African Americans.
Consequently, genes contributing to type 2 diabetes in African Americans may, in 
part, be different from those in European-derived study populations. High
frequency of risk alleles in several of these genes may, however, contribute to
the increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC2494685
PMID: 18443202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jun;134(7):1961-71, 1971.e1-4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.010. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Regulation of Wnt signaling by the nuclear pore complex.

Shitashige M(1), Satow R, Honda K, Ono M, Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The function of beta-catenin as a transcriptional coactivator 
of T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) is crucial for colorectal carcinogenesis. However,
beta-catenin has no nuclear localization signal, and the mechanisms by which
beta-catenin is imported into the nucleus and forms a complex with the TCF-4
nuclear protein are poorly understood.
METHODS: Proteins of 2 colorectal cancer cell lines, HCT-116 and DLD1, were
immunoprecipitated with anti-TCF-4 antibody and analyzed directly by nanoflow
liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. The functional significance of
nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins in Wnt signaling was evaluated by in vitro
and in vivo sumoylation, luciferase reporter, and colony formation assays.
RESULTS: TCF-4 interacted with a large variety of NPC proteins including
ras-related nuclear protein (Ran), Ran binding protein-2 (RanBP2), and Ran
GTPase-activating protein-1 (RanGAP1). The NPC protein RanBP2 functioned as the
small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase of TCF-4, and sumoylation of
TCF-4 enhanced the interaction between TCF-4 and beta-catenin. The overexpression
of NPC proteins increased the nuclear import of the TCF-4 and beta-catenin
proteins and enhanced the transcriptional activity. NPC proteins increased the
growth of colorectal cancer cells, whereas sentrin-specific protease-2 inhibited 
it.
CONCLUSIONS: Through a comprehensive proteomics approach, we revealed that NPC
functions as a novel regulator of Wnt signaling and is possibly involved in
colorectal carcinogenesis. A new drug targeting the interactions of TCF-4 with
NPC proteins as well as their sumoylation activity might be effective for
suppressing aberrant Wnt signaling and the proliferation of colorectal cancer
cells.

PMID: 18439914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Diabetologia. 2008 Jun;51(6):968-70. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1004-1. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms, cardiovascular disease and all-cause
mortality: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study.

Bielinski SJ(1), Pankow JS, Folsom AR, North KE, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, University of Minnesota, 1300
South 2nd Street, Suite 300, Minneapolis, MN 55454, USA. suzetteb@umn.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesised that TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) are associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) and that the associations
differ in diabetic and non-diabetic persons.
METHODS: Our analysis included black and white participants from the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study who were free of prevalent CVD at
baseline and had been genotyped for rs7903146, rs12255372, rs7901695, rs11196205 
and rs7895340 (n=13,369). Cox proportional hazard regression was used to estimate
the associations between polymorphisms and incident events; logistic and linear
regression were used for associations with baseline risk factor levels.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 SNPs were not significantly associated with incident coronary
heart disease, ischaemic stroke, CVD, prevalent peripheral artery disease (PAD)
or all-cause mortality in the full cohort or when stratified by race.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In the whole cohort, TCF7L2 SNPs were not associated 
with incident CVD, all-cause mortality or prevalent PAD. This result suggests
that the increased health risk associated with rs7903146 genotype is specific to 
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2597203
PMID: 18437354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jun;99(6):1139-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00814.x. Epub
2008 Apr 21.

Human homolog of NOTUM, overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma, is regulated
transcriptionally by beta-catenin/TCF.

Torisu Y(1), Watanabe A, Nonaka A, Midorikawa Y, Makuuchi M, Shimamura T,
Sugimura H, Niida A, Akiyama T, Iwanari H, Kodama T, Zeniya M, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

The Drosophila Notum gene, which is regulated by the Wingless pathway, encodes a 
secreted hydrolase that modifies heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In comparative
analysis of the gene expression profiles in primary human hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) and normal organs, we observed that the human ortholog of
Drosophila Notum was overexpressed markedly in a subset of HCC, but expressed
rarely in adult normal tissues. Immunoblotting confirmed the overexpression of
NOTUM protein in 12 of 40 primary HCC cases (30%). High levels of NOTUM protein
were significantly associated with intracellular (nuclear or cytoplasmic)
accumulation of beta-catenin protein: all 10 HCC with high intracellular
beta-catenin also had high NOTUM expression, whereas only 2 of 30 cases (6.7%)
without intracellular beta-catenin had high NOTUM expression (P < 0.00001). NOTUM
expression in HepG2 cells was downregulated significantly by induction of a
dominant-negative mutant of TCF4, a beta-catenin partner. In vivo binding of the 
beta-catenin/TCF complex to the NOTUM promoter was demonstrated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation in HepG2 and SW480 cells, where canonical Wnt signaling is
activated constitutively. These findings provide evidence that NOTUM is a novel
target of beta-catenin/TCF4 and is upregulated in Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling-activated HCC.

PMID: 18429952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Apr;17(4):978-82. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-2687.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphism and colon cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Folsom AR, Wolff R, Herrick J, Caan BJ, Potter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. mslattery@hrc.utah.edu

Polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
associated with insulin sensitivity and diabetes, and the TCF7L2 gene is involved
in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, all factors thought to be important in
the etiology of colon cancer. In this confirmatory study, we evaluated the
rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism with colon cancer using previously collected data
on 1,578 cases and 1,966 controls. We did not observe a statistically significant
association between the rs7903146 polymorphisms and risk of colon cancer [odds
ratio (OR), 1.12; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 0.98-1.28] when evaluating
the total population. We did, however, observe a statistically significant
interaction between the rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism and recent use of
aspirin/nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID; P = 0.001). Increased colon 
cancer risk associated with the T allele was restricted to those without recent
use of aspirin/NSAIDs (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.35-2.02, relative to recent aspirin
users, i.e., use of aspirin/NSAIDS within the 2 years before diagnosis, with the 
CC genotype). Among individuals who reported recent use of aspirin/NSAIDs, the T 
allele reduced risk of colon cancer (OR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62-0.98) in a
dose-response fashion (P for linear trend across genotypes = 0.03). These data
suggest that colon cancer risk associated with the rs7903146 TCF7L2 polymorphism 
is modified by use of aspirin/NSAIDs.

PMCID: PMC2587179
PMID: 18398040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Ann Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;72(Pt 4):499-509. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2008.00443.x. 
Epub 2008 Apr 7.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes in Khatri Sikhs from
North India: genetic variation affects lipid levels.

Sanghera DK(1), Nath SK, Ortega L, Gambarelli M, Kim-Howard X, Singh JR, Ralhan
SK, Wander GS, Mehra NK, Mulvihill JJ, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. dharambir-sanghera@ouhsc.edu

Recently, the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been identified as 
the most important type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) susceptibility gene. Common
intronic polymorphisms in this gene have been found to be strongly associated
with T2DM susceptibility showing marked reproducibility in multiple populations. 
The purpose of this study was to confirm the reported association of six TCF7L2
variants in a Khatri Sikh diabetic sample from North India. We genotyped
six-associated SNPs in a case-control sample consisting of 556 T2DM cases and 537
controls. We also examined the impact of these variants on body mass index (BMI),
waist to hip ratio (WHR), fasting insulin, and glucose and lipid levels. We
report replication of association of four of the six SNPs with T2DM in this
Khatri Sikh sample [rs7903146, (p = 0.010); rs11196205, (p = 0.011); rs10885409, 
(p = 0.002) and rs4918789, (p = 0.029)], under a dominant model conferring odds
ratios (ORs) of 1.39, 1.44, 1.57 and 1.36, respectively. Haplotype analysis
provided further evidence of association by showing a significant difference
between cases and controls as revealed by the global omnibus test (chi(2)= 19.36;
p = 0.0036). Multiple linear regression analysis also revealed the risk allele
carriers of three of four significant SNPs (rs7903146, rs11196205, rs10885409) to
be significantly associated with increased fasting total cholesterol (p value =
0.019, 0.025, 0.006) and LDL cholesterol levels (p value = 0.021, 0.018, 0.005), 
respectively. Our findings confirm that the TCF7L2 gene is a major risk factor
for development of T2DM in Khatri Sikhs. It also provides new information about
the significant impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on plasma cholesterol levels that 
appear to be independent of BMI.

PMID: 18397358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 30;370(2):327-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.081. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

A conserved domain in the transcription factor ITF-2B attenuates its activity.

Herbst A(1), Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377
Munich, Germany. Andreas.Herbst@med.uni-muenchen.de

The immunoglobulin transcription factor-2B (ITF-2B) belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors. It is ubiquitously
expressed and plays a prominent role in the regulation of differentiation
processes. Protein sequence alignment of the closely related bHLH transcription
factors ITF-2B, HeLa E box protein (HITF4), and the E2A proteins E12 and E47
revealed the presence of a highly conserved protein domain. Functional analysis
of this domain demonstrated that it plays an important role in repressing the
transcriptional activity of the ITF-2B protein. Moreover, this domain comprises a
self-contained transcriptional repressor whose activity depends on specific amino
acid residues.

PMID: 18371301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Cell Biol. 2008 Mar 24;180(6):1087-100. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200710050. Epub 2008
Mar 17.

Nuclear Dvl, c-Jun, beta-catenin, and TCF form a complex leading to stabilization
of beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Gan XQ(1), Wang JY, Xi Y, Wu ZL, Li YP, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

In canonical Wnt signaling, Dishevelled (Dvl) is a critical cytoplasmic regulator
that releases beta-catenin from degradation. Here, we find that Dvl and c-Jun
form a complex with beta-catenin-T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4) on the promoter of Wnt
target genes and regulate gene transcription. The complex forms via two
interactions of nuclear Dvl with c-Jun and beta-catenin, respectively, both of
which bind to TCF. Disrupting the interaction of Dvl with either c-Jun or
beta-catenin suppresses canonical Wnt signaling-stimulated transcription, and the
reduction of Dvl diminished beta-catenin-TCF-4 association on Wnt target gene
promoters in vivo. Expression of a TCF-Dvl fusion protein largely rescued the
c-Jun knockdown Wnt signaling deficiency in mammalian cells and zebrafish. Thus, 
we confirm that c-Jun functions in canonical Wnt signaling and show that c-Jun
functions as a scaffold in the beta-catenin-TCFs transcription complex bridging
Dvl to TCF. Our results reveal a mechanism by which nuclear Dvl cooperates with
c-Jun to regulate gene transcription stimulated by the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2290839
PMID: 18347071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):49-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.006. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Expression of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) in human adipocytes
is down regulated by insulin.

Ahlzén M(1), Johansson LE, Cervin C, Tornqvist H, Groop L, Ridderstråle M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Clinical Obesity, Entrance 72, Building
91, Floor 12, CRC, Lund University, Malmö University Hospital, S-205 02 Malmö,
Sweden. maja.j.ahlzen@skane.se

Variants in the TCF7L2 gene (transcription factor 7-like 2) have shown strong
association with type 2 diabetes with two defined risk haplotypes, HapA and
HapB(T2D). TCF7L2 may play a role in both glucose homeostasis and adipogenesis.
Our aim was to characterize the TCF7L2 mRNA expression and regulation in human
adipose tissue. We quantified TCF7L2 mRNA levels in cultured human adipocytes and
in biopsies from visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue from 38
obese non-diabetic subjects, using real-time PCR. The influence of haplotype and 
clinical traits on TCF7L2 mRNA levels were investigated. In vitro, insulin
decreased TCF7L2 mRNA expression. This effect was attenuated in cells incubated
with the free fatty acids palmitate or oleate. In vivo, we found significantly
higher expression in SAT from more insulin resistant subjects. No correlations
between TCF7L2 mRNA expression and obesity measures were observed. TCF7L2
expression was higher in VAT than in SAT and when stratifying for haplotype, this
difference was seen in HapA carriers but not in non-HapA carriers. In conclusion,
TCF7L2 mRNA levels in adipocytes are decreased by insulin and seem to increase in
insulin resistant subjects and in HapA carriers.

PMID: 18342627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes. 2008 May;57(5):1433-7. doi: 10.2337/db07-0299. Epub 2008 Feb 29.

Genetic similarities between latent autoimmune diabetes in adults, type 1
diabetes, and type 2 diabetes.

Cervin C(1), Lyssenko V, Bakhtadze E, Lindholm E, Nilsson P, Tuomi T, Cilio CM,
Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences-Diabetes & Endocrinology, Clinical Research
Center, Malmö University Hospital, Lund University, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2008 May;57(5):1160-2.

OBJECTIVE: Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is often considered a
slowly progressing subtype of type 1 diabetes, although the clinical picture more
resembles type 2 diabetes. One way to improve classification is to study whether 
LADA shares genetic features with type 1 and/or type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: To accomplish this, we studied whether LADA shares
variation in the HLA locus or INS VNTR and PTPN22 genes with type 1 diabetes or
the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes in 361 LADA, 718 type 1 diabetic, and 1,676 
type 2 diabetic patients, as well as 1,704 healthy control subjects from Sweden
and Finland.
RESULTS: LADA subjects showed, compared with type 2 diabetic patients, increased 
frequency of risk for the HLA-DQB1 *0201/*0302 genotype (27 vs. 6.9%; P < 1 x
10(-6)), with similar frequency as with type 1 diabetes (36%). In addition, LADA 
subjects showed higher frequencies of protective HLA-DQB1 *0602(3)/X than type 1 
diabetic patients (8.1 vs. 3.2%, P = 0.003). The AA genotype of rs689, referring 
to the class I allele in the INS VNTR, as well as the CT/TT genotypes of
rs2476601 in the PTPN22 gene, were increased both in type 1 diabetic (P = 3 x
10(-14) and P = 1 x 10(-10), respectively) and LADA (P = 0.001 and P = 0.002)
subjects compared with control subjects. Notably, the frequency of the type 2
diabetes-associated CT/TT genotypes of rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 were increased in 
LADA subjects (52.8%; P = 0.03), to the same extent as in type 2 diabetic
subjects (54.1%, P = 3 x 10(-7)), compared with control subjects (44.8%) and type
1 diabetic subjects (43.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: LADA shares genetic features with both type 1 (HLA, INS VNTR, and
PTPN22) and type 2 (TCF7L2) diabetes, which justifies considering LADA as an
admixture of the two major types of diabetes.

PMID: 18310307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Prostate. 2008 May 15;68(7):740-7. doi: 10.1002/pros.20732.

Evaluation of a variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and
prostate cancer risk in a population-based study.

Agalliu I(1), Suuriniemi M, Prokunina-Olsson L, Johanneson B, Collins FS,
Stanford JL, Ostrander EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a high mobility group-box
containing protein that is a critical member of the Wnt/beta-catenin canonical
signaling pathway. In addition to its recently recognized role in diabetes,
aberrant TCF7L2 expression has been implicated in cancer through regulation of
cell proliferation and apoptosis by c-MYC and cyclin D. It has been hypothesized 
that germline variants within the TCF7L2 gene previously associated with diabetes
may affect cancer risk through the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Specifically, the same risk allele of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs12255372 that is associated with diabetes (T allele) has recently been
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
METHODS: Here, we investigated associations between rs12255372 and prostate
cancer risk among 1,457 cases and 1,351 controls from a population-based study.
RESULTS: The variant TT genotype was not associated with overall prostate cancer 
risk. However, there was evidence that men homozygous for the variant T allele
had an elevated relative risk of more aggressive prostate cancer, as defined by
high Gleason score (OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 1.0-2.8) or regional/distant stage (OR =
1.7, 95% CI = 1.1-2.6) disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that this variant in the TCF7L2 gene may be
associated with risk of developing more clinically significant disease. These
results need to be confirmed, but provide initial evidence that the TCF7L2 gene
may alter risk of developing more aggressive prostate cancer.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2765224
PMID: 18302196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Feb 21;9:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-8.

Common variants of the TCF7L2 gene are associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes mellitus in a UK-resident South Asian population.

Rees SD(1), Bellary S, Britten AC, O'Hare JP, Kumar S, Barnett AH, Kelly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
s.d.rees@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have implicated variants of the transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene in genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus in
several different populations. The aim of this study was to determine whether
variants of this gene are also risk factors for type 2 diabetes development in a 
UK-resident South Asian cohort of Punjabi ancestry.
METHODS: We genotyped four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF7L2
(rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205 and rs12255372) in 831 subjects with diabetes
and 437 control subjects.
RESULTS: The minor allele of each variant was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes; the greatest risk of developing the disease was conferred by
rs7903146, with an allelic odds ratio (OR) of 1.31 (95% CI: 1.11 - 1.56, p = 1.96
x 10(-3)). For each variant, disease risk associated with homozygosity for the
minor allele was greater than that for heterozygotes, with the exception of
rs12255372. To determine the effect on the observed associations of including
young control subjects in our data set, we reanalysed the data using subsets of
the control group defined by different minimum age thresholds. Increasing the
minimum age of our control subjects resulted in a corresponding increase in OR
for all variants of the gene (p < or= 1.04 x 10(-7)).
CONCLUSION: Our results support recent findings that TCF7L2 is an important
genetic risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes in multiple ethnic
groups.

PMCID: PMC2276194
PMID: 18291022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Feb;8(1):38-50.

The role of LEF/TCF factors in neoplastic transformation.

Ravindranath A(1), O'Connell A, Johnston PG, El-Tanani MK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK.

The T cell factor 4 (Tcf-4) interacts with beta-catenin in the Wnt signalling
pathway and coactivates downstream target genes in diverse systems including the 
breast. This activity is important during normal development but its deregulation
plays a pivotal role in cancer progression. In a rat model for breast cancer it
has been shown that metastasis-inducing DNA (Met-DNA) sequesters the endogenous
inhibitory Tcf-4 and thereby promotes transcription of the secreted extracellular
matrix glycophosphoprotein, osteopontin, the direct effector of metastasis in
this model system. Permanent transfection of the benign rat mammary cell line
with a fragment from the Met-DNA containing the Tcf recognition sequence CAAAG
induces the cells to metastasize in syngeneic rats in vivo. Tcf-4 expression in
human breast carcinomas is inversely associated with osteopontin protein levels. 
High Tcf-4 expression impedes both OPN promoter activity and protein expression
in rat mammary carcinoma cells. Understanding the role of Tcf-4 in cancer
development and its transcription regulation should lay the foundation for novel 
therapeutic approaches in the future.

PMID: 18289012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Hum Hypertens. 2008 May;22(5):373-5. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2008.8. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

TCF7L2 alleles and metabolic syndrome in non-diabetic obese hypertensive
patients.

Sarzani R, Salvi F, Bordicchia M, Pietrucci F, Caraceni D, Lancioni L,
Dessí-Fulgheri P, Rappelli A.

PMID: 18288125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008 Jun;80(3):392-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2008.01.008. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphism with diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome,
and markers of beta cell function and insulin resistance in a population-based
sample of Emirati subjects.

Saadi H(1), Nagelkerke N, Carruthers SG, Benedict S, Abdulkhalek S, Reed R, Lukic
M, Nicholls MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
United Arab Emirates University, United Arab Emirates. saadih@uaeu.ac.ae

AIMS: The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) among Emirati subjects is
one of the highest in the world. This has been attributed to rising prevalence of
obesity acting on genetically susceptible individuals. We analyzed the
associations between TCF7L2 polymorphism and DM, metabolic syndrome, and markers 
of beta cell function and insulin resistance in a population-based sample of
Emirati subjects.
METHODS: We genotyped the two TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
rs12255372 and rs7903146 in 368 adult subjects. Homeostatic model assessment
(HOMA) was used to assess beta cell function (HOMA2-%B) and insulin resistance
(HOMA2-IR). The SNP genotypes were analyzed against disease stage [normal
glucose=0 (n=188), pre-diabetes=1 (n=85), and DM=2 (n=95)] and against clinical
and biochemical measures. Age and sex were included as covariates in all
association analyses. Additional adjustments were made for body mass index (BMI) 
and waist circumference in several analyses.
RESULTS: Diabetes disease stage was marginally significantly associated with the 
frequency of the T variant at rs12255372 (p=0.057; adjusted p=0.017) but not at
rs7903146 (p=0.5; adjusted p=0.2). Comparison between subjects with normal
glucose and the combined DM/pre-diabetes showed a significant association with
rs12255372 (OR 1.47, CI 1.04-2.08; p=0.03) but not with rs7903146 (OR 1.16, CI
0.81-1.64; p=0.4). We found no association with metabolic syndrome, or with
insulin and glucose levels, HOMA2-%B or HOMA2-IR. The age-standardized prevalence
rate for metabolic syndrome was 43.9% in men and 42.1% in women.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that TCF7L2 variants are associated with increased
risk for DM in Emirati subjects. We also demonstrate a high prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome in this population.

PMID: 18282631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Diabetes Care. 2008 May;31(5):905-9. doi: 10.2337/dc07-2131. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Variation in TCF7L2 and increased risk of colon cancer: the Atherosclerosis Risk 
in Communities (ARIC) Study.

Folsom AR(1), Pankow JS, Peacock JM, Bielinski SJ, Heiss G, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, School of Public Health,
University of Minnesota, Suite 300, 1300 S. Second St., Minneapolis, MN
55454-1015, USA. folsom@epi.umn.edu

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether a variation in the 
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene, which influences diabetes risk, is
associated with incidence of cancers.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We related diabetes and TCF7L2 variation with
occurrence of several common cancers in a prospective cohort study of 13,117
middle-aged adults initially free of cancer in 1987-1989. We assessed five single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 including the putative SNP (rs7903146) 
for diabetes. We identified incident cancers through 2000 via cancer registries, 
supplemented by hospital records.
RESULTS: Diabetes was associated marginally inversely with incidence of prostate 
cancer but not with incidence of colorectal, colon, lung, or breast cancer. The T
allele of rs7903146 (frequency 30%) was associated with increased risk of
colorectal cancer and, more specifically, colon cancer, with adjusted hazard
ratios (95% CI) of 1.0 for CC, 1.25 (0.85-1.83) for CT, and 2.15 (1.27-3.64) for 
TT genotypes (P(trend) = 0.009). TCF7L2 variation also was associated with lung
cancer incidence in whites but not blacks, but residual confounding by smoking
may be present.
CONCLUSIONS: Subjects who were initially cancer-free and carrying certain genetic
variants of TCF7L2, most notably the T allele of rs7903146, have an increased
risk of colon cancer. This association appears to be an independent gene effect
not explained by diabetes. Because the T allele of rs7903146 is common, if a
causal link is established, this variant could account for a sizable proportion (
approximately 17% here) of cases of colon cancer in the general population.

PMCID: PMC2577771
PMID: 18268068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2732-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02175-07. Epub 2008 Feb
11.

Genome-wide pattern of TCF7L2/TCF4 chromatin occupancy in colorectal cancer
cells.

Hatzis P(1), van der Flier LG, van Driel MA, Guryev V, Nielsen F, Denissov S,
Nijman IJ, Koster J, Santo EE, Welboren W, Versteeg R, Cuppen E, van de Wetering 
M, Clevers H, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signaling activates gene expression through the induced formation of
complexes between DNA-binding T-cell factors (TCFs) and the transcriptional
coactivator beta-catenin. In colorectal cancer, activating Wnt pathway mutations 
transform epithelial cells through the inappropriate activation of a TCF7L2/TCF4 
target gene program. Through a DNA array-based genome-wide analysis of TCF4
chromatin occupancy, we have identified 6,868 high-confidence TCF4-binding sites 
in the LS174T colorectal cancer cell line. Most TCF4-binding sites are located at
large distances from transcription start sites, while target genes are frequently
"decorated" by multiple binding sites. Motif discovery algorithms define the in
vivo-occupied TCF4-binding site as evolutionarily conserved A-C/G-A/T-T-C-A-A-A-G
motifs. The TCF4-binding regions significantly correlate with Wnt-responsive gene
expression profiles derived from primary human adenomas and often behave as
beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent enhancers in transient reporter assays.

PMCID: PMC2293123
PMID: 18268006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Diabetologia. 2008 Apr;51(4):597-601. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0926-y. Epub 2008
Feb 9.

Polymorphisms in the TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8 genes are associated with
impaired proinsulin conversion.

Kirchhoff K(1), Machicao F, Haupt A, Schäfer SA, Tschritter O, Staiger H, Stefan 
N, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-Universität 
Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str. 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variation within six novel genetic loci has been reported to
confer risk of type 2 diabetes and may be associated with beta cell dysfunction. 
We investigated whether these polymorphisms are also associated with impaired
proinsulin to insulin conversion.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,065 German participants for single nucleotide
polymorphisms rs7903146 in TCF7L2, rs7754840 in CDKAL1, rs7923837 and rs1111875
in HHEX, rs13266634 in SLC30A8, rs10811661 in CDKN2A/B and rs4402960 in IGF2BP2. 
All participants underwent an OGTT. Insulin, proinsulin and C-peptide
concentrations were measured at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min during the OGTT.
Insulin secretion was estimated from C-peptide or insulin levels during the OGTT 
using validated indices. We used the ratio proinsulin/insulin during the OGTT as 
indicator of proinsulin conversion.
RESULTS: In our cohort, we confirmed the significant association of variants in
TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and HHEX with reduced insulin secretion during the OGTT (p<0.05
for all). Variation in SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 was not associated with
insulin secretion. The risk alleles of the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8
reduced proinsulin to insulin conversion (p<0.05 for all), whereas the risk
alleles in HHEX, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 were not associated with reduced proinsulin
to insulin conversion (p>0.6).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Diabetes-associated variants in TCF7L2 and CDKAL1
impair insulin secretion and conversion of proinsulin to insulin. However, both
aspects of beta cell function are not necessarily linked, as impaired insulin
secretion is specifically present in variants of HHEX and impaired proinsulin
conversion is specifically present in a variant of SLC30A8.

PMID: 18264689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Genesis. 2008 Feb;46(2):81-6. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20363.

Autoregulation of XTcf-4 depends on a Lef/Tcf site on the XTcf-4 promoter.

Koenig SF, Lattanzio R, Mansperger K, Rupp RA, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

The restricted expression of XTcf-4 in the anterior midbrain is regulated via an 
active wnt/beta-catenin pathway (Kunz et al.,2004, Dev Biol 273:390-401). The
molecular mechanism of this autoregulatory loop, however, remained elusive. Here 
we show that the activity of a 1,775 bp promoter fragment containing a consensus 
Lef/Tcf binding site at position -1,437 to -1,428 is upregulated by activating
transcription factors of the Lef/Tcf family. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that endogenous beta-catenin is bound to the Lef/Tcf
site on the promoter. Thus, regulation of XTcf-4 by canonical wnt-signaling is
directly controlled by binding to and activating a consensus Lef/Tcf binding site
within its own promoter.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18257044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMC Genet. 2008 Feb 4;9:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-9-13.

Prevalence of common disease-associated variants in Asian Indians.

Pemberton TJ(1), Mehta NU, Witonsky D, Di Rienzo A, Allayee H, Conti DV, Patel
PI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. trevorp@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Asian Indians display a high prevalence of diseases linked to changes
in diet and environment that have arisen as their lifestyle has become more
westernized. Using 1200 genome-wide polymorphisms in 432 individuals from 15
Indian language groups, we have recently shown that: (i) Indians constitute a
distinct population-genetic cluster, and (ii) despite the geographic and
linguistic diversity of the groups they exhibit a relatively low level of genetic
heterogeneity.
RESULTS: We investigated the prevalence of common polymorphisms that have been
associated with diseases, such as atherosclerosis (ALOX5), hypertension (CYP3A5, 
AGT, GNB3), diabetes (CAPN10, TCF7L2, PTPN22), prostate cancer (DG8S737,
rs1447295), Hirschsprung disease (RET), and age-related macular degeneration
(CFH, LOC387715). In addition, we examined polymorphisms associated with skin
pigmentation (SLC24A5) and with the ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide
(TAS2R38). All polymorphisms were studied in a cohort of 576 India-born Asian
Indians sampled in the United States. This sample consisted of individuals whose 
mother tongue is one of 14 of the 22 "official" languages recognized in India as 
well as individuals whose mother tongue is Parsi, a cultural group that has
resided in India for over 1000 years. Analysis of the data revealed that allele
frequency differences between the different Indian language groups were small,
and interestingly the variant alleles of ALOX5 g.8322G>A and g.50778G>A, and
PTPN22 g.36677C>T were present only in a subset of the Indian language groups.
Furthermore, a latitudinal cline was identified both for the allele frequencies
of the SNPs associated with hypertension (CYP3A5, AGT, GNB3), as well as for
those associated with the ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide (TAS2R38).
CONCLUSION: Although caution is warranted due to the fact that this US-sampled
Indian cohort may not represent a random sample from India, our results will
hopefully assist in the design of future studies that investigate the genetic
causes of these diseases in India. Our results also support the inclusion of the 
Indian population in disease-related genetic studies, as it exhibits unique
genotype as well as phenotype characteristics that may yield new insights into
the underlying causes of common diseases that are not available in other
populations.

PMCID: PMC2267478
PMID: 18248681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Oct;6(10):1638-43. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Aberrant activation of gamma-catenin promotes genomic instability and oncogenic
effects during tumor progression.

Pan H(1), Gao F, Papageorgis P, Abdolmaleky HM, Faller DV, Thiagalingam S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Genetics Program and Cancer Research Center), Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Gamma-catenin (plakoglobin) exists in cells either as a component of adherens
junctions, along with beta-catenin and alpha-catenin, or in association with
desmoplakin in desmosomes, which are in turn coupled to the cytoskeleton linking 
to the plasma membrane. Although gamma-catenin overexpression is observed in many
cancers, the molecular basis of its contribution to tumor progression remains
unclear. In this study, we examined gamma-catenin overexpression-mediated effects
leading to altered regulation of effector genes such as PTTG and c-Myc, as well
as differential activation of signaling pathways. We found that overexpression of
gamma-catenin caused: (1) a reduction in E-cadherin and corresponding increase in
vimentin levels concomitant with increased cell mobility and migration; (2)
enhancement in the levels of phosphorylated Akt and Erk in the presence of EGF
and (3) an increase in PTTG and c-Myc protein levels, which are likely to
accelerate chromosomal instability and uncontrolled proliferation, respectively, 
in the affected cells. These effects resulting from overexpression of
gamma-catenin were further validated in converse experiments with the aid of
siRNA knockdown of the endogenous gamma-catenin gene. In conclusion, our studies 
provide a molecular basis for the promotion of genomic instability and the
oncogenic effects due to overexpression of gamma-catenin in human cancer.

PMID: 18245958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Feb;16(2):476-82. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.77.

Effects of TCF7L2 polymorphisms on obesity in European populations.

Cauchi S(1), Choquet H, Gutiérrez-Aguilar R, Capel F, Grau K, Proença C, Dina C, 
Duval A, Balkau B, Marre M, Potoczna N, Langin D, Horber F, Sørensen TI,
Charpentier G, Meyre D, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 8090, Institute of Biology,
Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146 T allele was previously
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and decreased BMI whereas haplotypes
carrying the rs7903146 C and rs10885406 A alleles (HapA) were associated with
increased BMI. The functional relevance of TCF7L2 polymorphisms and their effects
on T2D and obesity remained to be further investigated. In white European
populations, we found that the rs7903146 T allele was more associated with T2D in
3,547 non-obese individuals (odds ratio (OR) = 1.88 (1.69-2.10)) than in 1,110
class III obese subjects (OR = 1.24 (1.03-1.50)). No direct effect of the
rs7903146 C allele and HapA was found on any form of obesity in 3,507 normal
glucose tolerant (NGT) individuals, 1,106 pedigrees with familial obesity and
5,512 individuals from the French general population. However, in T2D subjects,
the rs7903146 C allele was less prevalent in the 1,111 non-obese individuals
(55.2%) compared to 659 class III obese subjects (67.5% OR = 1.69 (1.46-1.95)).
Functional studies showed that the rs7903146 T allele is less prone to be bound
by protein factors than the C allele in 3T3-L1, HepG2 and beta-TC3 cell lines and
that TCF7L2 expression decreases in subcutaneous adipose tissue from NGT obese
T/T carriers under calorie restriction. In conclusion, TCF7L2 is not a risk
factor for obesity in European populations, but its effect on T2D risk is
modulated by obesity. Furthermore, our data suggest that the rs7903146 T allele
may be possibly functional and associated with a nominal decrease in TCF7L2
expression in adipose tissue of individuals under calorie restriction.

PMID: 18239663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Front Horm Res. 2008;36:12-36. doi: 10.1159/0000115335.

Polygenic contribution to obesity: genome-wide strategies reveal new targets.

Körner A(1), Kiess W, Stumvoll M, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Research Laboratory,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. antje.koerner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Obesity results from the complex interaction of environmental factors that act on
a genetic background that determines the susceptibility to obesity. The
identification of such obesity susceptibility genes can provide important
insights into the mechanism underlying this condition. While candidate gene
approaches have not been tremendously successful in identifying relevant genetic 
contributors to obesity, except PPAR , the advent of genome-wide strategies has
recently revealed novel and unexpected genetic factors with strong associations
with obesity and/or diabetes, i.e. FTO, TCF7L2, INSIG2, ENPP1, or FASN (reviewed 
herein), although some of them are not undebated. Considering the function of the
encoded proteins, it will now be of interest to investigate the cellular and
molecular mechanisms, how these genetic variations affect body weight, energy
metabolism and/or obesity-associated morbidity.

PMID: 18230892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):172-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.12.002. Epub 
2008 Jan 14.

Deletion 18q21.2q21.32 involving TCF4 in a boy diagnosed by CGH-array.

Andrieux J(1), Lepretre F, Cuisset JM, Goldenberg A, Delobel B, Manouvrier-Hanu
S, Holder-Espinasse M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoires de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, 
France. j-andrieux@chru-lille.fr

We report on a 12 year-old boy presenting with severe developmental delay,
dysmorphic features, limb anomalies, growth retardation, hypoplastic vermis and
corpus callosum. Conventional and high-resolution cytogenetic analyses were
normal. CGH-array allowed characterisation of a de novo 6.2 Mb 18q21.2q21.32
interstitial deletion involving TCF4, the recently identified gene responsible
for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS). No tachypnoea-apnoea paroxysms were observed. We
discuss the dysmorphic features particularly involving the ears, which might be
helpful towards PHS and 18q21 deletion diagnosis.

PMID: 18222743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8723-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706105200. Epub 2008 
Jan 23.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 activation of TCF7L2-dependent Wnt signaling enhances
pancreatic beta cell proliferation.

Liu Z(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

The insulinotropic hormone GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1) is a new therapeutic
agent that preserves or restores pancreatic beta cell mass. We report that GLP-1 
and its agonist, exendin-4 (Exd4), induce Wnt signaling in pancreatic beta cells,
both isolated islets, and in INS-1 cells. Basal and GLP-1 agonist-induced
proliferation of beta cells requires active Wnt signaling. Cyclin D1 and c-Myc,
determinants of cell proliferation, are up-regulated by Exd4. Basal endogenous
Wnt signaling activity depends on Wnt frizzled receptors and the protein kinases 
Akt and GSK3beta but not cAMP-dependent protein kinase. In contrast, GLP-1
agonists enhance Wnt signaling via GLP-1 receptor-mediated activation of Akt and 
beta cell independent of GSK3beta. Inhibition of Wnt signaling by small
interfering RNAs to beta-catenin or a dominant-negative TCF7L2 decreases both
basal and Exd4-induced beta cell proliferation. Wnt signaling appears to mediate 
GLP-1-induced beta cell proliferation raising possibilities for novel treatments 
of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2417166
PMID: 18216022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Mar;86(3):341-8. doi: 10.1007/s00109-007-0295-x. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Analysis of novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes in a general French population:
the D.E.S.I.R. study.

Cauchi S(1), Proença C, Choquet H, Gaget S, De Graeve F, Marre M, Balkau B,
Tichet J, Meyre D, Vaxillaire M, Froguel P; D.E.S.I.R. Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

Recently, Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies identified novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), highly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in 
several case-control studies of European descent. However, the impact of these
markers on glucose homeostasis in a population-based study remains to be
clarified. The French prospective D.E.S.I.R. study (N = 4,707) was genotyped for 
22 polymorphisms within 14 loci showing nominal to strong association with T2D in
recently published GWA analyses (CDKAL1, IGFBP2, CDKN2A/2B, EXT2, HHEX,
LOC646279, SLC30A8, MMP26, KCTD12, LDLR, CAMTA1, LOC38776, NGN3 and CXCR4). We
assessed their effects on quantitative traits related to glucose homeostasis in
4,283 normoglycemic middle-aged participants at baseline and their contribution
to T2D incidence during 9 years of follow-up. Individuals carrying T2D risk
alleles of CDKAL1 or SLC30A8 had lower fasting plasma insulin level (rs7756992 P 
= 0.003) or lower basal insulin secretion (rs13266634 P = 0.0005), respectively, 
than non-carriers. Furthermore, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles associated with
higher fasting plasma glucose levels (rs10823406 P = 0.01 and rs2499953 P = 0.04,
respectively). However, for these SNPs, only modest associations were found with 
a higher incidence of T2D: hazard ratios of 2.03 [1.00-4.11] for MMP26 (rs2499953
P = 0.05) and 1.33 [1.02-1.73] for NGN3 (rs10823406 P = 0.03). We confirmed
deleterious effects of SLC30A8, CDKAL1, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles on glucose
homeostasis in the D.E.S.I.R. prospective cohort. However, in contrast to TCF7L2,
the contribution of novel loci to T2D incidence seems only modest in the general 
middle-aged French population and should be replicated in larger cohorts.

PMID: 18210030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9136-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708968200. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

The effects of myostatin on adipogenic differentiation of human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells are mediated through cross-communication
between Smad3 and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways.

Guo W(1), Flanagan J, Jasuja R, Kirkland J, Jiang L, Bhasin S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston Medical Center, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
wguo@bu.edu

The effects of myostatin on adipogenic differentiation are poorly understood, and
the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We determined the effects of human
recombinant myostatin protein on adipogenesis of bone marrow-derived human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and adipose tissue-derived preadipocytes. For both
progenitor cell types, differentiation in the presence of myostatin caused a
dose-dependent reduction of lipid accumulation and diminished incorporation of
exogenous fatty acid into cellular lipids. Myostatin significantly down-regulated
the expression of adipocyte markers PPARgamma, C/EBPalpha, leptin, and aP2, but
not C/EBPbeta. Overexpression of PPARgamma, but not C/EBPbeta, blocked the
inhibitory effects of myostatin on adipogenesis. Myostatin induced
phosphorylation of Smad3 in hMSCs; knockdown of Smad3 by RNAi or inhibition of
its upstream kinase by an Alk5 inhibitor blocked the inhibitory effect of
myostatin on adipogenesis in hMSCs, implying an important role of Smad3
activation in this event. Furthermore, myostatin enhanced nuclear translocation
of beta-catenin and formation of the Smad3-beta-catenin-TCF4 complex, together
with the altered expression of a number of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway genes in
hMSCs. The inhibitory effects of myostatin on adipogenesis were blocked by RNAi
silencing of beta-catenin and diminished by overexpression of dominant-negative
TCF4. The conclusion is that myostatin inhibited adipogenesis in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and preadipocytes. These effects were
mediated, in part, by activation of Smad3 and cross-communication of the
TGFbeta/Smad signal to Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway, leading to down-regulation 
of PPARgamma.

PMCID: PMC2431017
PMID: 18203713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cancer Sci. 2008 Apr;99(4):631-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00716.x. Epub
2008 Jan 2.

Wnt signaling inside the nucleus.

Shitashige M(1), Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuoh-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Accumulation of the beta-catenin protein and transactivation of a certain set of 
T-cell factor (TCF)-4 target genes by accumulated beta-catenin have been
considered crucial in colorectal carcinogenesis. In the present review, we
summarize nuclear proteins that interact with, and regulate, the beta-catenin and
TCF and lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) transcriptional complexes. Our recent
series of proteomic studies has also revealed that various classes of nuclear
proteins participate in the beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex and modulate its
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the protein composition of the
TCF-4-containing nuclear complex is not fixed, but is regulated dynamically by
endogenous programs associated with intestinal epithelial cell differentiation
and exogenous stimuli. Restoration of the loss-of-function mutation of the
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in colorectal cancer cells does not seem to
be a realistic approach with currently available medical technologies, and only
signaling molecules downstream of the APC gene product can be considered as
targets of pharmacological intervention. Nuclear proteins associated with the
beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex may include feasible targets for molecular therapy
against colorectal cancer. Recently, an inhibitor of the interaction between
CREB-binding protein and beta-catenin was shown to efficiently shut down the
transcriptional activity of TCF-4 and induce apoptosis of colorectal cancer
cells. We also summarize current strategies in the development of drugs against
Wnt signaling.

PMID: 18177486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biomol Tech. 2007 Dec;18(5):298-305.

Electrophoretic techniques applied to the detection and analysis of the human
microsatellite DG10s478.

Taylor CY(1), Guillén IA, Nazabal M, Fernández JR, Silva JA.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Diagnostic Division, Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, PO Box 6162, 10600, Havana, Cuba.

Short nucleotide repetitions (STRs) are commonly used as genetic markers; thus
their detection and analysis constitutes a very important tool for the mapping of
genetic diseases, as well as for gathering information about genetic
polymorphisms at the population level. STRs can be detected with agarose- or
acrylamide-based electrophoretic techniques, followed by visualization of the DNA
sample with ethidium bromide, silver nitrate, or fluorophore labeling. In this
work, we analyzed genomic DNA from five individuals affected with type II
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and five controls (unaffected individuals) in order to
know the most precise and reproducible technique for the analysis of the existing
polymorphism in the STR DG10S478 of the TCF7L2 gene. The combination of PCR with 
labeling of the products with the CY5 fluorophore, followed by detection on an
ALFexpress sequencer, offered the required resolution to detect the variability
in this STR, based solely on size analysis. Our methodology offers similar
accuracy and reproducibility at lower costs than existing methods based on the
sequencing of PCR products, and is a faster alternative when applied to
genotyping studies.

PMCID: PMC2392994
PMID: 18166673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jan;134(1):56-64. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2007.10.009. Epub 
2007 Oct 10.

Functional characterization of the novel APC N1026S variant associated with
attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis.

Menéndez M(1), González S, Obrador-Hevia A, Domínguez A, Pujol MJ, Valls J,
Canela N, Blanco I, Torres A, Pineda-Lucena A, Moreno V, Bachs O, Capellá G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Departament de Prevenció i Control del
Càncer, Servei d'Epidemiologia i Registre del Càncer, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge-Institut Català d'Oncologia, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We identified the APC N1026S variant of unknown malignant
potential in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in a Spanish attenuated
familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) family. The variant was located in the
first of the 4 highly conserved 15-amino acid (AA) repeats within the
beta-catenin union domain. Our aim was to determine its functional relevance to
establish its pathogenicity.
METHODS: N1026S variant was analyzed in 22 members of the AFAP family studied, in
236 sporadic colorectal cancer cases, 203 matched controls, and 205 unrelated
familial colorectal cancer cases. To assess its effects on beta-catenin binding, 
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transcription and beta-catenin subcellular
distribution we performed affinity chromatography experiments, BIAcore 1000
(BIAcore AB, Uppsala, Sweden) assays, luciferase reporter assays, assessment of
c-myc messenger RNA levels, and cell fractionation.
RESULTS: N1026S variant cosegregated with the disease in the AFAP family studied.
None of the sporadic or familial cases as well as the controls analyzed was
positive for the variant. N1026S variant completely precluded beta-catenin
binding to the first 15-AA repeat and diminished it when all four 15-AA repeats
were present. Expression of APC N1026S in SW480 and DLD-1 cells did not diminish 
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transcription as effectively as APC wild-type. N1026S
did not decrease c-myc transcription in DLD1 cells and nuclear beta-catenin in
SW480 cells as effectively as WT.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings strongly support a pathogenic role of the APC N1026S 
variant in the AFAP phenotype, reinforcing the importance of functional
characterization of APC variants for genetic counseling.

PMID: 18166348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(2):174-80. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in
4,087 Japanese subjects.

Miyake K(1), Horikawa Y, Hara K, Yasuda K, Osawa H, Furuta H, Hirota Y, Yamagata 
K, Hinokio Y, Oka Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y, Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H,
Kashiwagi A, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Takeda J, Makino H, Nanjo K, Kadowaki T,
Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho,
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been shown to be associated with type 
2 diabetes mellitus in multiple ethnic groups. Regarding the Asian population,
Horikoshi et al. (Diabetologia 50:747-751, 2007) and Hayashi et al. (Diabetologia
50:980-984, 2007) reported that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 
were associated with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population, while
contradictory results were reported for Han Chinese populations. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the associations of the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes
using a relatively large sample size: 2,214 Japanese individuals with type 2
diabetes and 1,873 normal controls. The minor alleles of rs7903146, rs11196205,
and rs12255372 showed significant associations with type 2 diabetes (OR=1.48,
P=2.7 x 10(-4); OR=1.39, P=4.6 x 10(-4); OR=1.70, P=9.8 x 10(-5), respectively)
in the combined sample sets. However, neither rs11196218 nor rs290487 showed a
significant association. These results indicate that TCF7L2 is an important
susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

PMID: 18097733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2008 Apr;116(4):211-4. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

The DG10S478 variant in the TCF7L2 gene is not associated with microvascular
complications in type 2 diabetes.

Buchbinder S(1), Rudofsky G Jr, Humpert PM, Schilling T, Zorn M, Bierhaus A,
Nawroth PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I and Clinical Chemistry, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. Susanne.Buchbinder@med.uni-heidelberg.de

OBJECTIVE: The DG10S478 variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene is a tetranucleotide repeat with six alleles. Alleles 0, 8 and 12 were found
to account for 98% of chromosomes in population based controls. The composite
allele X (non zero) has been associated with type 2 diabetes while allele 0 (no
insertion) was described as protective. However, no data exist about the
influence of DG10S478 variants on manifestation of diabetes and development of
diabetic complications.
METHODS: 250 patients with type 2 diabetes were tested for the DG10S478 allele X 
and its association with diabetic complications, age at diagnosis of diabetes and
BMI.
RESULTS: Allele 0 was found in 42.4% of the examined patients, 45.2% of the
participants were found to be heterozygous and 12.4% homozygous for the composite
allele X. The correlation of allele X with the age at diagnosis of diabetes was
not significant. There was also no association of allele X with retinopathy,
nephropathy or neuropathy. Only the correlation with BMI was statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The DG10S478 variant seems to have no influence on manifestation of 
diabetes and the development of microvascular complications.

PMID: 18072015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):645-53. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 regulates beta-cell survival and function in human 
pancreatic islets.

Shu L(1), Sauter NS, Schulthess FT, Matveyenko AV, Oberholzer J, Maedler K.

Author information: 
(1)Larry L. Hillblom Islet Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2014 Nov;63(11):3974.

OBJECTIVE: Type 2 diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin secretion in
response to increased metabolic demand. This defect in beta-cell compensation
seems to result from the interplay between environmental factors and genetic
predisposition. Genome-wide association studies reveal that common variants in
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) are associated with increased risk of type
2 diabetes. The aim of the present study was to establish whether TCF7L2 plays a 
role in beta-cell function and/or survival.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: To investigate the effects of TCFL7L2 depletion,
isolated islets were exposed to TCF7L2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) versus
scrambled siRNA, and beta-cell survival and function were examined. For TCF7L2
overexpression, islets were cultured in glucose concentrations of 5.5-33.3 mmol/l
and the cytokine mix interleukin-1 beta/gamma-interferon with or without
overexpression of TCF7L2. Subsequently, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion
(GSIS), beta-cell apoptosis [by transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling assay
and Western blotting for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and Caspase-3 cleavage], and
beta-cell proliferation (by Ki67 immunostaining) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Depleting TCF7L2 by siRNA resulted in a 5.1-fold increase in beta-cell
apoptosis, 2.2-fold decrease in beta-cell proliferation (P < 0.001), and 2.6-fold
decrease in GSIS (P < 0.01) in human islets. Similarly, loss of TCF7L2 resulted
in impaired beta-cell function in mouse islets. In contrast, overexpression of
TCF7L2 protected islets from glucose and cytokine-induced apoptosis and impaired 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 is required for maintaining GSIS and beta-cell survival.
Changes in the level of active TCF7L2 in beta-cells from carriers of at-risk
allele may be the reason for defective insulin secretion and progression of type 
2 diabetes.

PMID: 18071026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2007 Oct;32(5):912-20.

Non-obese patients with type 2 diabetes and prediabetic subjects: distinct
phenotypes requiring special diabetes treatment and (or) prevention?

Vaag A(1), Lund SS.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte, Denmark.
avaa@steno.dk

A major reason for the increased incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
across the world is the so-called obesity epidemic, which occurs both in
developed and developing countries. However, a large proportion of patients with 
T2DM in European and, in particular, Asian countries are non-obese. The non-obese
T2DM phenotype is characterized by disproportionally reduced insulin secretion
and less insulin resistance, as compared with obese patients with T2DM.
Importantly, non-obese patients with T2DM have a similar increased risk of
cardiovascular disease as obese T2DM patients. The risk of T2DM in non-obese
patients is influenced by genetics as well as factors operating in utero
indicated by low birth weight. Furthermore, this phenotype is slightly more
prevalent among patients with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults, characterized
by positive anti-GAD antibodies. The recently identified TCF7L2 gene polymorphism
resulting in low insulin secretion influences the risk of T2DM in both obese and 
non-obese subjects, but is relatively more prevalent among non-obese patients
with T2DM. Furthermore, the Pro12Ala polymorphism of the PPAR gamma gene
influencing insulin action increases the risk of T2DM in non-obese subjects.
Despite a "normal" body mass index, non-obese patients with T2DM are generally
characterized by a higher degree of both abdominal and total fat masses
(adiposity). Prevention of T2DM with lifestyle intervention is at least as
effective in non-obese as in obese prediabetic subjects, and recent data suggest 
that metformin treatment targeting insulin resistance and non-glycemic
cardiovascular disease risk factors is as beneficial in non-obese as in obese
patients with T2DM. Nevertheless, non-obese patients with T2DM may progress to
insulin treatment more rapidly as compared with obese patients with T2DM.

PMID: 18059616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jan;29(1):84-92. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Downregulation of Dkk3 activates beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling in lung cancer.

Yue W(1), Sun Q, Dacic S, Landreneau RJ, Siegfried JM, Yu J, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology.

Although the oncogenic role of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is well defined, it
remains unclear how this pathway is aberrantly activated in lung cancer. We found
that Dickkopf (Dkk)-3, a member of Dkk family of Wnt antagonists, is frequently
inactivated in lung cancer and plays a role in suppressing lung cancer cell
growth through inhibition of beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)-4 signaling. Dkk3
is the only Dkk family member abundantly expressed in normal lung, but silenced
by promoter hypermethylation in a large fraction of lung cancer cell lines and
lung tumors. Downregulation of Dkk3 was correlated with tumor progression and
expression of nuclear beta-catenin in lung tumors. Ectopic expression of Dkk3 in 
lung cancer cells with Dkk3 hypermethylation induced apoptosis and inhibited
TCF-4 activity as well as nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and expression of 
TCF-4 targets c-Myc and cyclin D1. Furthermore, small interference RNA knock down
of Dkk3 in cells lacking Dkk3 hypermethylation was sufficient to promote cell
proliferation, beta-catenin nuclear translocation and expression of c-Myc. These 
observations suggested that epigenetic inactivation of Dkk3 activates the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, thereby promoting the growth of lung cancer cells.

PMID: 18048388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):e22; author reply e23.

Comment on: Chang et al. (2007) Association study of the genetic polymorphisms of
the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and type 2 diabetes in the
Chinese population: Diabetes 56:2631-2637.

Ku CS, Khaw M, Chia KS.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7.

PMID: 18042757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(3):977-87. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Myeloid translocation gene family members associate with T-cell factors (TCFs)
and influence TCF-dependent transcription.

Moore AC(1), Amann JM, Williams CS, Tahinci E, Farmer TE, Martinez JA, Yang G,
Luce KS, Lee E, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 512 Preston Research Building, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Ave., Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Canonical Wnt signaling is mediated by a molecular "switch" that regulates the
transcriptional properties of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding
proteins. Members of the myeloid translocation gene (MTG) family of
transcriptional corepressors are frequently disrupted by chromosomal
translocations in acute myeloid leukemia, whereas MTG16 may be inactivated in up 
to 40% of breast cancer and MTG8 is a candidate cancer gene in colorectal
carcinoma. Genetic studies imply that this corepressor family may function in
stem cells. Given that mice lacking Myeloid Translocation Gene Related-1 (Mtgr1) 
fail to maintain the secretory lineage in the small intestine, we surveyed
transcription factors that might recruit Mtgr1 in intestinal stem cells or
progenitor cells and found that MTG family members associate specifically with
TCF4. Coexpression of beta-catenin disrupted the association between these
corepressors and TCF4. Furthermore, when expressed in Xenopus embryos, MTG family
members inhibited axis formation and impaired the ability of beta-catenin and
XLef-1 to induce axis duplication, indicating that MTG family members act
downstream of beta-catenin. Moreover, we found that c-Myc, a transcriptional
target of the Wnt pathway, was overexpressed in the small intestines of mice
lacking Mtgr1, thus linking inactivation of Mtgr1 to the activation of a potent
oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2223385
PMID: 18039847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1569-78. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Functional interaction of DNA topoisomerase IIalpha with the beta-catenin and
T-cell factor-4 complex.

Huang L(1), Shitashige M, Satow R, Honda K, Ono M, Yun J, Tomida A, Tsuruo T,
Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Wnt signaling pathway is activated constitutively in the
majority of colorectal cancers as a result of mutation in either the adenomatous 
polyposis coli or the CTNNB1 gene, and blockage of the pathway has been
considered feasible as molecular therapy against colorectal cancer. DNA
topoisomerase IIalpha (Topo IIalpha) is a component of the beta-catenin/T-cell
factor-4 (TCF-4) nuclear complex. We examined the functional significance of Topo
IIalpha in Wnt signaling.
METHODS: The physical and functional interaction between Topo IIalpha and the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 nuclear complex was evaluated by immunoprecipitation,
immunofluorescence microscopy, 2-hybrid assay, and luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Amino acids 951-1301 of Topo IIalpha were necessary for binding to
beta-catenin. Over expression of Topo IIalpha enhanced the TCF/lymphoid enhancer 
factor transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, and knockdown of Topo
IIalpha by RNA interference conversely attenuated the transcriptional activity.
The Topo II inhibitors, merbarone and etoposide, suppressed the
beta-catenin-mediated TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional activity. The 
catalytic activity of Topo II was augmented by overexpression of beta-catenin as 
measured by the decatenation of kinetoplast DNA. Topo IIalpha was highly
expressed and colocalized with beta-catenin in tumor cells of patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and patients with sporadic colorectal
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Topo IIalpha interacts with beta-catenin as a novel transcriptional 
co-activator. A new drug targeting the interaction of Topo IIalpha with
beta-catenin as well as its catalytic activity might be more effective for
suppressing aberrant Wnt signaling and proliferation of colorectal cancer cells
than the current Topo II inhibitors.

PMID: 17983804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Diabetes. 2008 Jan;57(1):244-54. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Impact of common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms in the DESIR prospective
study.

Vaxillaire M(1), Veslot J, Dina C, Proença C, Cauchi S, Charpentier G, Tichet J, 
Fumeron F, Marre M, Meyre D, Balkau B, Froguel P; DESIR Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)UMR8090 and Institute of Biology, Lille 2 University, CNRS and Pasteur
Institute, Lille, France. martine.vaxillaire@good.ibl.fr

OBJECTIVE: The emerging picture of type 2 diabetes genetics involves differently 
assembled gene variants, each modestly increasing risk with environmental
exposure. However, the relevance of these genes for disease prediction has not
been extensively tested.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 19 common polymorphisms of 14 known
candidate genes for their contribution to prevalence and incidence of glucose
intolerance in the DESIR (Data from an Epidemiological Study on the Insulin
Resistance syndrome) prospective study of middle-aged Caucasian subjects,
including 3,877 participants (16.8% with hyperglycemia and 7.9% with diabetes
after the 9-year study).
RESULTS: The GCK (Glucokinase) -30A allele was associated with increased type 2
diabetes risk at the end of the follow-up study (adjusted OR 1.34 [95% CI
1.07-1.69]) under an additive model, as supported in independent French diabetic 
case subjects (OR 1.22, P = 0.007), with increased fasting glycemia (0.85% per A 
allele, P = 6 x 10(-5)) and decreased homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell
function (4%, P = 0.0009). IL6 (Interleukin- 6) -174 G/C interacts with age in
disease risk and modulates fasting glycemia according to age (1.36% decrease over
56 years, P = 5 x 10(-5)). These polymorphisms together with KCNJ11 (Kir6.2)-E23K
and TCF7L2-rs7903146 may predict diabetes incidence in the DESIR cohort. Each
additional risk allele at GCK, TCF7L2, and IL6 increased risk by 1.34 (P = 2 x
10(-6)), with an OR of 2.48 (95% CI 1.59-3.86), in carriers of at least four
at-risk alleles compared with those with none or one risk allele.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm several at-risk polymorphisms for type 2 diabetes
in a general population and demonstrate that prospective studies are valuable
designs to complement classical genetic approaches.

PMID: 17977958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Diabet Med. 2007 Dec;24(12):1393-9. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Heterogeneity in disease severity in a family with a novel G68V GCK activating
mutation causing persistent hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia of infancy.

Wabitsch M(1), Lahr G, Van de Bunt M, Marchant C, Lindner M, von Puttkamer J,
Fenneberg A, Debatin KM, Klein R, Ellard S, Clark A, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, University of Ulm, Ulm,
Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Glucokinase (GCK)-activating mutations cause persistent
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia of infancy (PHHI). GCK-PHHI patients have
regulated insulin secretion and can usually be treated with diazoxide. The six
reported cases suggest that the severity of the mutation predicts the clinical
phenotype. The aim of this study was to relate genotype to phenotype [clinical
phenotype, glucose-stimulated insulin release (GSIR) and GCK functional analysis]
in a large pedigree with eight affected individuals.
METHODS: The genes encoding B-cell GCK and the K(ATP) channel subunits (ABCC8 and
KCNJ11) were sequenced to identify mutations for functional analysis. Genetic
variants influencing B-cell function were genotyped in affected individuals.
Islet secretory capacity was determined by oral glucose tolerance test
RESULTS: A novel GCK mutation (G68V) co-segregating with hypoglycaemia was
identified in eight family members. Kinetic analysis revealed that G68V-GCK
activity is ~16 times more than wild-type-GCK with an increased affinity for
glucose [concentration at half maximal activation (S(0.5)) 1.94 +/- 0.16 vs. 7.43
+/- 0.12, mutant vs. wild type, mean +/- sem]. Mathematical modelling predicted a
threshold for GSIR of 1.9 mmol/l in the mutant. Oral glucose tolerance tests
showed regulated insulin secretion. The severity of hypoglycaemia and related
symptoms in affected subjects were heterogeneous. Clinical presentations were
asymptomatic (n = 1), extreme hunger (n = 3), seizures (n = 2) and loss of
consciousness (n = 2); 7/8 were managed with diet but the proband was treated
with diazoxide and octreotide. Phenotypic modification by a second mutation in
the K(ATP) channel genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11) or by common genetic variants in KCNJ11,
GCK and TCF7L2 was excluded.
CONCLUSION: The novel activating GCK mutation G68V is associated with variable
phenotypic severity, supporting modification of GSIR by genetic and/or
environmental factors.

PMID: 17976205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):62-9. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

TCF7L2 is associated with high serum triacylglycerol and differentially expressed
in adipose tissue in families with familial combined hyperlipidaemia.

Huertas-Vazquez A(1), Plaisier C, Weissglas-Volkov D, Sinsheimer J,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Cruz-Bautista I, Nikkola E, Herrera-Hernandez M,
Davila-Cervantes A, Tusie-Luna T, Taskinen MR, Aguilar-Salinas C, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common DNA variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) are associated with type 2 diabetes. Familial combined hyperlipidaemia
(FCHL) is characterised by hypertriacylglycerolaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, or
both. Additionally, disturbances in glucose metabolism are commonly seen in FCHL.
Therefore, we hypothesised that TCF7L2 may contribute to the genetic
susceptibility for this common dyslipidaemia.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of the TCF7L2 variants, rs7903146 and
rs12255372, on FCHL and its component traits triacylglycerol (TG), total
cholesterol (TC) and apolipoprotein B (ApoB) in 759 individuals from 55 Mexican
families. As a replication sample, 719 individuals from 60 Finnish FCHL families 
were analysed. We also used quantitative RT-PCR to evaluate the transcript levels
of TCF7L2 in 47 subcutaneous fat biopsies from unrelated Mexican FCHL and
normolipidaemic participants.
RESULTS: Significant evidence for association was observed for high TG for the T 
alleles of rs7903146 and rs12255372 (p = 0.005 and p = 0.01) in Mexican FCHL
families. No evidence for association was observed for FCHL, TC, ApoB or glucose 
in Mexicans. When testing rs7903146 and rs12255372 for replication in Finnish
FCHL families, these single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with TG (p =
0.01 and p = 0.007). Furthermore, we observed statistically significant decreases
in the mRNA levels (p = 0.0002) of TCF7L2 in FCHL- and TG-affected individuals.
TCF7L2 expression was not altered by the SNP genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data show that rs7903146 and rs12255372 are
significantly associated with high TG in FCHL families from two different
populations. In addition, significantly decreased expression of TCF7L2 was
observed in TG- and FCHL-affected individuals.

PMID: 17972059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):304-9. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Association of TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms with reduced acute insulin response in
Hispanic Americans.

Palmer ND(1), Lehtinen AB, Langefeld CD, Campbell JK, Haffner SM, Norris JM,
Bergman RN, Goodarzi MO, Rotter JI, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

CONTEXT: Genetic variation at the transcription factor 7-like 2 locus has been
linked to type 2 diabetes in predominantly European-derived populations. The
biological basis of these associations remains to be determined.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate previously associated
variants for association with measures of glucose homeostasis in
Hispanic-Americans and African-Americans and determine the biological
mechanism(s) through which these variants exert their effect.
DESIGN: This study was the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Family Study
(IRAS-FS).
SETTING: The IRAS-FS is a community-based study of Hispanic-Americans (San
Antonio, TX, and San Luis Valley, CO) and African-Americans (Los Angeles, CA).
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1040 Hispanic-American and 500 African-American
individuals from the IRAS-FS formed the basis of this study. MAIN OUTCOMES
MEASURES(S): The primary glucose homeostasis phenotypes of interest in this study
were derived from the frequently sampled iv glucose tolerance test and include
insulin sensitivity, acute insulin response, and disposition index.
RESULTS: In Hispanic-Americans, significant evidence of association was observed 
between single-nucleotide polymorphisms rs7903146 and rs112255372 with reduced
insulin secretion as measured by acute insulin response and adjusted for the
degree of insulin sensitivity (P = 0.032 and 0.036, respectively). Other
quantitative measures, e.g. insulin sensitivity or disposition index, were not
associated with the single nucleotide polymorphisms examined. In
African-Americans there was no evidence of association observed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that transcription factor 7-like 2 variants
could play a role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes in the Hispanic-American
population through a mechanism involving insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC2190750
PMID: 17971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Diabetes Care. 2008 Jan;31(1):63-8. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

A variant of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and the risk of
posttransplantation diabetes mellitus in renal allograft recipients.

Kang ES(1), Kim MS, Kim YS, Hur KY, Han SJ, Nam CM, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim SI, Lee
HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134
Shinchon-Dong Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a major complication
associated with kidney transplantation. Defects in insulin secretion play a
pivotal role in the pathogenesis of PTDM. A polymorphism in the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene was reported to be associated with type 2 diabetes 
and possibly associated with an insulin secretion defect. The aim of this study
was to investigate the association between genetic variations in TCF7L2 and PTDM 
in renal allograft recipients.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 511 unrelated renal allograft recipients 
without previously known diabetes were enrolled. Six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (rs11196205, rs4506565, rs12243326, rs7903146, rs12255372, and
rs7901695) were genotyped in the cohort, which consisted of 119 PTDM patients and
392 non-PTDM subjects. The genotyping of TCF7L2 polymorphisms was performed using
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: rs4506565, rs7901695, and rs7903146 were found to be in complete linkage
disequilibrium. The rs7903146 genotype distribution was CC 94.3% and CT 5.7%. The
incidence of PTDM was significantly higher in patients with the CT genotype than 
in patients with the CC genotype (41.4 vs. 22.2%) (odds ratio 2.474 [95% CI
1.146-5.341]; P = 0.024). The effect of this genotype remains significant after
adjustment for age, sex, amount of body weight gain, and type of
immunosuppressant (2.655 [1.168-6.038]; P = 0.020).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the TCF7L2 rs7903146 genetic variation is
associated with an increased risk of PTDM in renal allograft recipients.

PMID: 17934151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Sep 19;8 Suppl 1:S16.

Genome-wide association with diabetes-related traits in the Framingham Heart
Study.

Meigs JB(1), Manning AK, Fox CS, Florez JC, Liu C, Cupples LA, Dupuis J.

Author information: 
(1)General Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. jmeigs@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Susceptibility to type 2 diabetes may be conferred by genetic
variants having modest effects on risk. Genome-wide fixed marker arrays offer a
novel approach to detect these variants.
METHODS: We used the Affymetrix 100K SNP array in 1,087 Framingham Offspring
Study family members to examine genetic associations with three diabetes-related 
quantitative glucose traits (fasting plasma glucose (FPG), hemoglobin A1c, 28-yr 
time-averaged FPG (tFPG)), three insulin traits (fasting insulin, HOMA-insulin
resistance, and 0-120 min insulin sensitivity index); and with risk for diabetes.
We used additive generalized estimating equations (GEE) and family-based
association test (FBAT) models to test associations of SNP genotypes with
sex-age-age2-adjusted residual trait values, and Cox survival models to test
incident diabetes.
RESULTS: We found 415 SNPs associated (at p < 0.001) with at least one of the six
quantitative traits in GEE, 242 in FBAT (18 overlapped with GEE for 639
non-overlapping SNPs), and 128 associated with incident diabetes (31 overlapped
with the 639) giving 736 non-overlapping SNPs. Of these 736 SNPs, 439 were within
60 kb of a known gene. Additionally, 53 SNPs (of which 42 had r2 < 0.80 with each
other) had p < 0.01 for incident diabetes AND (all 3 glucose traits OR all 3
insulin traits, OR 2 glucose traits and 2 insulin traits); of these, 36
overlapped with the 736 other SNPs. Of 100K SNPs, one (rs7100927) was in moderate
LD (r2 = 0.50) with TCF7L2 (rs7903146), and was associated with risk of diabetes 
(Cox p-value 0.007, additive hazard ratio for diabetes = 1.56) and with tFPG (GEE
p-value 0.03). There were no common (MAF > 1%) 100K SNPs in LD (r2 > 0.05) with
ABCC8 A1369S (rs757110), KCNJ11 E23K (rs5219), or SNPs in CAPN10 or HNFa. PPARG
P12A (rs1801282) was not significantly associated with diabetes or related
traits.
CONCLUSION: Framingham 100K SNP data is a resource for association tests of known
and novel genes with diabetes and related traits posted at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?id=phs000007 webcite. 
Framingham 100K data replicate the TCF7L2 association with diabetes.

PMCID: PMC1995610
PMID: 17903298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Prostate. 2007 Dec 1;67(16):1751-60.

Modulation of beta-catenin-mediated TCF-signalling in prostate cancer cell lines 
by wild-type and mutant p53.

Prowald A(1), Cronauer MV, von Klot C, Eilers T, Rinnab L, Herrmann T, Spindler
KD, Montenarh M, Jonas U, Burchardt M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Urologie und Kinderurologie, Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Deregulation of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin-pathway is known to
play an important role in the progression of various tumour cell types including 
prostate cancer (PCa). Recently, the tumour-suppressor p53 was shown to
down-regulate beta-catenin-signalling in colon cancer. As p53 is frequently
mutated in late stage PCa we investigated the effect of wild-type p53 (p53wt) as 
well as p53-mutants on beta-catenin-signalling in PCa-cell lines.
METHODS: The effects of p53wt and p53-mutants on Wnt/beta-catenin-signalling were
studied using reporter gene assays. Expression of beta-catenin levels was
monitored by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Overexpression of p53wt as well as p53(249Ser) (a structural mutant) and
p53(273His) (a DNA-contact-mutant) almost completely inhibited
beta-catenin-mediated transcriptional activity of the T-cell factor (TCF) whereas
p53(175His), a structural mutant, and a p53-mutant with a C-terminal deletion in 
the tetramerization domain (Deltap53) were unable to do so. Co-transfection
experiments with p53wt and a dominant negative p53-mutant reversed the
down-regulation of TCF-signalling, while Deltap53 was unable to interfere with
p53wt-function. Down-regulation of TCF-signalling by p53wt and p53(273His) was
accompanied by a reduction in beta-catenin protein level.
CONCLUSIONS: p53wt, p53(273His)- and p53(249Ser)-mutants are able to
down-regulate beta-catenin-signalling in PCa-cells probably via degradation of
beta-catenin. The degradation of beta-catenin in PCa by p53 is not linked to
transcriptional activity of p53. So far the mechanism how p53 interferes with
beta-catenin-signalling is unknown. For the first time we provide experimental
evidence that the C-terminus of p53 plays an important role in the
down-regulation of beta-catenin-mediated TCF-signalling in PCa-cell lines
possibly via p53 transrepressional function.

PMID: 17929268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1554-68. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Beta-catenin/Tcf-4 inhibition after progastrin targeting reduces growth and
drives differentiation of intestinal tumors.

Pannequin J(1), Delaunay N, Buchert M, Surrel F, Bourgaux JF, Ryan J, Boireau S, 
Coelho J, Pélegrin A, Singh P, Shulkes A, Yim M, Baldwin GS, Pignodel C, Lambeau 
G, Jay P, Joubert D, Hollande F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5203, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Aberrant activation of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 transcriptional 
complex represents an initiating event for colorectal carcinogenesis, shifting
the balance from differentiation toward proliferation in colonic crypts. Here, we
assessed whether endogenous progastrin, encoded by a target gene of this complex,
was in turn able to regulate beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity in adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC)-mutated cells, and we analyzed the impact of topical progastrin
depletion on intestinal tumor growth in vivo.
METHODS: Stable or transient RNA silencing of the GAST gene was induced in human 
tumor cells and in mice carrying a heterozygous Apc mutation (APCDelta14), which 
overexpress progastrin but not amidated or glycine-extended gastrin.
RESULTS: Depletion of endogenous progastrin production strongly decreased
intestinal tumor growth in vivo through a marked inhibition of constitutive
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity in tumor cells. This effect was mediated by the de
novo expression of the inhibitor of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 (ICAT), resulting from
a down-regulation of integrin-linked kinase in progastrin-depleted cells.
Accordingly, ICAT down-regulation was correlated with progastrin overexpression
and Tcf-4 target gene activation in human colorectal tumors, and ICAT repression 
was detected in the colon epithelium of tumor-prone, progastrin-overexpressing
mice. In APCDelta14 mice, small interfering RNA-mediated progastrin depletion not
only reduced intestinal tumor size and numbers, but also increased goblet cell
lineage differentiation and cell apoptosis in the remaining adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, depletion of endogenous progastrin inhibits the tumorigenicity
of APC-mutated colorectal cancer cells in vivo by promoting ICAT expression,
thereby counteracting Tcf-4 activity. Progastrin targeting strategies should
provide an exciting prospect for the differentiation therapy of colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 17920061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):396-407. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

TCF4 deficiency expands ventral diencephalon signaling and increases induction of
pituitary progenitors.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Potok MA, Davis SW, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Human Genetics, 4909 Buhl Building, 1241
E. Catherine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA.

The anterior and intermediate lobes of the pituitary gland are formed from
Rathke's pouch. FGF, BMP and WNT signals emanating from the ventral diencephalon 
influence pouch growth and development. In order to examine the role of canonical
WNT signaling during pituitary development we examined the pituitary expression
of the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors, which mediate WNT signaling
through the binding of beta-catenin. We report here the expression of several
members of this family during pituitary development and the functional role of
one member, TCF4 (TCF7L2), in the induction of the pituitary primordium. TCF4 is 
expressed in the ventral diencephalon early in pituitary development, rostral to 
a domain of BMP and FGF expression. Tcf4 deficient mice express Fgf10 and Bmp4;
however, the Bmp and Fgf expression domains are expanded rostrally. As a result, 
additional pituitary progenitor cells are recruited into Rathke's pouch in Tcf4
mutants. Mutants also exhibit an expansion of the Six6 expression domain within
Rathke's pouch, which may increase the number of proliferating pouch cells,
resulting in a greatly enlarged anterior pituitary gland. This suggests that TCF4
negatively regulates pituitary growth through two mechanisms. The first mechanism
is to restrict the domains of BMP and FGF signaling in the ventral diencephalon, 
and the second mechanism is the restriction of Six6 within Rathke's pouch. Thus, 
TCF4 is necessary both intrinsically and extrinsically to Rathke's pouch to
ensure the proper growth of the pituitary gland.

PMCID: PMC2693283
PMID: 17919533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3082-8. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

TCF7L2 is not a major susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians:
analysis of 3,501 individuals.

Guo T(1), Hanson RL, Traurig M, Muller YL, Ma L, Mack J, Kobes S, Knowler WC,
Bogardus C, Baier LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Molecular Genetics Section, Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical
Research Branch, National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, NIH, 445 North 5th St., Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene was initially reported
to be associated with type 2 diabetes in Icelandic, Danish, and U.S. populations.
We investigated whether TCF7L2 also has a role in type 2 diabetes susceptibility 
in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The six variants reported to be associated with type
2 diabetes in the Icelandic study were genotyped in a population-based sample of 
3,501 Pima Indians (1,561 subjects had type 2 diabetes, and 1,940 did not have
diabetes). In addition, the coding and promoter regions of TCF7L2 were sequenced 
in 24 Pima subjects. The one variant identified by sequencing, 35 additional
database variants positioned in introns, and the six variants reported in the
Icelandic study were genotyped in Pima families to determine the haplotype
structure of TCF7L2 among Pima Indians. Fourteen representative variants were
selected and genotyped in 3,501 Pima Indians.
RESULTS: The six variants initially reported to be associated with type 2
diabetes were less common in Pima Indians compared with samples of European
origin, and none were associated with type 2 diabetes. One representative
variant, rs1225404, was nominally associated with type 2 diabetes in a general
model (additive P = 0.03, dominant P = 0.005) but not in a within-family analysis
(additive P = 0.2, dominant P = 0.07). However, several variants were associated 
with BMI; in particular, rs12255372 was associated in both general and
within-family analyses (both P = 0.0007). Modest associations were also found
with traits predictive for type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Variation within TCF7L2 does not confer major risk for type 2
diabetes among the Pima Indian population.

PMID: 17909099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9315-21.

beta-catenin regulates multiple steps of RNA metabolism as revealed by the RNA
aptamer in colon cancer cells.

Lee HK(1), Kwak HY, Hur J, Kim IA, Yang JS, Park MW, Yu J, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, BK21 Graduate Program for RNA Biology,
Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, Dankook University Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

Nuclear beta-catenin forms a transcription complex with TCF-4, which is
implicated in colon cancer development and progression. Recently, we and others
have shown that beta-catenin could be a regulator of RNA splicing and it also
stabilizes the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA. Here, we further explored the role 
of beta-catenin in the RNA metabolism in colon cancer cells. To specifically
modulate the subcellular functions of beta-catenin, we expressed the RNA aptamer 
in the form of RNA intramers with unique cellular localizations. The
nucleus-expressed RNA intramer proved to be effective in reducing the
protein-protein interaction between beta-catenin and TCF-4, thus shown to be a
specific regulator of beta-catenin-activated transcription. It could also
regulate the alternative splicing of E1A minigene in diverse colon cancer cell
lines. In addition, we tested whether beta-catenin could stabilize any other
mRNAs and found that cyclin D1 mRNA was also bound and stabilized by
beta-catenin. Significantly, the cytoplasm-expressed RNA intramer reverted the
beta-catenin-induced COX-2 and cyclin D1 mRNA stabilization. We show here that
beta-catenin regulated multiple steps of RNA metabolism in colon cancer cells and
might be the protein factor coordinating RNA metabolism. We suggest that the RNA 
intramers could provide useful ways for inhibiting beta-catenin-mediated
transcription and RNA metabolism, which might further enhance the antitumorigenic
effects of these molecules in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 17909039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nat Genet. 2007 Nov;39(11):1376-83. Epub 2007 Sep 30.

EphB-ephrin-B interactions suppress colorectal cancer progression by
compartmentalizing tumor cells.

Cortina C(1), Palomo-Ponce S, Iglesias M, Fernández-Masip JL, Vivancos A,
Whissell G, Humà M, Peiró N, Gallego L, Jonkheer S, Davy A, Lloreta J, Sancho E, 
Batlle E.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Programme, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Josep
Samitier 1-5, 08028 Barcelona. Spain.

The genes encoding tyrosine kinase receptors EphB2 and EphB3 are beta-catenin and
Tcf4 target genes in colorectal cancer (CRC) and in normal intestinal cells. In
the intestinal epithelium, EphB signaling controls the positioning of cell types 
along the crypt-villus axis. In CRC, EphB activity suppresses tumor progression
beyond the earliest stages. Here we show that EphB receptors compartmentalize the
expansion of CRC cells through a mechanism dependent on E-cadherin-mediated
adhesion. We demonstrate that EphB-mediated compartmentalization restricts the
spreading of EphB-expressing tumor cells into ephrin-B1-positive territories in
vitro and in vivo. Our results indicate that CRC cells must silence EphB
expression to avoid repulsive interactions imposed by normal ephrin-B1-expressing
intestinal cells at the onset of tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17906625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2417-9.

Testing the gene or testing a variant? The case of TCF7L2.

Goodarzi MO(1), Rotter JI.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, 8700 Beverly Blvd., Becker B-131, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
mark.goodarzi@cshs.org

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7.

PMID: 17901222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2413-6.

The enteroinsular axis may mediate the diabetogenic effects of TCF7L2
polymorphisms.

Nauck MA(1), Meier JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabeteszentrum Bad Lauterberg, Kirchberg 21, D-37431, Bad Lauterberg, Harz,
Germany. M.Nauck@diabeteszentrum.de

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2443-50.

PMID: 17898988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. FEBS Lett. 2007 Oct 16;581(25):4850-6. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Suppression of nuclear Wnt signaling leads to stabilization of Rac1 isoforms.

Esufali S(1), Charames GS, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 60 Murray Street,
Room L6-304-4, Toronto, Canada.

The Rac1 GTPase contains a functional nuclear localization signal (NLS) and
destruction box sequence in the C-terminal polybasic region. It has been
postulated that these two regulatory sequences may function together, enabling
Rac1 to participate in nuclear signaling pathways that ultimately target it for
degradation. We have previously shown that the NLS activity of Rac1 and the Rac1b
splice variant is essential for Wnt pathway activation. In the present study, we 
demonstrate that suppression of nuclear Wnt signaling leads to stabilization of
Rac1 protein. In addition, we show that Rac1b may be under proteasomal
regulation. We propose that Rac1 and Rac1b levels are regulated by being targeted
for degradation through a negative feedback loop initiated by Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17888911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Diabet Med. 2007 Oct;24(10):1062-6.

The importance of TCF7L2.

Weedon MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK. michael.weedon@pms.ac.uk

After many years of frustratingly limited success, the genetic architecture of
Type 2 diabetes is finally being uncovered. Recent genome-wide association
studies have identified novel genes predisposing to Type 2 diabetes, which are
giving fascinating new insights into the pathophysiology of this complex disease.
Of the genes so far identified by this approach, one stands out as having by far 
the biggest effect on disease risk. A common variant of TCF7L2, when present in
two copies, is associated with an approximate 2-fold higher risk of Type 2
diabetes. This short review focuses on the TCF7L2 finding and discusses its
significance for Type 2 diabetes genetic studies and for clinical practice.

PMID: 17888129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7802-15. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Sox17 and Sox4 differentially regulate beta-catenin/T-cell factor activity and
proliferation of colon carcinoma cells.

Sinner D(1), Kordich JJ, Spence JR, Opoka R, Rankin S, Lin SC, Jonatan D, Zorn
AM, Wells JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The canonical Wnt pathway is necessary for gut epithelial cell proliferation, and
aberrant activation of this pathway causes intestinal neoplasia. We report a
novel mechanism by which the Sox family of transcription factors regulate the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway. We found that some Sox proteins antagonize while
others enhance beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) activity. Sox17, which is
expressed in the normal gut epithelium but exhibits reduced expression in
intestinal neoplasia, is antagonistic to Wnt signaling. When overexpressed in
SW480 colon carcinoma cells, Sox17 represses beta-catenin/TCF activity in a
dose-dependent manner and inhibits proliferation. Sox17 and Sox4 are expressed in
mutually exclusive domains in normal and neoplastic gut tissues, and gain- and
loss-of-function studies demonstrate that Sox4 enhances beta-catenin/TCF activity
and the proliferation of SW480 cells. In addition to binding beta-catenin, both
Sox17 and Sox4 physically interact with TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family
members via their respective high-mobility-group box domains. Results from gain- 
and loss-of-function experiments suggest that the interaction of Sox proteins
with beta-catenin and TCF/LEF proteins regulates the stability of beta-catenin
and TCF/LEF. In particular, Sox17 promotes the degradation of both beta-catenin
and TCF proteins via a noncanonical, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta-independent
mechanism that can be blocked by proteasome inhibitors. In contrast, Sox4 may
function to stabilize beta-catenin protein. These findings indicate that Sox
proteins can act as both antagonists and agonists of beta-catenin/TCF activity,
and this mechanism may regulate Wnt signaling responses in many developmental and
disease contexts.

PMCID: PMC2169141
PMID: 17875931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1520-6. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a
p53-dependent manner.

Iwai A(1), Hijikata M, Hishiki T, Isono O, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin is closely related to carcinogenesis.
Mutations in the p53 gene are reported to induce the aberrant accumulation of
beta-catenin in the absence of dysfunction in the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
(GSK3beta)-mediated degradation pathway, but the mechanism remains incompletely
understood. Here, we show that human coiled-coil domain containing 85B (CCDC85B) 
is induced by p53 and regulates beta-catenin activity via interaction with the
T-cell factor 4 in the nucleus. Moreover, CCDC85B enhances the degradation of
beta-catenin and suppresses tumor cell growth. In conclusion, we revealed that
CCDC85B-induced degradation of beta-catenin is independent of GSK3beta and other 
p53-inducible products, Siah-1L, suggesting that CCDC85B constitutes the one of
the frameworks of p53-induced multiple regulatory pathways for beta-catenin
activity.

PMID: 17873903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1527-35. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Downregulation of tumor suppressor Pdcd4 promotes invasion and activates both
beta-catenin/Tcf and AP-1-dependent transcription in colon carcinoma cells.

Wang Q(1), Sun Z, Yang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA.

Programmed cell death 4 (Pdcd4) is a tumor suppressor that inhibits neoplastic
transformation and tumor invasion. Tissue microarray analysis showed that Pdcd4
expression is downregulated in colon adenocarcinoma and carcinoma relative to
adjacent normal tissues. To address the issue of whether reduced Pdcd4 expression
is sufficient to promote tumor progression, we knocked down Pdcd4 expression in
colon tumor HT29 cells using pdcd4 short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Pdcd4 knockdown
results in a fibroblast-like transition, while the control cells (expressing LacZ
shRNA) remain as clumped similar to the parental cells. In addition, expression
of pdcd4 shRNA in HT29 cells promotes invasion. In an effort to characterize the 
molecular mechanism underlying these observations, we discovered that knockdown
of Pdcd4 results in reduction of E-cadherin expression, and accumulation of
active beta-catenin in the nucleus. The active beta-catenin binds with T-cell
factor 4 (Tcf4) and activates beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription.
Furthermore, Pdcd4 knockdown dramatically increases AP-1-dependent transcription.
Thus, the mechanism by which reduced Pdcd4 expression promotes invasion appears
to involve the activation of beta-catenin/Tcf and AP-1-dependent transcription.

PMID: 17828298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. EMBO Rep. 2007 Oct;8(10):966-73. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

T-cell factor 4 (Tcf7l2) maintains proliferative compartments in zebrafish
intestine.

Muncan V(1), Faro A, Haramis AP, Hurlstone AF, Wienholds E, van Es J, Korving J, 
Begthel H, Zivkovic D, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Center for Biomedical
Research, Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Previous studies have shown that Wnt signals, relayed through beta-catenin and
T-cell factor 4 (Tcf4), are essential for the induction and maintenance of crypts
in mice. We have now generated a tcf4 (tcf7l2) mutant zebrafish by reverse
genetics. We first observe a phenotypic defect at 4 weeks post-fertilization
(wpf), leading to death at about 6 wpf. The phenotype comprises a loss of
proliferation at the base of the intestinal folds of the middle and distal parts 
of the intestine. The proximal intestine represents an independent compartment,
as it expresses sox2 in the epithelium and barx1 in the surrounding mesenchyme,
which are early stomach markers in higher vertebrates. Zebrafish are functionally
stomach-less, but the proximal intestine might share its ontogeny with the
mammalian stomach. Rare adult homozygous tcf4(-/-) 'escapers' show proliferation 
defects in the gut epithelium, but have no other obvious abnormalities. This
study underscores the involvement of Tcf4 in maintaining proliferative
self-renewal in the intestine throughout life.

PMCID: PMC2002560
PMID: 17823612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2318-22. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Disparate genetic influences on polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and type 2
diabetes revealed by a lack of association between common variants within the
TCF7L2 gene and PCOS.

Barber TM(1), Bennett AJ, Groves CJ, Sovio U, Ruokonen A, Martikainen H, Pouta A,
Hartikainen AL, Elliott P, Wass JA, Järvelin MR, Zeggini E, Franks S, McCarthy
MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, 
Old Road, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK. tom.barber@drl.ox.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Common variants of the gene encoding transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) have a powerful effect on individual risk of type 2 diabetes (per
allele odds ratio approximately 1.35). Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and type 
2 diabetes are familial conditions sharing common features. Based on this, the
aim of the present study was to establish whether variation in TCF7L2 also
influences the development of PCOS.
METHODS: We conducted a genetic association study of variants of TCF7L2
(rs7903146 and rs12255372) using both case-control and quantitative trait
approaches. Case-control analyses were conducted in (1) 369 PCOS cases and 2574
controls of UK British/Irish origin, and (2) 540 women with PCOS symptoms and
1083 controls from the Northern Finland Birth Cohort of 1966. Quantitative trait 
analyses (androgen levels) were also performed (1249 individuals).
RESULTS: There was no association between rs7903146 and PCOS in the UK
case-control study (Cochran-Armitage test, p = 0.51); nor with symptomatic status
in the Finnish cohort (p = 0.36). In addition, there were no relationships
between the TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphism rs7903146 and androgen levels
(UK cases, p = 0.99; Finnish controls, p = 0.57; Finnish symptomatic cases, p =
0.80). Results at rs12255372 were similar, reflecting strong linkage
disequilibrium with rs7903146.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study was powered to detect an effect on PCOS
susceptibility similar to that previously reported for these variants on type 2
diabetes. Failure to detect any evident association with PCOS provides the
strongest evidence yet that the genetic architecture of these related conditions 
is qualitatively distinct.

PMID: 17805508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007 Nov;14(11):3251-9. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

Overexpression of axin downregulates TCF-4 and inhibits the development of lung
cancer.

Xu HT(1), Wei Q, Liu Y, Yang LH, Dai SD, Han Y, Yu JH, Liu N, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: T cell factor 4 (TCF-4) mediates a nuclear response to wingless/int
(Wnt) signals by interacting with beta-catenin. Axis inhibition protein (axin) is
an important negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway. Our aims were to
examine the relationship between axin and TCF-4 and to explore the effects of
axin on the development of lung cancer.
METHODS: Expression levels of axin and TCF-4 were examined in 107 lung cancer
specimens by immunohistochemistry. The axin gene was transfected into lung cancer
BE1 cells. The expression levels of axin, beta-catenin, and TCF-4 were detected
with immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) experiments. Apoptosis, proliferation, and the invasive ability of lung 
cancer cells were examined using flow cytometry,
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide (MTT), and Matrigel 
invasive assays.
RESULTS: Preserved axin expression correlated negatively with TCF-4 expression (P
= .031). Axin expression differed with respect to degree of differentiation (P = 
.025) and histological tumor type (P = .031). TCF-4 expression differed relative 
to tumor, node metastasis (TNM) stage (P = .024). BE1 cells transfected with axin
(BE1-axin cells) exhibited a significant decrease in TCF-4 expression. The level 
of apoptosis in BE1-axin cells was significantly increased, while the
proliferative and invasive abilities of BE1-axin cells were decreased.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that reduced expression of axin or augmented
expression of TCF-4 is associated with the malignant behavior of lung cancers.
Overexpression of axin can downregulate expression of TCF-4 and can inhibit the
ability of lung cancer cells to proliferate and invade.

PMID: 17768662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Diabet Med. 2007 Oct;24(10):1067-72. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated with Type 2
diabetes in UK community-based cases, but the risk allele frequency is reduced
compared with UK cases selected for genetic studies.

De Silva NM(1), Steele A, Shields B, Knight B, Parnell K, Weedon MN, Hattersley
AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Common polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are
strongly associated with Type 2 diabetes. Many studies include a large proportion
of cases enriched for family history or young age of diagnosis and may therefore 
provide an overestimation of the general population risk. We aimed to compare the
impact of TCF7L2 in UK community-based Type 2 diabetic subjects with that in
subjects ascertained for genetic studies.
METHODS: We genotyped the TCF7L2 polymorphism rs7903146 in 1068 cases from two
sources: 487 from 10 GP practices and 601 ascertained for genetic studies, and
2099 control subjects from two sources: 1099 parents from a birth cohort
(population control subjects) and 300 subjects with normal fasting glucose aged >
or = 45 years (community control subjects).
RESULTS: When compared with Type 2 diabetes cases ascertained for genetic
studies, the risk allele frequency in community-based cases was lower (40 vs.
36%, P = 0.04), but there was no difference in risk allele frequency between
community-based control and population-based control subjects (31 vs. 30%, P =
0.61). The T allele of rs7903146 increased Type 2 diabetes risk with an odds
ratio (OR) of 1.32 (95% CI: 1.13-1.52; P = 0.0002) in community-based cases, but 
this OR was lower than the OR of cases enriched for genetic studies [1.58 (95%
CI: 1.38-1.80), P = 1.4 x 10(-11)] and the combined OR of meta-analysis of 10
studies to date on rs7903146 [1.48 (95% CI: 1.41-1.54), P < 10(-20)].
CONCLUSION: Common variation in the TCF7L2 gene contributes to Type 2 diabetes
risk in UK patients recruited in general practice, but the risk allele frequency 
may be lower than that in subjects enriched for genetic effects.

PMID: 17725629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):3109-18.

The Paneth cell alpha-defensin deficiency of ileal Crohn's disease is linked to
Wnt/Tcf-4.

Wehkamp J(1), Wang G, Kübler I, Nuding S, Gregorieff A, Schnabel A, Kays RJ,
Fellermann K, Burk O, Schwab M, Clevers H, Bevins CL, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University 
of Tübingen, Auerbachstrasse 12, Stuttgart, Germany. jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

Ileal Crohn's disease (CD), a chronic mucosal inflammation, is characterized by
two pertinent features: a specific decrease of Paneth cell-produced antimicrobial
alpha-defensins and the presence of mucosal-adherent bacteria. A mutation in
NOD2, the muramyl dipeptide recognition receptor, is found in some patients,
which leads to an even more pronounced alpha-defensin decrease. However, the
underlying mechanism remains unclear for the majority of patients. In this study,
we report a reduced expression in ileal CD of the Wnt-signaling pathway
transcription factor Tcf-4, a known regulator of Paneth cell differentiation and 
alpha-defensin expression. Within specimens, the levels of Tcf-4 mRNA showed a
high degree of correlation with both HD5 and HD6 mRNA. The levels of Tcf-4 mRNA
were decreased in patients with ileal disease irrespective of degree of
inflammation, but were not decreased in colonic CD or ulcerative colitis. As a
functional indicator of Tcf-4 protein, quantitative binding analysis with nuclear
extracts from small intestine biopsies to a Tcf-4 high-affinity binding site in
the HD-5 and HD-6 promoters showed significantly reduced activity in ileal CD.
Furthermore, a causal link was shown in a murine Tcf-4 knockout model, where the 
comparably reduced expression of Tcf-4 in heterozygous (+/-) mice was sufficient 
to cause a significant decrease of both Paneth cell alpha-defensin levels and
bacterial killing activity. Finally, the association between Paneth cell
alpha-defensins and Tcf-4 was found to be independent of the NOD2 genotype. This 
new link established between a human inflammatory bowel disease and the Wnt
pathway/Tcf-4 provides a novel mechanism for pathogenesis in patients with ileal 
CD.

PMID: 17709525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Zhongguo Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2007 Aug;19(8):471-3.

[A study of expression of Tcf-4 in the small intestine mucosa crypt during severe
abdominal infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu CT(1), Liu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China. wct66@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of T cell factor 4(Tcf-4) in the process of 
severe abdominal infection in rats.
METHODS: Forty healthy adult Wistar rats were randomly divided into control group
(celiotomy only) and groups of 12, 24, 48 hours after establishment of abdominal 
infection. The latter groups included rats receiving cecal ligation and puncture 
(CLP) to establish the severe abdominal infection. Each group consisted of 10
rats. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) were used to detect the number of Tcf-4-positive cells and
expression of Tcf-4 mRNA in the crypts of the mucosa of the small intestine.
RESULTS: It showed that the expression of Tcf-4 in the mucosal crypts of the
small intestine in control group was weak but the number of cells with positive
Tcf-4 expression was increased in crypts of small intestinal mucosa 12 hours
after CLP, reaching its peak level at 24 hours, and remained higher than control 
group at 48 hours (all P<0.01). The transcription level of Tcf-4 was associated
with the stages of the severe abdominal infection. RT-PCR showed that Tcf-4 mRNA 
was upregulated rapidly 12 hours after CLP (0.21+/-0.01, P<0.01), and it reached 
peak level after 24 hours (0.28+/-0.02, P<0.01), decreased slowly but still
obviously higher (0.20+/-0.01, P<0.05) than that of control group (0.19+/-0.01).
CONCLUSION: The expression of Tcf-4 is induced by severe abdominal infection. The
results suggest that Tcf-4 might be related with the proliferation and
differentiation of intestinal stem cell during severe abdominal infection, and
plays an important role in damage and repair of enteric mucosa.

PMID: 17708841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Oncol. 2007 Jun;29(2):152-5.

Identification of new DNA markers of endometrial cancer in patients from the
Ukrainian population.

Domenyuk VP(1), Litovkin KV, Verbitskaya TG, Dubinina VG, Bubnov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Odessa State Medical University,
Odessa, Ukraine.

AIM: To identify clinically significant molecular markers of endometrial cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cancer and normal endometrial tissue samples from 20
patients of the Gynecology Clinic of Odessa State Medical University (Odessa,
Ukraine) with confirmed endometrial cancer were compared for SSR and ISSR
polymorphisms. Identified polymorphic fragments from anonymous genome regions
situated between microsatellite repeats underwent direct DNA sequencing; analysis
of their homology to sequences from human genome database has been performed.
RESULTS: No significant variability for the microsatellite loci adjacent to the
E2F1, BAX, TCF7L2, C-MYC, WNT1, FES, DCC, P27, THRA, APC, CYP19 and P53 genes was
detected. Search for new molecular markers of endometrial cancer within anonymous
DNA sequences located between microsatellite repeats revealed 100 bp and 174 bp
polymorphic fragments. These fragments were detected correspondingly in 60% and
35% of patients. 100 bp fragment appeared to be homologous to a region within the
NFKB gene, 174 bp fragment - to a sequence within the DDR1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: NFKB1 and DDR1 genes may be regarded as potential markers for some
types of endometrial cancer. This is a first report about possible association of
these genes with endometrial cancer.

PMID: 17704737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Metabolism. 2007 Sep;56(9):1174-8.

The rs12255372(G/T) and rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene are
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Asian Indians.

Bodhini D(1), Radha V, Dhar M, Narayani N, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)MDRF-ICMR Advanced Centre for Genomics of Diabetes, Madras Diabetes Research
Foundation, Gopalapuram, Chennai, India.

One thousand thirty-eight normal glucose-tolerant and 1031 type 2 diabetic
subjects selected from the Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study were genotyped 
using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay to
investigate the association of rs12255372(G/T) and rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms
of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
in Asian Indians. The frequency of the "T" allele of both rs12255372(G/T) and
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms was significantly higher in diabetic subjects (23%
and 33%) compared to that in normal glucose-tolerant subjects (19% and 28%; P =
.001 and P = .0001, respectively). Logistic regression analysis of the
rs12255372(G/T) polymorphism showed that the odds ratio (adjusted for age, sex,
and body mass index) was 1.56 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.03-2.37; P = .034)
for the TT genotype and 1.29 (95% CI, 1.06-1.58; P = .011) for the TG genotype
when compared with the GG genotype. Adjusted odds ratios for the TT and TC
genotypes of the rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism were found to be 1.50 (95% CI,
1.08-2.08; P = .013) and 1.44 (95% CI, 1.18-1.76; P = .0003), respectively,
compared with the CC genotype. Normal glucose-tolerant subjects with the TT
genotype of rs12255372(G/T) had significantly higher 2-hour plasma glucose levels
(mean +/- SD, 6.1 +/- 1.4 mmol/L) than those with the GG genotype (5.6 +/- 1.0
mmol/L, P = .011). Normal glucose-tolerant subjects with the TT genotype of
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphism had significantly higher 2-hour plasma glucose levels
(mean +/- SD, 6.0 +/- 1.3 mmol/L) than those with the CC genotype (5.6 +/- 1.0
mmol/L, P = .004). In conclusion, the T allele of the rs12255372(G/T) and
rs7903146(C/T) polymorphisms of TCF7L2 gene confer susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus in Asian Indians.

PMID: 17697858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Nov;21(11):2805-20. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Transforming growth factor-beta and Wnt signals regulate chondrocyte
differentiation through Twist1 in a stage-specific manner.

Dong YF(1), Soung do Y, Chang Y, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Paris M, O'Keefe RJ, Schwarz 
EM, Drissi H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

We investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the transition between
immature and mature chondrocytes downstream of TGF-beta and canonical Wnt
signals. We used two developmentally distinct chondrocyte models isolated from
the caudal portion of embryonic chick sternum or chick growth plates. Lower
sternal chondrocytes exhibited immature phenotypic features, whereas growth
plate-extracted cells displayed a hypertrophic phenotype. TGF-beta significantly 
induced beta-catenin in immature chondrocytes, whereas it repressed it in mature 
chondrocytes. TGF-beta further enhanced canonical Wnt-mediated transactivation of
the Topflash reporter expression in lower sternal chondrocytes. However, it
inhibited Topflash activity in a time-dependent manner in growth plate
chondrocytes. Our immunoprecipitation experiments showed that TGF-beta induced
Sma- and Mad-related protein 3 interaction with T-cell factor 4 in immature
chondrocytes, whereas it inhibited this interaction in mature chondrocytes.
Similar results were observed by chromatin immunoprecipitation showing that
TGF-beta differentially shifts T-cell factor 4 occupancy on the Runx2 promoter in
lower sternal chondrocytes vs. growth plate chondrocytes. To further determine
the molecular switch between immature and hypertrophic chondrocytes, we assessed 
the expression and regulation of Twist1 and Runx2 in both cell models upon
treatment with TGF-beta and Wnt3a. We show that Runx2 and Twist1 are
differentially regulated during chondrocyte maturation. Furthermore, whereas
TGF-beta induced Twist1 in mature chondrocytes, it inhibited Runx2 expression in 
these cells. Opposite effects were observed upon Wnt3a treatment, which
predominates over TGF-beta effects on these cells. Finally, overexpression of
chick Twist1 in mature chondrocytes dramatically inhibited their hypertrophy.
Together, our findings show that Twist1 may be an important regulator of
chondrocyte progression toward terminal maturation in response to TGF-beta and
canonical Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17684115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Aug 3;8:51.

The TCF7L2 locus and type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ(1), Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics Lab, The McGill University Health Center, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada. hui.qi.qu@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 belongs to a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG box-containing
transcription factors, and maps to human chromosome 10q25.3. A recent study
identified genetic association of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with this gene,
correlated with diminished insulin secretion. This study aimed to investigate the
possibility of genetic association between TCF7L2 and type 1 diabetes (T1D).
METHODS: The SNP most significantly associated with T2D, rs7903146, was genotyped
in 886 T1D nuclear family trios with ethnic backgrounds of mixed European
descent.
RESULTS: This study found no T1D association with, and no age-of-onset effect
from rs7903146.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that a T2D mechanism mediated by TCF7L2 does not 
participate in the etiology of T1D.

PMCID: PMC1978206
PMID: 17683561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Kidney Int Suppl. 2007 Aug;(106):S43-8.

Genetic variations associated with diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes in a
Japanese population.

Maeda S(1), Osawa N, Hayashi T, Tsukada S, Kobayashi M, Kikkawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Center, RIKEN, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan. smaeda@src.riken.jp

Genetic susceptibility plays an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetic
nephropathy and type II diabetes. To identify the genetic polymorphisms
associated with diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes, we performed a
genome-wide association study using single-nucleotide polymorphisms as genetic
markers. We also analyzed polymorphisms within the genes encoding for the
renin-angiotensin system that were considered as candidate genes for diabetic
nephropathy susceptibility and the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) as a
candidate for type II diabetes, in a large cohort of a Japanese population. A
genome-wide association study identified SLC12A3 and engulfment and cell motility
1 gene as the new candidates for diabetic nephropathy and transcription
factor-activating protein 2beta as a novel susceptibility gene for type II
diabetes; this observation was based on the significant association between the
polymorphisms within the genes and the corresponding diseases (P<0.0001).
Further, we discovered that the genes encoding the angiotensin-converting enzyme,
angiotensinogen, and angiotensin II type I receptor have a significant
combinational effect on conferring susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy.
Furthermore, TCF7L2 that has been reported as a convincing susceptibility gene
for type II diabetes in Caucasian populations was also shown to be associated
with type II diabetes in a Japanese population. These genes could be considered
as strong susceptibility genes for diabetic nephropathy and type II diabetes in
the Japanese, although the new candidates that have been identified by
genome-wide screening need to be examined in greater detail by several
replication studies.

PMID: 17653210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2155-63.

Mechanisms by which common variants in the TCF7L2 gene increase risk of type 2
diabetes.

Lyssenko V(1), Lupi R, Marchetti P, Del Guerra S, Orho-Melander M, Almgren P,
Sjögren M, Ling C, Eriksson KF, Lethagen AL, Mancarella R, Berglund G, Tuomi T,
Nilsson P, Del Prato S, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, and Lund
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
Valeri.Lyssenko@med.lu.se

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2077-9.

Genetic variants in the gene encoding for transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) 
have been associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and impaired beta cell function, 
but the mechanisms have remained unknown. We therefore studied prospectively the 
ability of common variants in TCF7L2 to predict future T2D and explored the
mechanisms by which they would do this. Scandinavian subjects followed for up to 
22 years were genotyped for 3 SNPs (rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs10885406) in
TCF7L2, and a subset of them underwent extensive metabolic studies. Expression of
TCF7L2 was related to genotype and metabolic parameters in human islets. The
CT/TT genotypes of SNP rs7903146 strongly predicted future T2D in 2 independent
cohorts (Swedish and Finnish). The risk T allele was associated with impaired
insulin secretion, incretin effects, and enhanced rate of hepatic glucose
production. TCF7L2 expression in human islets was increased 5-fold in T2D,
particularly in carriers of the TT genotype. Overexpression of TCF7L2 in human
islets reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. In conclusion, the increased
risk of T2D conferred by variants in TCF7L2 involves the enteroinsular axis,
enhanced expression of the gene in islets, and impaired insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC1934596
PMID: 17671651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2077-9.

Prime suspect: the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes risk.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, United Kingdom. Andrew.Hattersley@pms.ac.uk

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2155-63.

Transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is the most important type 2 diabetes
susceptibility gene identified to date, with common intronic variants strongly
associated with diabetes in all major racial groups. This ubiquitous
transcription factor in the Wnt signaling pathway was not previously known to be 
involved in glucose homeostasis, so defining the underlying mechanism(s) will
provide new insights into diabetes. In this issue of the JCI, Lyssenko and
colleagues report on their human and isolated islet studies and suggest that the 
risk allele increases TCF7L2 expression in the pancreatic beta cell, reducing
insulin secretion and hence predisposing the individual to diabetes (see the
related article beginning on page 2155).

PMCID: PMC1934573
PMID: 17671643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):338-45. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Type 2 diabetes whole-genome association study in four populations: the DiaGen
consortium.

Salonen JT(1), Uimari P, Aalto JM, Pirskanen M, Kaikkonen J, Todorova B, Hyppönen
J, Korhonen VP, Asikainen J, Devine C, Tuomainen TP, Luedemann J, Nauck M, Kerner
W, Stephens RH, New JP, Ollier WE, Gibson JM, Payton A, Horan MA, Pendleton N,
Mahoney W, Meyre D, Delplanque J, Froguel P, Luzzatto O, Yakir B, Darvasi A.

Author information: 
(1)Oy Jurilab, and Research Institute of Public Health, University of Kuopio,
Kuopio, Finland, and Hope Hospital, Salford, UK.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a common, polygenic chronic disease with high
heritability. The purpose of this whole-genome association study was to discover 
novel T2D-associated genes. We genotyped 500 familial cases and 497 controls with
>300,000 HapMap-derived tagging single-nucleotide-polymorphism (SNP) markers.
When a stringent statistical correction for multiple testing was used, the only
significant SNP was at TCF7L2, which has already been discovered and confirmed as
a T2D-susceptibility gene. For a replication study, we selected 10 SNPs in six
chromosomal regions with the strongest association (singly or as part of a
haplotype) for retesting in an independent case-control set including 2,573 T2D
cases and 2,776 controls. The most significant replicated result was found at the
AHI1-LOC441171 gene region.

PMCID: PMC1950819
PMID: 17668382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Dec;84(12):1005-14.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene and predisposition to type 2 diabetes in UK
European Whites, Indian Asians and Afro-Caribbean men and women.

Humphries SE(1), Gable D, Cooper JA, Ireland H, Stephens JW, Hurel SJ, Li KW,
Palmen J, Miller MA, Cappuccio FP, Elkeles R, Godsland I, Miller GJ, Talmud PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, British Heart
Foundation Laboratories, Royal Free and University College Medical School,
London, WC1E 6JF, UK. rmhaseh@ucl.ac.uk

Common variants of TCF7L2, encoding a beta-cell-expressed transcription factor,
are strongly associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We examined
this association using both prospective and case-control designs. A total of
2,676 healthy European white middle-aged men from the prospective NPHSII (158
developed T2D over 15 years surveillance) were genotyped for two intronic SNPs
[rs 7903146 (IVS3C>T) and rs12255372 (IVS4G>T)] which showed strong linkage
disequilibrium (D' = 0.88, p<0.001; R(2)=0.76, p<0.001). The IVS5T allele
frequency was 0.28 (95% CI 0.27-0.29) and 0.33 (0.28-0.39) in healthy and T2D,
respectively (p=0.04). Compared to CC men, CT and TT men had an adjusted [for
age, body mass index, systolic blood pressure, triglyceride and C-reactive
protein levels] hazard ratio for T2D of 1.65 (1.13-2.41) and 1.87 (0.99-3.53),
respectively, p<0.01. The population attributable fraction for diabetes risk was 
17%. In 1459, European white T2D men and women (60% male), T allele frequency was
0.36 (0.34-0.38), and compared to NPHSII healthy men the OR for T2D for the CT
and TT subjects was 1.43 (1.24-1.65) and 2.11 (1.69-2.63), respectively
p=<0.0001. A similar effect was observed in 919 T2D Indian Asians [OR=1.50
(1.14-1.99) and 1.64 (1.03-2.63) p=0.003] and 385 Afro-Caribbean subjects
[OR=1.25 (0.90-1.75) and 1.32 (0.74-2.33) p=0.17] compared to non-diabetic
ethnically matched subjects from South London. Weaker associations were found for
the IVS4G>T in all studies. Linkage disequilibrium between the two SNPs was high 
in Indian Asians (D'=0.94), but much weaker in Afro-Caribbeans (D'=0.17) and
haplotype frequencies differed markedly in this group. These results extend
previous observations to other ethnic groups, and strongly confirm that TCF7L2
genotype is a major risk factor for development of T2D.

PMID: 17665514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2443-50. Epub 2007 Jul 28.

Impaired glucagon-like peptide-1-induced insulin secretion in carriers of
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene polymorphisms.

Schäfer SA(1), Tschritter O, Machicao F, Thamer C, Stefan N, Gallwitz B, Holst
JJ, Dekker JM, 't Hart LM, Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, Eberhard-Karls University of
Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str 10, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Mar;52(3):557. Dosage error in article text.
    Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):208. t' Hart, L M [corrected to 't Hart, L M].

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2413-6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene
are associated with type 2 diabetes and reduced insulin secretion. The
transcription factor TCF7L2 is an essential factor for glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) secretion from intestinal L cells. We studied whether a defect in the
enteroinsular axis contributes to impaired insulin secretion in carriers of
TCF7L2 polymorphisms.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,110 non-diabetic German participants for five single
nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF7L2. All participants underwent an OGTT; GLP-1
secretion was measured in 155 participants. In 210 participants, an IVGTT
combined with a hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp was performed. In another 160
participants from the Netherlands and 73 from Germany, a hyperglycaemic clamp (10
mmol/l) was performed. In 73 German participants this clamp was combined with a
GLP-1 infusion and an arginine bolus.
RESULTS: The OGTT data confirmed that variants in TCF7L2 are associated with
reduced insulin secretion. In contrast, insulin secretion induced by an i.v.
glucose challenge in the IVGTT and hyperglycaemic clamp was not different between
the genotypes. GLP-1 concentrations during the OGTT were not influenced by the
TCF7L2 variants. However, GLP-1-infusion combined with a hyperglycaemic clamp
showed a significant reduction in GLP-1-induced insulin secretion in carriers of 
the risk allele in two variants (rs7903146, rs12255372, p < 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Variants of TCF7L2 specifically impair GLP-1-induced 
insulin secretion. This seems to be rather the result of a functional defect in
the GLP-1 signalling in beta cells than a reduction in GLP-1 secretion. This
defect might explain the impaired insulin secretion in carriers of the risk
alleles and confers the increased risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2063563
PMID: 17661009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Protein Sci. 2007 Sep;16(9):1984-98. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Molecular plasticity of beta-catenin: new insights from single-molecule
measurements and MD simulation.

Ritco-Vonsovici M(1), Ababou A, Horton M.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Nanotechnology and Department of Medicine, University
College London, London WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom.

The multifunctional protein, beta-catenin, has essential roles in cell adhesion
and, through the Wnt signaling pathway, in controlling cell differentiation,
development, and generation of cancer. Could distinct molecular forms of
beta-catenin underlie these two functions? Our single-molecule force spectroscopy
of armadillo beta-catenin, with molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, suggests a
model in which the cell generates various forms of beta-catenin, in equilibrium. 
We find beta-catenin and the transcriptional factor Tcf4 form two complexes with 
different affinities. Specific cellular response is achieved by the ligand
binding to a particular matching preexisting conformer. Our MD simulation
indicates that complexes derive from two conformers of the core region of the
protein, whose preexisting molecular forms could arise from small variations in
flexible regions of the beta-catenin main binding site. This mechanism for the
generation of the various forms offers a route to tailoring future therapeutic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC2206973
PMID: 17660262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jul 21;13(27):3747-51.

Novel mutations and sequence variants in exons 3-9 of human T cell factor-4 gene 
in sporadic rectal cancer patients stratified by microsatellite instability.

Meng WJ(1), Wang L, Tian C, Yu YY, Zhou B, Gu J, Xia QJ, Sun XF, Li Y, Wang R,
Zheng XL, Zhou ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, 37 Guo Xue Xiang, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

AIM: To establish the role of human T Cell Factor-4 (hTCF-4) gene exons 3-9
mutation status in association with sporadic rectal cancer with microsatellite
instability (MSI).
METHODS: Microsatellite markers were genotyped in 93 sporadic rectal cancer
patients. Eleven cases were found to be high-frequency MSI (MSI-H). Sequence
analysis of the coding region of the exons 3-9 of hTCF-4 gene was carried out for
the 11 MSI-H cases and 10 controls (5 microsatellite stability (MSS) cases and 5 
cases with normal mucosa). The sequencing and MSI identification were used.
RESULTS: Several novel mutations and variants were revealed. In exon 4, one is a 
4-position continuous alteration which caused amino acid change from Q131T and
S132I (391insA, 392 G > A, 393 A > G and 395delC) and another nucleotide deletion
(395delC) is present in MSI-H cases (5/10 and 4/10, respectively) but completely 
absent in the controls.
CONCLUSION: Novel mutations in exon 4 of hTCF-4 gene were revealed in this study,
which might be of importance in the pathogenesis of sporadic rectal cancer
patients with MSI-H.

PMCID: PMC4250650
PMID: 17659738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Diabetologia. 2007 Sep;50(9):1852-7. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Variants of the TCF7L2 gene are associated with beta cell dysfunction and confer 
an increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the ULSAM cohort of Swedish
elderly men.

Dahlgren A(1), Zethelius B, Jensevik K, Syvänen AC, Berne C; ULSAM Cohort.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: In a population-based cohort of elderly men with well-defined
phenotypes and biochemical markers related to type 2 diabetes mellitus, we
analysed two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs7903146 and rs12255372, in
the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2), which are associated with an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 1,142 subjects were from the population-based Uppsala 
Longitudinal Study of Adult Men cohort study (see
http://www.pubcare.uu.se/ULSAM/, last accessed in May 2007). Insulin sensitivity 
was assessed using a euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp; fasting intact and
32-33 split proinsulin, immunoreactive insulin and specific insulin were measured
in plasma samples. The SNPs rs7903146 and rs12255372 were genotyped using a
fluorescent homogeneous single base extension assay. The SNP genotypes were
analysed against diabetes prevalence at age 70 using logistic regression and
against quantitative biochemical measures using linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: We replicated the association with type 2 diabetes mellitus for both
SNPs in this cohort of elderly males. The highest significant odds ratio (2.15,
95% CI 1.20-3.85) was found for SNP rs7903146. The odds ratio for SNP rs12255372 
was 1.69 (95% CI 1.20-2.39). Both TCF7L2 SNPs were found to be significantly
associated with plasma proinsulin when adjusting for insulin sensitivity, both in
the whole cohort and when the diabetic subjects were excluded. Analysis for
fasting plasma insulin or insulin sensitivity did not give significant results.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The association between the risk alleles of the two
SNPs studied and levels of proinsulin in plasma, identified when adjusting for
insulin sensitivity using euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp measurements in
this study, is an important novel finding.

PMID: 17618413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Sep;92(9):3733-7. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Replication and identification of novel variants at TCF7L2 associated with type 2
diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese.

Ng MC(1), Tam CH, Lam VK, So WY, Ma RC, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: Variations at a large linkage disequilibrium (LD) block of
transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) were reported to be associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Icelandic, Danish and European-American populations and 
further replicated in other populations of European, African, and Asian
ancestries. However, data for Chinese and comprehensive survey of the whole gene 
are lacking.
DESIGN: We attempted to examine 22 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
spanning across the TCF7L2 gene for association with T2D in Hong Kong Chinese. We
first studied a case-control sample involving 433 hospital cases with familial
early-onset T2D and 419 normal controls and further studied the associated SNPs
in 450 members of 142 diabetic families.
RESULTS: Two of the previously reported risk alleles at rs11196205 (C) and
rs7903146 (T) were rare in Chinese (0.013 and 0.024, respectively, in controls). 
Rs11196205 was associated with T2D [odds ratio (OR) [95% confidence interval
(CI)] = 2.11 (1.04-4.26)], whereas the association for rs7903146 [OR (95% CI) =
1.27 (0.71-2.29)] was not significant in the case-control sample. Interestingly, 
another SNP (rs11196218 G allele) located in adjacent LD block conferred
independent risk for T2D [OR (95%CI) =1.43 (1.14-1.79)] and contributed
high-population attributable risk of 42%. The association finding of rs11196218
and its haplotype for T2D was also replicated in the family sample (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are consistent with others' findings that variations at 
TCF7L2 contribute to T2D, including Chinese. The presence of association signals 
spanning several LD blocks warrants further examination of extended regions to
reveal the causal variant(s) for this important T2D gene.

PMID: 17609304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):35-45.

Crosstalk between NF-kappaB/p65 and beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling pathways
through alterations in GSK-3beta expression during trans-differentiation of
endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling loops play an important role in
trans-differentiation towards the morular phenotype of endometrial carcinomas.
Crosstalk between NF-kappaB and beta-catenin pathways has been proposed and we
focused here on associations between these two pathways during
trans-differentiation. In normal endometrium, nuclear phosphorylated p65 (pp65), 
the active form NF-kappaB subunit, was found to be significantly increased in the
secretory phase, correlating positively with vimentin and E-cadherin and
inversely with Snail mRNA expression. On transfection of p65, vimentin,
E-cadherin, and Snail were transcriptionally altered, indicating possible roles
in establishment and maintenance of the secretory phenotype. In endometrial
carcinomas with morules, levels of nuclear pp65, Snail mRNA, vimentin, and
cytoplasmic TNF-alpha were reduced during trans-differentiation, correlating
inversely with nuclear beta-catenin. Nuclear accumulation of GSK-3beta, along
with beta-catenin, was observed in morules. In cell lines, overexpression of p65 
inhibited beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription, while transfection of
GSK-3beta resulted in repression of TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activity.
Moreover, nuclear GSK-3beta was increased by overexpression of beta-catenin, as
well as induction of G1-cell cycle arrest. These findings provide evidence that a
shift from NF-kappaB to beta-catenin signalling pathways through alterations in
GSK-3beta expression may be essential for the induction of trans-differentiation 
of endometrial carcinoma cells, leading to a shut-down of mesenchymal markers.

PMID: 17607667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2638-42. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with
type 2 diabetes in an African-American population enriched for nephropathy.

Sale MM(1), Smith SG, Mychaleckyj JC, Keene KL, Langefeld CD, Leak TS, Hicks PJ, 
Bowden DW, Rich SS, Freedman BI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. msale@virginia.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recently, variants in the TCF7L2 gene have been reported to be
associated with type 2 diabetes across multiple Europid populations, but only one
small sample of African-American type 2 diabetic patients has been examined. Our 
objective was to investigate the importance of TCF7L2 in a larger
African-American case-control population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in six known type 2 diabetes genes in 577 African-American case subjects
with type 2 diabetes enriched for nephropathy and 596 African-American control
subjects. Additionally, we genotyped 70 ancestry-informative markers (AIMs) to
apply adjustments for differences in ancestral proportions.
RESULTS: The most significant associations were observed with TCF7L2 intron 3
SNPs rs7903146 (additive P = 4.10 x 10(-6), odds ratio [OR] 1.51;
admixture-adjusted P(a) = 3.77 x 10(-6)) and rs7901695 (P = 0.001, OR 1.30; P(a) 
= 0.003). The 2-SNP haplotype containing these SNPs was also associated with type
2 diabetes (P = 3 x 10(-5)). Modest associations were also seen with TCF7L2
intron 4 SNPs rs7895340, rs11196205, and rs12255372 (0.01 < P < 0.05; 0.03 < P(a)
< 0.08), as well as with ATP-sensitive inwardly rectifying potassium channel
subunit Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) SNPs (0.01 
< P < 0.05; 0.01 < P(a) < 0.41). No significant associations were detected with
genotyped calpain 10 (CAPN10), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARG), and transcription factor 1 (TCF1) SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that variants in the TCF7L2 gene significantly 
contribute to diabetes susceptibility in African-American populations.

PMID: 17601994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Jun 25;8:37.

TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant does not associate with smallness for gestational age in
the French population.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Choquet H, Deghmoun S, Durand E, Gaget S, Lecoeur C,
Froguel P, Levy-Marchal C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, 8090-Institute of biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, 59000 France.
Stephane.Cauchi@good.ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: In adults, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 T allele, commonly associated with
type 2 diabetes (T2D), has been also associated with a lower body mass index
(BMI) in T2D individuals and with a smaller waist circumference in subjects with 
impaired glucose tolerance.
METHODS: The present association study aimed at analyzing the contribution of the
rs7903146 SNP to smallness for gestational age (SGA) and metabolic profiles in
subjects with SGA or appropriate for gestational age birth weight (AGA). Two
groups of French Caucasian subjects were selected on birth data: SGA (birth
weight < 10th percentile; n = 764), and AGA (25th < birth weight < 75th
percentile; n = 627). Family-based association tests were also performed in 3,012
subjects from 628 SGA and AGA pedigrees.
RESULTS: The rs7903146 genotypic distributions between AGA (30.7%) and SGA
(29.0%) were not statistically different (allelic OR = 0.92 [0.78-1.09], p =
0.34). Family association-based studies did not show a distortion of T allele
transmission in SGA subjects (p = 0.52). No significant effect of the T allele
was detected on any of the metabolic parameters in the SGA group. However, in the
AGA group, trends towards a lower insulin secretion (p = 0.03) and a higher
fasting glycaemia (p = 0.002) were detected in carriers of the T allele.
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant neither increases the risk for SGA nor
modulates birth weight and young adulthood glucose homeostasis in French
Caucasian subjects born with SGA.

PMCID: PMC1920504
PMID: 17593304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1780. Epub 2007 Jun 23.

The accelerator hypothesis cannot be tested using the type 2 diabetes gene,
TCF7L2.

Wilkin TJ.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2001 Jul;44(7):914-22.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):212-3.

PMID: 17589824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1621-30. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes, glucose
homeostasis traits and gene expression in US participants of European and African
descent.

Elbein SC(1), Chu WS, Das SK, Yao-Borengasser A, Hasstedt SJ, Wang H, Rasouli N, 
Kern PA.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Section, Medicine and Research Services, Central Arkansas Veterans
Healthcare System, John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans Hospital, 4700 W. 7th
Street, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. elbeinstevenc@uams.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We sought to determine: (1) the role of previously described
transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants in type 2 diabetes in African
American individuals and in participants of European ancestry; (2) the
physiological impact of these variants on glucose homeostasis; and (3) whether
the non-coding variants altered TCF7L2 expression in adipocytes and transformed
lymphocytes.
METHODS: Association studies were conducted by genotyping 932 Europid and African
American diabetic and control participants. Family studies were conducted in 673 
members of 68 Europid families ascertained for at least two diabetic siblings.
Metabolic studies were conducted in 585 non-diabetic individuals who had
undergone frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance tests to determine
insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion. Gene expression studies were conducted
in 74 adipose samples and 64 muscle samples from non-diabetic individuals with
known genotypes and also in 55 lymphoblastoid cell lines.
RESULTS: TCF7L2 variants were associated with type 2 diabetes in a Europid
case-control population and in families, but not in African Americans. Risk
alleles increased the 60 min post-challenge glucose value in Europid families and
reduced insulin sensitivity by 45% in Europids, but did not alter insulin
secretion. TCF7L2 expression was not altered by genotype and did not correlate
with insulin sensitivity or BMI.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We confirmed TCF7L2 as a risk factor in a population 
of European descent, where it reduced glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, 
but not insulin secretion. We found no role in African Americans and could not
explain the association by altered adipocyte or muscle gene expression.

PMID: 17579832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2631-7. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Association study of the genetic polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like
2 (TCF7L2) gene and type 2 diabetes in the Chinese population.

Chang YC(1), Chang TJ, Jiang YD, Kuo SS, Lee KC, Chiu KC, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2417-9.
    Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):e22; author reply e23.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
gene is one of the few validated genetic variants with large effects on the risk 
of type 2 diabetes in the populations of European ancestry. In this study, we
aimed to explore the effect of the TCF7L2 polymorphisms in a Han Chinese
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) across the TCF7L2 gene in 1,520 unrelated subjects from a Han Chinese
population in Taiwan. The associations of SNPs and haplotypes with type 2
diabetes and linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure of the TCF7L2 gene were
analyzed.
RESULTS: The previously reported SNPs rs7903146 T- and rs12255372 T-alleles of
the TCF7L2 gene were rare and were not associated with type 2 diabetes in a
Chinese population, which may attribute to the low frequencies of these two SNPs.
SNP rs290487 located in an LD block close to the 3' end of the gene was
associated with type 2 diabetes (allele-specific P = 0.0021; permuted P = 0.03). 
The odds ratio was 1.36 for the CT genotype (95% CI 1.08-1.71; P = 0.0063) and
1.51 for the CC genotype (1.10 -2.07; P = 0.0085) compared with the TT genotype, 
corresponding to a population attributable risk fraction of 18.7%. The haplotypes
composed of rs290487 were also significantly associated with type 2 diabetes
(global P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel risk-conferring genetic variant of TCF7L2 for 
type 2 diabetes in a Chinese population. Our data suggested that the TCF7L2
genetic polymorphisms are major determinants for risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Chinese population.

PMID: 17579206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2007 Jul;10(4):420-6.

Gene-environment interactions in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and
metabolism.

Grarup N(1), Andersen G.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Gene-environment interaction can be viewed as a departure from
an otherwise expected additivity of genetic and environmental factors on a given 
outcome measure. Important genetic and environmental factors contribute to the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and intermediary traits, probably modulated by
their complex interaction. This paper provides an update on the current
literature investigating gene-environment interactions of type 2 diabetes and
metabolic phenotypes, and discusses the future perspectives of this research.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent advances in gene-environment interaction studies of
metabolism have involved LIPC, APOA5 and PPARG variation, and nutrition and
physical activity, of which the most consistently replicated observations have
been obtained for APOA5. Also, intervention studies of the promising TCF7L2 type 
2 diabetes gene and possible future strategies are discussed.
SUMMARY: Possibly as a result of the complexity of these multifactorial diseases,
recent years have seen only limited success in unravelling significant
gene-environment interactions, but important insights have been gained and they
hold promise for implementation in lifestyle intervention strategies. We need to 
evolve to more complex, but realistic, scenarios involving several genes and
environmental factors. Recent progress in statistical methods allowing for
higher-order interactions may make this possible.

PMID: 17563459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2007 Jul;10(4):415-9.

Evaluation of polymorphisms known to contribute to risk for diabetes in African
and African-American populations.

Elbein SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine and Research Services, Central Arkansas Veterans Affairs Healthcare
System, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. 
elbeinstevenc@uams.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Populations of direct African ancestry have much greater
genetic diversity than do other populations. African-American populations exhibit
twice the prevalence of type 2 diabetes as compared with their Caucasian
counterparts. African-American populations are likely to have unique genetic
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. This review addresses current knowledge of
susceptibility genes that are shared with other groups and those that are unique 
to populations of African descent.
RECENT FINDINGS: When compared with the plethora of Caucasian studies, relatively
few studies have been conducted in African or African-American populations. The
most exciting findings have been family-based linkage studies, which point to
multiple regions that may harbor susceptibility genes. Recent work suggests that 
the major Caucasian locus, TCF7L2, plays a role in some African-based
populations, whereas unique factors remain to be confirmed.
SUMMARY: Although progress has been made in finding the genetic cause of type 2
diabetes in African and African-American populations, at this time no variant can
be considered unequivocally confirmed as a diabetes susceptibility locus.

PMID: 17563458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2007 Jul;10(4):391-6.

The new type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2.

Florez JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit and Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. jcflorez@partners.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Common variants in the gene that encodes the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) have been strongly associated with type 2 diabetes. This
highly reproducible association may uncover novel mechanisms of glycemic
pathophysiology.
RECENT FINDINGS: The initial publication of an association of common variants in 
TCF7L2 with type 2 diabetes in people of European descent has been followed by an
avalanche of replication reports. These papers not only confirm the original
finding, but also extend it to other populations, fine map the source of the
association signal, describe its effect on metabolic parameters in humans, open
the door to a more precise molecular characterization, and provide an insight
into its possible impact on diabetes therapy.
SUMMARY: The discovery of TCF7L2 as a diabetes gene illustrates that novel true
diabetes genes can be found, their association with type 2 diabetes replicated
and their effect incorporated into risk prediction models. It is hoped that the
detection of other such genes in genome-wide association scans will help
elucidate the genetic architecture of this disease.

PMID: 17563454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabet Med. 2007 Jul;24(7):696-701. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

A new era in finding Type 2 diabetes genes-the unusual suspects.

Frayling TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
tim.frayling@pms.ac.uk

In 1988 the task of identifying Type 2 diabetes genes was described as a
nightmare. For the next 17 years this proved to be largely correct. In the
meantime the prevalence of Type 2 diabetes rose sharply due to non-genetic
factors, compounding the problem of trying to find genes. Despite a huge amount
of effort, progress was disappointing and only two genes, PPARG and KCNJ11, were 
confirmed beyond doubt as Type 2 diabetes risk factors in multiple studies. The
reasons for this have been well documented and mainly consist of the use of
inappropriate levels of statistical inference given the many hundreds of
thousands of potential risk polymorphisms in the genome and their small effect
sizes. The good news is that these problems are now surmountable and prospects
for finding many more genes are bright. This year saw the identification of a
third gene, TCF7L2, that has a greater impact on risk than the first two and
provided important lessons for Type 2 diabetes genetic studies. The most
important of these lessons was that previously unsuspected genes may be involved.
In this review I discuss why this year is the start of a new era in our
understanding of Type 2 diabetes genes and how this may lead to improved patient 
care.

PMID: 17561964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Diabetes Care. 2007 Sep;30(9):2299-301. Epub 2007 May 31.

Variation of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene predicts impaired
fasting glucose in healthy young adults: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns
Study.

Raitakari OT(1), Rönnemaa T, Huupponen R, Viikari L, Fan M, Marniemi J,
Hutri-Kähönen N, Viikari JS, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Turku, Finland.
olli.raitakari@utu.fi

Erratum in
    Diabetes Care. 2007 Dec;30(12):3154. Lehtimäkimd, Terho [corrected to Lehtimäki, 
Terho].

PMID: 17540954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Diabetes. 2007 Aug;56(8):2178-82. Epub 2007 May 22.

Variation in TCF7L2 influences therapeutic response to sulfonylureas: a GoDARTs
study.

Pearson ER(1), Donnelly LA, Kimber C, Whitley A, Doney AS, McCarthy MI,
Hattersley AT, Morris AD, Palmer CN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
e.pearson@chs.dundee.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: There is considerable interindividual variation in sulfonylurea
response in type 2 diabetes. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants have
been identified to be strongly associated with type 2 diabetes risk, probably due
to decreased beta-cell function. We hypothesized that variation in TCF7L2 would
influence response to sulfonylureas but not metformin. We studied the effect of
TCF7L2 rs12255372 and rs7903146 genotypes on glycemic response.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The DARTS/MEMO (Diabetes Audit and Research
Tayside/Medicines Monitoring Unit) collaboration database includes prescribing,
biochemistry, and clinical phenotype of all patients with diabetes within
Tayside, Scotland, from 1992. Of these, the TCF7L2 genotype was determined in
4,469 patients with type 2 diabetes recruited to GoDARTS (Genetics of Diabetes
Audit and Research Tayside) between 1997 and July 2006. A total of 901 incident
sulfonylurea users and 945 metformin users were identified. A logistic regression
was used with treatment failure defined as an A1C >7% within 3-12 months after
treatment initiation. Covariates included the TCF7L2 genotype, BMI, sex, age
diagnosed, drug adherence, and drug dose. A1C pretreatment was available in a
subset of patients (sulfonylurea n = 579; metformin n = 755).
RESULTS: Carriers of the risk allele were less likely to respond to sulfonylureas
with an odds ratio (OR) for failure of 1.95 (95% CI 1.23-3.06; P = 0.005),
comparing rs12255372 T/T vs. G/G. Including the baseline A1C strengthened this
association (OR 2.16 [95% CI 1.21-3.86], P = 0.009). A similar, although slightly
weaker, association was seen with rs7903146. No association was seen between
metformin response and either single nucleotide polymorphism, after adjustment
for baseline A1C.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF7L2 variants influence therapeutic response to sulfonylureas but 
not metformin. This study establishes that genetic variation can alter response
to therapy in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17519421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;80(6):1150-61. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Type 2 diabetes TCF7L2 risk genotypes alter birth weight: a study of 24,053
individuals.

Freathy RM(1), Weedon MN, Bennett A, Hypponen E, Relton CL, Knight B, Shields B, 
Parnell KS, Groves CJ, Ring SM, Pembrey ME, Ben-Shlomo Y, Strachan DP, Power C,
Jarvelin MR, McCarthy MI, Davey Smith G, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK.

The role of genes in normal birth-weight variation is poorly understood, and it
has been suggested that the genetic component of fetal growth is small. Type 2
diabetes genes may influence birth weight through maternal genotype, by
increasing maternal glycemia in pregnancy, or through fetal genotype, by altering
fetal insulin secretion. We aimed to assess the role of the recently described
type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2 in birth weight. We genotyped the polymorphism
rs7903146 in 15,709 individuals whose birth weight was available from six studies
and in 8,344 mothers from three studies. Each fetal copy of the predisposing
allele was associated with an 18-g (95% confidence interval [CI] 7-29 g) increase
in birth weight (P=.001) and each maternal copy with a 30-g (95% CI 15-45 g)
increase in offspring birth weight (P=2.8x10-5). Stratification by fetal genotype
suggested that the association was driven by maternal genotype (31-g [95% CI 9-48
g] increase per allele; corrected P=.003). Analysis of diabetes-related traits in
10,314 nondiabetic individuals suggested the most likely mechanism is that the
risk allele reduces maternal insulin secretion (disposition index reduced by
~0.15 standard deviation; P=1x10-4), which results in increased maternal glycemia
in pregnancy and hence increased offspring birth weight. We combined information 
with the other common variant known to alter fetal growth, the -30G-->A
polymorphism of glucokinase (rs1799884). The 4% of offspring born to mothers
carrying three or four risk alleles were 119 g (95% CI 62-172 g) heavier than
were the 32% born to mothers with none (for overall trend, P=2x10-7), comparable 
to the impact of maternal smoking during pregnancy. In conclusion, we have
identified the first type 2 diabetes-susceptibility allele to be reproducibly
associated with birth weight. Common gene variants can substantially influence
normal birth-weight variation.

PMCID: PMC1867102
PMID: 17503332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jun 15;16(12):1488-94. Epub 2007 May 3.

Severe mental retardation with breathing abnormalities (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome) is
caused by haploinsufficiency of the neuronal bHLH transcription factor TCF4.

Brockschmidt A(1), Todt U, Ryu S, Hoischen A, Landwehr C, Birnbaum S, Frenck W,
Radlwimmer B, Lichter P, Engels H, Driever W, Kubisch C, Weber RG.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, 53111 
Bonn, Germany.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic mental disorder, which is mainly 
characterized by severe motor and mental retardation including absent language
development, a characteristic facial gestalt and episodes of hyperventilation. We
report on a female patient with PHS showing severe mental retardation with absent
speech, pronounced muscular hypotonia, ataxia, distinctive facial features, such 
as a coarse face, a broad nasal bridge and a wide mouth, and hyperventilation
attacks. In this patient, genomic profiling by array-based comparative genomic
hybridization and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies detected and
confirmed a de novo 0.5 Mb deletion in 18q21.2 containing a single gene, the
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TCF4. cDNA and genomic analyses in
the patient and her parents demonstrated TCF4 haploinsufficiency as the
underlying cause of the disease. Analysis of the embryonal expression pattern of 
the Danio rerio ortholog, tcf4, by whole-mount in situ hybridization showed a
highly specific expression domain in the pallium of the telencephalon during late
somitogenesis, when the patterning of the zebrafish brain is advanced and neural 
differentiation commences. Later expression domains were restricted to several
regions in the central nervous system, including continued expression in the
pallium of the telencephalon, and starting expression in the diencephalon
(thalamus, ventral thalamus and posterior tuberculum), the midbrain tegmentum,
the hindbrain and the branchial arches. This expression pattern correlates with
the clinical phenotype. Our results show that haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes
PHS and suggest that D. rerio is a valuable model to study the molecular
pathogenesis of PHS and the role of TCF4 in brain development.

PMID: 17478476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Jul;85(7):777-82. Epub 2007 May 3.

TCF7L2 is reproducibly associated with type 2 diabetes in various ethnic groups: 
a global meta-analysis.

Cauchi S(1), El Achhab Y, Choquet H, Dina C, Krempler F, Weitgasser R, Nejjari C,
Patsch W, Chikri M, Meyre D, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, 8090, Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, 59000, France.

TCF7L2 variants have been consistently associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of different ethnic descent. Among them, the rs7903146 T allele is
probably the best proxy to evaluate the effect of this gene on T2D risk in
additional ethnic groups. In the present study, we investigated the association
between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and T2D in Moroccans (406 normoglycemic
individuals and 504 T2D subjects) and in white Austrians (1,075 normoglycemic
individuals and 486 T2D subjects). Then, we systematically reviewed the
association of this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with T2D risk in a
meta-analysis, combining our data with data from previous studies. The allelic
odds ratios (ORs) for T2D were 1.56 [1.29-1.89] (p = 2.9 x 10(-6)) and 1.52
[1.29-1.78] (p = 3.0 x 10(-7)) in Moroccans and Austrians, respectively. No
heterogeneity was found between these two different populations by Woolf test
(chi (2) = 0.04, df = 1, p = 0.84). We found 28 original published association
studies dealing with the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism in T2D. A meta-analysis
was then performed on 29,195 control subjects and 17,202 cases. No heterogeneity 
in genotypic distribution was found (Woolf test: chi (2) = 31.5, df = 26, p =
0.21; Higgins statistic: I2 = 14.1%). A Mantel-Haenszel procedure was then
performed to provide a pooled odds ratio (OR) of 1.46 [1.42-1.51] (p = 5.4 x
10(-140)). No publication bias was detected, using the conservative Egger's
regression asymmetry test (t = -1.6, df = 25, p = 0.11). Compared to any other
gene variants previously confirmed by meta-analysis, TCF7L2 can be distinguished 
by its tremendous reproducibility of association with T2D and its OR twice as
high. In the near future, large-scale genome-wide association studies will fully 
extend the genome coverage, potentially delivering other common
diabetes-susceptibility genes like TCF7L2.

PMID: 17476472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Clin Genet. 2007 Apr;71(4):359-66.

Association of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in Mexico City.

Parra EJ(1), Cameron E, Simmonds L, Valladares A, McKeigue P, Shriver M, Wacher
N, Kumate J, Kittles R, Cruz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario,
Canada. eparra@utm.utoronto.ca

Polymorphisms within the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) have been
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in several recent studies. We characterized
three of these polymorphisms (rs12255372, rs7903146 and the microsatellite
DG10S478) in an admixed sample of 286 patients with T2D and 275 controls from
Mexico City. We also analyzed three samples representative of the relevant
parental populations: Native Americans from the state of Guerrero (Mexico),
Spanish from Valencia and Nigerians (Bini from the Edo region). In order to
minimize potential confounding because of the presence of population
stratification in the sample, we evaluated the association of the three TCF7L2
polymorphisms with T2D by using the program admixmap to fit a logistic regression
model incorporating individual ancestry, sex, age, body mass index and education.
The markers rs12255372, rs7903146 and DG10S478 are in tight disequilibrium in the
Mexican sample. We observed a significant association between the
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs12255372 and the microsatellite DG10S478
with T2D in the Mexican sample [rs12255372, odds ratio (OR) = 1.78, p = 0.017;
DG10S478, OR = 1.62, p = 0.041]. The SNP rs7903146 shows similar trends, but its 
association with T2D is not as strong (OR = 1.39, p = 0.152). Analysis of the
parental samples, as well as other available data, indicates that there are
substantial population frequency differences for these polymorphisms: The
frequencies of the T2D risk factors are more than 20% higher in European and West
African populations than in East Asian and Native American populations.

PMID: 17470138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Jun;17(3):239-44. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes.

Owen KR(1), McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital Old Road, Headington, Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

Identification and characterization of genetic variants that either cause or
predispose to diabetes are a major focus of biomedical research. As of early
2007, the molecular basis of most forms of monogenic diabetes resulting from
beta-cell dysfunction is known and, in particular, there has been recent success 
in delineating the genetic aetiology of neonatal diabetes. Finding genes
predisposing to more common, multifactorial forms of type 2 diabetes represents a
far greater challenge, and only a handful of robust, well-replicated examples
have been established. Nevertheless, 2006 heralded identification of the most
important type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene known so far, TCF7L2, and in 2007
large-scale genome-wide association studies are destined to provide novel
insights into the genetic architecture and biology of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17466512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jul;14(7):1361-73. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha inhibits adipogenesis via a
beta-catenin/TCF4(TCF7L2)-dependent pathway.

Cawthorn WP(1), Heyd F, Hegyi K, Sethi JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a proinflammatory cytokine, is a potent
negative regulator of adipocyte differentiation. However, the mechanism of
TNF-alpha-mediated antiadipogenesis remains incompletely understood. In this
study, we first confirm that TNF-alpha inhibits adipogenesis of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes by preventing the early induction of the adipogenic transcription
factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha). This suppression coincides
with enhanced expression of several reported mediators of antiadipogenesis that
are also targets of the Wnt/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) pathway. Indeed, 
we found that TNF-alpha enhanced TCF4-dependent transcriptional activity during
early antiadipogenesis, and promoted the stabilisation of beta-catenin throughout
antiadipogenesis. We analysed the effect of TNF-alpha on adipogenesis in 3T3-L1
cells in which beta-catenin/TCF signalling was impaired, either via stable
knockdown of beta-catenin, or by overexpression of dominant-negative TCF4
(dnTCF4). The knockdown of beta-catenin enhanced the adipogenic potential of
3T3-L1 preadipocytes and attenuated TNF-alpha-induced antiadipogenesis. However, 
beta-catenin knockdown also promoted TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis in these cells. 
In contrast, overexpression of dnTCF4 prevented TNF-alpha-induced
antiadipogenesis but showed no apparent effect on cell survival. Finally, we show
that TNF-alpha-induced antiadipogenesis and stabilisation of beta-catenin
requires a functional death domain of TNF-alpha receptor 1 (TNFR1). Taken
together these data suggest that TNFR1-mediated death domain signals can inhibit 
adipogenesis via a beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC4303765
PMID: 17464333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Science. 2007 Jun 1;316(5829):1341-5. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

A genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in Finns detects multiple
susceptibility variants.

Scott LJ(1), Mohlke KL, Bonnycastle LL, Willer CJ, Li Y, Duren WL, Erdos MR,
Stringham HM, Chines PS, Jackson AU, Prokunina-Olsson L, Ding CJ, Swift AJ,
Narisu N, Hu T, Pruim R, Xiao R, Li XY, Conneely KN, Riebow NL, Sprau AG, Tong M,
White PP, Hetrick KN, Barnhart MW, Bark CW, Goldstein JL, Watkins L, Xiang F,
Saramies J, Buchanan TA, Watanabe RM, Valle TT, Kinnunen L, Abecasis GR, Pugh EW,
Doheny KF, Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Identifying the genetic variants that increase the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
in humans has been a formidable challenge. Adopting a genome-wide association
strategy, we genotyped 1161 Finnish T2D cases and 1174 Finnish normal
glucose-tolerant (NGT) controls with >315,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and imputed genotypes for an additional >2 million autosomal SNPs. We
carried out association analysis with these SNPs to identify genetic variants
that predispose to T2D, compared our T2D association results with the results of 
two similar studies, and genotyped 80 SNPs in an additional 1215 Finnish T2D
cases and 1258 Finnish NGT controls. We identify T2D-associated variants in an
intergenic region of chromosome 11p12, contribute to the identification of
T2D-associated variants near the genes IGF2BP2 and CDKAL1 and the region of
CDKN2A and CDKN2B, and confirm that variants near TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, FTO,
PPARG, and KCNJ11 are associated with T2D risk. This brings the number of T2D
loci now confidently identified to at least 10.

PMCID: PMC3214617
PMID: 17463248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):770-5. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

A variant in CDKAL1 influences insulin response and risk of type 2 diabetes.

Steinthorsdottir V(1), Thorleifsson G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Jonsdottir
T, Walters GB, Styrkarsdottir U, Gretarsdottir S, Emilsson V, Ghosh S, Baker A,
Snorradottir S, Bjarnason H, Ng MC, Hansen T, Bagger Y, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP,
Adeyemo A, Chen Y, Zhou J, Gudnason V, Chen G, Huang H, Lashley K, Doumatey A, So
WY, Ma RC, Andersen G, Borch-Johnsen K, Jorgensen T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV,
Hofker MH, Wijmenga C, Christiansen C, Rader DJ, Rotimi C, Gurney M, Chan JC,
Pedersen O, Sigurdsson G, Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. vstein@decode.is

We conducted a genome-wide association study for type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
Icelandic cases and controls, and we found that a previously described variant in
the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) gene conferred the most
significant risk. In addition to confirming two recently identified risk
variants, we identified a variant in the CDKAL1 gene that was associated with T2D
in individuals of European ancestry (allele-specific odds ratio (OR) = 1.20 (95% 
confidence interval, 1.13-1.27), P = 7.7 x 10(-9)) and individuals from Hong Kong
of Han Chinese ancestry (OR = 1.25 (1.11-1.40), P = 0.00018). The genotype OR of 
this variant suggested that the effect was substantially stronger in homozygous
carriers than in heterozygous carriers. The ORs for homozygotes were 1.50
(1.31-1.72) and 1.55 (1.23-1.95) in the European and Hong Kong groups,
respectively. The insulin response for homozygotes was approximately 20% lower
than for heterozygotes or noncarriers, suggesting that this variant confers risk 
of T2D through reduced insulin secretion.

PMID: 17460697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Nat Prod. 2007 May;70(5):802-7. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Additional scalarane sesterterpenes from the sponge Phyllospongia papyracea.

Li HJ(1), Amagata T, Tenney K, Crews P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Institute for Marine Sciences,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA.

A chemical investigation of the marine sponge Phyllospongia papyracea, collected 
in Papua New Guinea, initiated by the screening result of a beta-catenin/Tcf4
disruption assay afforded six new bishomoscalarane sesterterpenes containing two 
rare scalaranes with a cyclobutane ring in the molecule, together with one known 
scalarane sesterterpene. The structures of the new compounds were elucidated by
1D and 2D spectroscopic techniques. The compounds isolated in this study did not 
show activity against the beta-catenin and Tcf4 complex.

PMID: 17455979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biomol NMR. 2007 Jun;38(2):133-7. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Protein-protein interaction site mapping using NMR-detected mutational scanning.

Baminger B(1), Ludwiczek ML, Kontaxis G, Knapp S, Konrat R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Structural Chemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories,
University of Vienna, Vienna, 1030, Austria.

We demonstrate a novel NMR method for the mapping of protein-protein interaction 
sites. In our approach protein-protein binding sites are mapped by competition
binding experiments using indirect NMR reporter technology and Ala positional
scanning. The methodology provides high sensitivity, ease of implementation and
high-throughput capabilities. The feasibility of the technique is demonstrated
with an application to the beta-Catenin/Tcf4 complex.

PMID: 17447011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1192-200. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene predict conversion to
type 2 diabetes in the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study and are associated with 
impaired glucose regulation and impaired insulin secretion.

Wang J(1), Kuusisto J, Vänttinen M, Kuulasmaa T, Lindström J, Tuomilehto J,
Uusitupa M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
70210 Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We investigated the association of variants of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene with: (1) incident diabetes in the Finnish Diabetes
Prevention Study (DPS, Study I); (2) type 2 diabetes and impaired glucose
regulation (i.e. IGT or IFG) in a cross-sectional study (Study II); and (3)
insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity and adipose tissue expression of TCF7L2 in
offspring of type 2 diabetic probands (III).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Study I (the DPS) included 507 individuals with IGT who
were randomly allocated to control and intervention groups and followed for an
average of 3.9 years to monitor for progression to diabetes. Study II was a
population-based cross-sectional study of 1,766 men, aged 50-70 years, randomly
selected from the population of Kuopio, eastern Finland. Study III included 238
non-diabetic offspring of patients with type 2 diabetes. Genotyping of rs12255372
and rs7903146 of TCF7L2 was carried out.
RESULTS: In the DPS, the TT genotype of rs12255372 was significantly associated
with an adjusted 2.85-fold risk (95% CI 1.17-6.95, p = 0.021) of incident
diabetes in the control group, but not in the intervention group. In Study II,
the adjusted odds ratio in subjects with the TT genotype was 3.40 (1.45-7.97, p =
0.005) for the comparison of diabetic subjects with normoglycaemic subjects. The 
T allele of rs12255372 was significantly associated with decreased insulin
secretion (Studies II, III). Expression of TCF7L2 in adipose tissue tended to be 
lower in subjects with the TT risk genotypes of rs12255372 and rs7903146.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The variant of rs12255372 of TCF7L2 was associated
with incident type 2 diabetes in the DPS and in a separate population-based
cross-sectional study. Impaired insulin secretion is likely to be the main cause 
for our findings.

PMID: 17437080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):994-1001. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes syndromal mental retardation with intermittent 
hyperventilation (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome).

Zweier C(1), Peippo MM, Hoyer J, Sousa S, Bottani A, Clayton-Smith J, Reardon W, 
Saraiva J, Cabral A, Gohring I, Devriendt K, de Ravel T, Bijlsma EK, Hennekam RC,
Orrico A, Cohen M, Dreweke A, Reis A, Nurnberg P, Rauch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rarely reported syndrome of so-far-unknown etiology
characterized by mental retardation, wide mouth, and intermittent
hyperventilation. By molecular karyotyping with GeneChip Human Mapping 100K SNP
arrays, we detected a 1.2-Mb deletion on 18q21.2 in one patient. Sequencing of
the TCF4 transcription factor gene, which is contained in the deletion region, in
30 patients with significant phenotypic overlap revealed heterozygous stop,
splice, and missense mutations in five further patients with severe mental
retardation and remarkable facial resemblance. Thus, we establish the
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome as a distinct but probably heterogeneous entity caused by
autosomal dominant de novo mutations in TCF4. Because of its phenotypic overlap, 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome evolves as an important differential diagnosis to Angelman 
and Rett syndromes. Both null and missense mutations impaired the interaction of 
TCF4 with ASCL1 from the PHOX-RET pathway in transactivating an E box-containing 
reporter construct; therefore, hyperventilation and Hirschsprung disease in
patients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome might be explained by altered development of 
noradrenergic derivatives.

PMCID: PMC1852727
PMID: 17436255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):988-93. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Mutations in TCF4, encoding a class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, are responsible for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, a severe epileptic
encephalopathy associated with autonomic dysfunction.

Amiel J(1), Rio M, de Pontual L, Redon R, Malan V, Boddaert N, Plouin P, Carter
NP, Lyonnet S, Munnich A, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Genetics, Pediatric Radiology and INSERM U-797,
Universite Paris-Descartes, Faculte de Medecine, Hopitaux de Paris, Hopital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. amiel@necker.fr

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic encephalopathy characterized by
daily bouts of hyperventilation and a facial gestalt. We report a 1.8-Mb de novo 
microdeletion on chromosome 18q21.1, identified by array-comparative genomic
hybridization in one patient with PHS. We subsequently identified two de novo
heterozygous missense mutations of a conserved amino acid in the basic region of 
the TCF4 gene in three additional subjects with PHS. These findings demonstrate
that TCF4 anomalies are responsible for PHS and provide the first evidence of a
human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription-factor
defects (also known as "E proteins"). Moreover, our data may shed new light on
the normal processes underlying autonomic nervous system development and
maintenance of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal circuitry.

PMCID: PMC1852736
PMID: 17436254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3496-506. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

WNTs in the ovine uterus: potential regulation of periimplantation ovine
conceptus development.

Hayashi K(1), Burghardt RC, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, 442 Kleberg Center, 2471 TAMU,
Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

WNTs (Wingless-type MMTV integration site family member) are involved in critical
developmental and growth processes in animals. These studies investigated WNT
pathways in the ovine uterus and conceptus during the periimplantation period of 
pregnancy. WNT2 and WNT2B mRNAs were detected in endometrial stroma. WNT5A and
WNT5B mRNAs were most abundant in the stroma and less so in the luminal
epithelium, whereas WNT11 mRNA was detected primarily in the glands. WNT7A mRNA
was present in the luminal epithelium on d 10, absent on d 12 and 14, and
increased between d 16 and 20. Only WNT2, WNT2B, and WNT4 were detected in
conceptus trophectoderm. FZD6/8 (frizzled receptor) and GSK3B (glycogen synthase 
kinase 3beta) mRNAs were detected primarily in endometrial epithelia and
conceptus trophectoderm, whereas the LRP5/6 (low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related proteins 5 and 6) coreceptor was present in all endometrial
cells and the trophectoderm. DKK1 (Dickkopf), a WNT signaling inhibitor,
increased in the endometrium from d 16-20. CTNNB1 [catenin (cadherin associated
protein) beta1] and CDH1 (E-cadherin) mRNAs were most abundant in the endometrial
epithelia and trophectoderm. LEF1 (lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1) mRNA was
expressed primarily in uterine epithelia, whereas TCF7L2 [(transcription factor
7-like 2 (T-cell specific, HMG-box)] was primarily in the conceptus. CTNNB1 and
TCF7L2 proteins were both abundant in the nuclei of trophoblast giant binucleate 
cells. WNT7A stimulated a TCF/LEF-luciferase reporter activity in ovine
trophectoderm cells that was inhibited by dominant-negative TCF and Sfrp2
(secreted FZD-related protein 2). WNT7A increased trophectoderm cell
proliferation as well as MSX2 (msh homeobox 2) and MYC (myelocytomatosis
oncogene) mRNA levels. Wnt5a increased trophectoderm cell migration in a Rho
kinase-dependent manner. These results support the hypotheses that canonical and 
noncanonical WNT signaling pathways are conserved regulators of
conceptus-endometrial interactions in mammals and regulate periimplantation ovine
conceptus development.

PMID: 17431004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1186-91. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

TCF7L2 in the Go-DARTS study: evidence for a gene dose effect on both diabetes
susceptibility and control of glucose levels.

Kimber CH(1), Doney AS, Pearson ER, McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT, Leese GP, Morris 
AD, Palmer CN.

Author information: 
(1)Population Pharmacogenetics Group, Biomedical Research Centre, Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The gene encoding transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has
been identified as a type 2 diabetes locus from genome-wide linkage studies and
subsequent association analysis. We investigated the role of two common variants 
in TCF7L2 in a large case-control study recruited from the Tayside region of
Scotland, UK.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 6,516 participants for rs12255372 and
rs7903146 and analysed the role in type 2 diabetes susceptibility using binary
logistic regression. Age, sex and obesity status were examined as covariates. The
distribution of the genotypes within different treatment groups of cases was
examined.
RESULTS: Both variants were associated with type 2 diabetes (p < 10(-13)). The
variants were present at very similar frequencies and were in strong linkage
disequilibrium (R(2) = 0.88, D' = 0.89). A gene dosage effect of the rare allele 
of both variants was observed, the heterozygote CT group of rs7903146 having an
odds ratio of 1.36 (95% CI 1.2-1.5, p=1.54 x 10(-7)) for type 2 diabetes and the 
TT homozygote having a greater risk (OR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.7-2.5, p=1.40 x
10(-12)). An interaction with sex was observed, the males displaying a higher
degree of genotype-associated risk compared with the females (p = 0.023). The T
allele was associated with increased HbA(1c) levels in both cases and controls,
and with decreased BMI and waist circumference in case but not controls. The T
allele was overrepresented in individuals requiring insulin treatment and
underrepresented in the patients being managed by diet alone (p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: We have confirmed TCF7L2 to be a diabetes locus in a large
case-control study in Tayside, UK. Our data suggest that variants of TCF7L2 may
be associated with increased disease severity and therapeutic failure.

PMID: 17429603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Diabetes. 2007 Jul;56(7):1943-7. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms modulate proinsulin levels and beta-cell function in a
British Europid population.

Loos RJ(1), Franks PW, Francis RW, Barroso I, Gribble FM, Savage DB, Ong KK,
O'Rahilly S, Wareham NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Strangeways Research Laboratory,
Cambridge, UK. ruth.loos@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk

Rapidly accumulating evidence shows that common T-cell transcription factor
(TCF)7L2 polymorphisms confer risk of type 2 diabetes through unknown mechanisms.
We examined the association between four TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), including rs7903146, and measures of insulin sensitivity and insulin
secretion in 1,697 Europid men and women of the population-based MRC (Medical
Research Council)-Ely study. The T-(minor) allele of rs7903146 was strongly and
positively associated with fasting proinsulin (P = 4.55 x 10(-9)) and 32,33 split
proinsulin (P = 1.72 x 10(-4)) relative to total insulin levels; i.e.,
differences between T/T and C/C homozygotes amounted to 21.9 and 18.4%
respectively. Notably, the insulin-to-glucose ratio (IGR) at 30-min oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT), a frequently used surrogate of first-phase insulin
secretion, was not associated with the TCF7L2 SNP (P > 0.7). However, the insulin
response (IGR) at 60-min OGTT was significantly lower in T-allele carriers (P =
3.5 x 10(-3)). The T-allele was also associated with higher A1C concentrations (P
= 1.2 x 10(-2)) and reduced beta-cell function, assessed by homeostasis model
assessment of beta-cell function (P = 2.8 x 10(-2)). Similar results were
obtained for the other TCF7L2 SNPs. Of note, both major genes involved in
proinsulin processing (PC1, PC2) contain TCF-binding sites in their promoters.
Our findings suggest that the TCF7L2 risk allele may predispose to type 2
diabetes by impairing beta-cell proinsulin processing. The risk allele increases 
proinsulin levels and diminishes the 60-min but not 30-min insulin response
during OGTT. The strong association between the TCF7L2 risk allele and fasting
proinsulin but not insulin levels is notable, as, in this unselected and largely 
normoglycemic population, external influences on beta-cell stress are unlikely to
be major factors influencing the efficiency of proinsulin processing.

PMCID: PMC2668957
PMID: 17416797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2284-94. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

CBP/p300 are bimodal regulators of Wnt signaling.

Li J(1), Sutter C, Parker DS, Blauwkamp T, Fang M, Cadigan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

Many Wnts influence cell behavior by a conserved signaling cascade that promotes 
the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin (beta-cat), which then
associates with TCF family members to activate target genes. The histone
acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP) can bind to TCF and inhibit Wnt
signaling in Drosophila. In contrast, studies in vertebrates indicate a positive 
role for CBP and the closely related protein p300 as beta-cat binding
transcriptional co-activators. We address this discrepancy by demonstrating that 
in addition to its negative role, CBP has an essential positive role in Wnt
signaling in flies. CBP binds directly to the C-terminus of Armadillo (Arm, the
fly beta-cat) and is recruited to a Wnt-regulated enhancer (WRE) in a Wnt- and
Arm-dependent manner. In a human colorectal cancer cell line, we show that CBP
and p300 can inhibit Wnt signaling and demonstrate that human p300 can bind
directly to TCF4 in vitro. Our results argue that CBP/p300 has an evolutionarily 
conserved role as a buffer regulating TCF-beta-cat/Arm binding. Subsequent to
this interaction, it also has an essential role in mediating the transactivation 
activity of beta-cat/Arm.

PMCID: PMC1864967
PMID: 17410209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Gastroenterology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1420-31. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

The forkhead box M1 transcription factor contributes to the development and
growth of mouse colorectal cancer.

Yoshida Y(1), Wang IC, Yoder HM, Davidson NO, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
yyoshida@gh.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In this study, we used Forkhead Box m1b (Foxm1b) transgenic
mice and conditional Foxm1 knock-out mice to examine the role of Foxm1 in colon
cancer development and proliferation.
METHODS: To induce mouse colorectal cancer, we used a single intraperitoneal
injection of azoxymethane (AOM) followed by three 1-week cycles of 2.5% dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS) water, each cycle separated by 2 weeks. For these colon
tumor studies, we used either Rosa26-Foxm1b transgenic mice that ubiquitously
expressed the human Foxm1b complementary DNA or mice in which the Foxm1 fl/fl
targeted allele was deleted in colonic epithelial cells using the gut-specific
Villin-Cre recombinase transgene (Villin-Cre). Colorectal tumor number and
bromodeoxyuridine labeling were determined in Rosa26-Foxm1b mice, Villin-Cre
Foxm1-/-, mice and wild-type mice after 12 weeks of AOM/DDS exposure. We also
used Foxm1 small interfering RNA-depleted human DLD1 and mouse CT26 colon cancer 
cell lines to examine DNA replication and anchorage-independent growth.
RESULTS: After 12 weeks of treatment with AOM/DSS, Rosa26 Foxm1b transgenic mice 
showed an increase in the number and size of colorectal tumors compared with
wild-type mice. Likewise, a significant reduction in the development and growth
of colorectal tumors was found in Villin-Cre Foxm1-/- mice compared with Foxm1
fl/fl mice after AOM/DSS treatment, which was associated with decreased
expression of cyclin A2, cyclin B1, survivin, and T-cell factor 4 genes.
Moreover, Foxm1-depleted colon cancer cell lines showed reduced DNA replication
and anchorage-independent growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that Foxm1 is critical for the proliferation
and growth of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17408638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5864-71. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Human immunodeficiency virus-restricted replication in astrocytes and the ability
of gamma interferon to modulate this restriction are regulated by a downstream
effector of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Carroll-Anzinger D(1), Kumar A, Adarichev V, Kashanchi F, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush University Medical Center, 1735 W.
Harrison Street, 614 Cohn, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Astrocyte dysregulation correlates with the severity and the rate of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated dementia (HAD) progression, highlighting 
a pivotal role for astrocytes in HIV neuropathogenesis. Yet, astrocytes limit
HIV, indicating that they possess an intrinsic molecular mechanism to restrict
HIV replication. We previously established that this restriction can be partly
overcome by priming astrocytes with gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), which is
elevated in the cerebral spinal fluid of HAD patients. We evaluated the mechanism
of restrictive HIV replication in astrocytes and how IFN-gamma priming modulates 
this restriction. We demonstrate that the downstream effector of Wnt signaling,
T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4), is part of a transcriptional complex that is
immunoprecipitated with HIV TAR-containing region in untreated astrocytes but not
in IFN-gamma-treated cells. Blocking TCF-4 activity with a dominant-negative
mutant enhanced HIV replication by threefold in both the astrocytoma cell line
U87MG and primary fetal astrocytes. Using a TCF-4 reporter plasmid, we directly
demonstrate that Wnt signaling is active in human astrocytes and is markedly
reduced by IFN-gamma treatment. Collectively, these data implicate TCF-4 in
repressing HIV replication and the ability of IFN-gamma to regulate this
restriction by inhibiting TCF-4. Given that TCF-4 is the downstream effector of
Wnt signaling, harnessing Wnt signaling as an intrinsic molecular mechanism to
limit HIV replication may emerge as a powerful tool to regulate HIV replication
within and outside of the brain.

PMCID: PMC1900315
PMID: 17392368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Gastroenterology. 2007 Mar;132(3):1039-54. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Involvement of splicing factor-1 in beta-catenin/T-cell factor-4-mediated gene
transactivation and pre-mRNA splicing.

Shitashige M(1), Naishiro Y, Idogawa M, Honda K, Ono M, Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: beta-Catenin is the downstream effector of the Wnt signaling
pathway and is involved in the process of colorectal carcinogenesis. However, it 
is still uncertain whether beta-catenin exerts its oncogenic function solely by
coactivating the target genes of T-cell factor-4 (TCF4). We previously reported
that the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex contains several classes of RNA-binding
proteins and regulates the premessenger RNA splicing reaction, but the identity
of the exact effector molecule downstream of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex has
not been established.
METHODS: Using isotope-coded affinity tagging and mass spectrometry, we examined 
more than 4000 peptides derived from colorectal cancer cells and identified that 
splicing factor-1 (SF1) was one of the proteins whose expression is regulated by 
the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex.
RESULTS: The expression of SF1 was found to be correlated with the
differentiation status of intestinal epithelial cells and inversely correlated
with tumorigenesis. Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed that SF1 was a complex, and beta-catenin-evoked gene transactivation and
cell proliferation were negatively regulated by SF1 complementary DNA
transfection. SF1 was essential for the induction of alternative splicing by the 
beta-catenin/TCF4 complex, and SF1 complementary DNA transfection induced known
cancer-related splice variants, such as Wnt-induced secreted protein-1v and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-3-ATII.
CONCLUSIONS: The beta-catenin/TCF4 complex regulates the level of SF1 protein
expression, and, conversely, SF1 interacts with the complex and regulates its
gene transactivation and premessenger RNA splicing activities. Identification of 
the interaction may shed light on a novel aspect of the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 17383426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Diabetes Care. 2007 Jun;30(6):1621-3. Epub 2007 Mar 10.

Additive effects of obesity and TCF7L2 variants on risk for type 2 diabetes among
cardiac patients.

Duan QL(1), Dubé MP, Frasure-Smith N, Barhdadi A, Lesperance F, Théroux P,
St-Onge J, Rouleau GA, McCaffery JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal and Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

PMID: 17351281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Diabetologia. 2007 May;50(5):972-9. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

A variant in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated with
an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Lernmark A, Karlsson E, Ivarsson S, Parikh H, Berntorp K, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes & Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. nael.shaat@med.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic and epidemiological studies suggest an association
between gestational diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes. Both are polygenic
multifactorial disorders characterised by beta cell dysfunction and insulin
resistance. Our aim was to investigate whether common genetic variants that have 
previously been associated with type 2 diabetes or related phenotypes would also 
confer risk for gestational diabetes mellitus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 1,881 unrelated pregnant Scandinavian women (649 women 
with gestational diabetes mellitus, 1,232 non-diabetic control subjects) we
genotyped the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2 rs7903146), adiponectin
(ADIPOQ +276G > T), peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor, gamma 2 (PPARG
Pro12Ala), PPARG-coactivator, 1 alpha (PPARGC1A Gly482Ser), forkhead box C2
(FOXC2 -512C > T) and beta3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3 Trp64Arg) polymorphisms
using TaqMan allelic discrimination assay or RFLP.
RESULTS: The CC, CT and TT genotype frequencies of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant
differed significantly between women with gestational diabetes mellitus and
control women (46.3, 43.6 and 10.1% vs 58.5, 35.3 and 6.2%, p = 3.7 x 10(-6),
corrected p value [Pc] for multiple testing Pc = 2.2 x 10(-5)). The T-allele was 
associated with an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (odds ratio
1.49 [95% CI 1.28-1.75], p = 4.9 x 10(-7) [Pc = 2.8 x 10(-6)]). Compared with
wild-type CC-genotype carriers, heterozygous (CT-genotype) and homozygous
(TT-genotype) carriers had a 1.6-fold (95% CI 1.26-1.93, p = 3.7 x 10(-5) [Pc =
0.0002]) and a 2.1-fold (95% CI 1.41-2.99, p = 0.0001 [Pc = 0.0008]) increased
risk of gestational diabetes mellitus, respectively. The other polymorphisms
studied were not significantly associated with gestational diabetes mellitus
(ADIPOQ +276G > T: 1.17 [1.01-1.36], p = 0.039 [Pc = 0.23]; PPARG Pro12Ala: 1.06 
[0.87-1.29], p = 0.53; PPARGC1A Gly482Ser: 0.96 [0.83-1.10], p = 0.54; FOXC2
-512C > T: 1.01 [0.87-1.16], p = 0.94; and ADRB3 Trp64Arg: 1.22 [0.95-1.56], p = 
0.12).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 variant is associated with an
increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in Scandinavian women.

PMID: 17342473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Diabetologia. 2007 May;50(5):980-4. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Replication study for the association of TCF7L2 with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes in a Japanese population.

Hayashi T(1), Iwamoto Y, Kaku K, Hirose H, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Centre, The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) has been shown
to be strongly associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes in white
populations. To further investigate the involvement of TCF7L2 in conferring
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, we examined the association of TCF7L2
polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We analysed four SNPs (rs12255372, rs7903146, rs7901695 and
rs11196205) and one tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism (DG10S478) in 1,630
Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes and 1,064 control subjects.
RESULTS: All investigated polymorphisms were significantly associated with type 2
diabetes, and rs12255372 showed the strongest association (T vs G, chi2 = 9.20, p
= 0.0024, odds ratio = 1.70, 95% CI = 1.20-2.41), although the frequency of the
risk allele in our population was much lower than that in white populations. The 
microsatellite polymorphism showed an almost complete linkage disequilibrium to
rs1255372 when the alleles with longer repeats (+8, +12) were considered as minor
alleles and showed an association with type 2 diabetes (chi2 = 5.34, p = 0.021,
odds ratio = 1.50, 95% CI = 1.06-2.12).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results indicate that TCF7L2 might be a strong 
candidate for conferring susceptibility to type 2 diabetes across different
ethnicities.

PMID: 17340123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Gastroenterology. 2007 Feb;132(2):628-32. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

The Intestinal Wnt/TCF Signature.

Van der Flier LG(1), Sabates-Bellver J, Oving I, Haegebarth A, De Palo M, Anti M,
Van Gijn ME, Suijkerbuijk S, Van de Wetering M, Marra G, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Centre
for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In colorectal cancer, activating mutations in the Wnt pathway 
transform epithelial cells through the inappropriate expression of a TCF4 target 
gene program, which is physiologically expressed in intestinal crypts.
METHODS: We have now performed an exhaustive array-based analysis of this target 
gene program in colorectal cancer cell lines carrying an inducible block of the
Wnt cascade. Independently, differential gene-expression profiles of human
adenomas and adenocarcinomas vs normal colonic epithelium were obtained.
RESULTS: Expression analyses of approximately 80 genes common between these data 
sets were performed in a murine adenoma model. The combined data sets describe a 
core target gene program, the intestinal Wnt/TCF signature gene set, which is
responsible for the transformation of human intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The genes were invariably expressed in adenomas, yet could be
subdivided into 3 modules, based on expression in distinct crypt compartments. A 
module of 17 genes was specifically expressed at the position of the crypt stem
cell.

PMID: 17320548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Endocrinology. 2007 May;148(5):2168-80. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Negative regulation of c-Myc transcription by pancreas duodenum homeobox-1.

Chen L(1), Yan HX, Chen J, Yang W, Liu Q, Zhai B, Cao HF, Liu SQ, Wu MC, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Co-operation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, 200438
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor-1 (Pdx1) is essential for pancreatic 
development and insulin gene transcription, whereas c-Myc has a deleterious
effect on islet function. However, the relationship between c-Myc and Pdx1 is
poorly concerned. Here we demonstrated that Pdx1 could suppress c-Myc promoter
activity, which relied on T cell factor (Tcf) binding elements harbored in c-Myc 
promoter. Furthermore, the transcription activity of beta-catenin/Tcf was
markedly decreased on Pdx1 expression, but cotransfection of Pdx1 short hairpin
RNA abrogated this effect. Pdx1 expression did not induce beta-catenin
degradation nor did it alter their subcellular distribution. The mutation
analysis showed that the amino acids (1-209) of Pdx1 harboring an inhibitory
domain, which might lead to the reduction of beta-catenin/Tcf/p300 complex levels
and attenuate their binding activity with c-Myc promoter sequences. Moreover,
adenovirus-mediated Pdx1 interference caused cell proliferation and
cytokine-induced apoptosis via the dysregulation of c-Myc transcription. These
results indicated that the Pdx1 functioned as a key regulator for maintenance of 
beta-cell function, at least in part, through controlling c-Myc expression and
the loss of its regulatory function may be an alternative mechanism for beta-cell
neogenesis and apoptosis found in diabetes.

PMID: 17317781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Diabetes. 2007 May;56(5):1481-5. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is associated with gestational diabetes
mellitus and interacts with adiposity to alter insulin secretion in Mexican
Americans.

Watanabe RM(1), Allayee H, Xiang AH, Trigo E, Hartiala J, Lawrence JM, Buchanan
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
90089-9011, USA. rwatanab@usc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Variation in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been
shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes and diabetes-related quantitative
traits. We examined variation in a 0.1-Mb region surrounding marker DG10S478 for 
association with diabetes-related quantitative traits in 132 Mexican-American
families of a proband with previous gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Study participants were phenotyped by an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and an intravenous glucose tolerance test and by a 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan for percentage of body fat. Of the 42 tag
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyped, 15 were identified.
RESULTS: On univariate analysis, none of the SNPs showed association with
diabetes-related quantitative traits. However, rs12255372 showed association with
30' Deltainsulin (OGTT 30' min fasting insulin) in an interaction with percentage
of body fat (Bonferroni-corrected P = 0.027). The effect of adiposity to increase
30' Deltainsulin was greater in subjects with the T allele. This interaction was 
not associated with acute insulin response to intravenous glucose. rs12255372
also showed an association with beta-cell compensation for insulin resistance
based on 30' Deltainsulin in an interaction with percentage of body fat
(Bonferroni-corrected P = 0.014). rs12255372 was also associated with GDM (odds
ratio [OR] 2.49 [95% CI 1.17-5.31]; P = 0.018) in our case-control sample.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that variation in TCF7L2 is associated with GDM and
interacts with adiposity to alter insulin secretion in Mexican Americans. Our
observations partly explain the increased ORs observed in previous associated
studies when analyses were restricted to lean subjects and the variability in
quantitative trait association results.

PMCID: PMC2925638
PMID: 17317761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;92(5):1956-60. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

TCF7L2 gene polymorphisms confer an increased risk for early impairment of
glucose metabolism and increased height in obese children.

Körner A(1), Berndt J, Stumvoll M, Kiess W, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig,
Oststrasse 21-25, 04317 Leipzig, Germany. antje.koerner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

CONTEXT: Variants in the transcription factor 7-like2 (TCF7L2) gene have been
associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes in adults. To evaluate
whether the five reported risk variants confer a higher risk for obesity and
early impairment of glucose metabolism in children, we genotyped these risk
variants of the TCF7L2 gene in a representative cohort of 1029 Caucasian children
and an independent cohort of 283 obese children.
RESULTS: Applying a case control design, we observed a significantly lower
prevalence of the rs11196205 and rs7895340 risk alleles in the obese (n = 283)
compared with lean (n = 672) children (0.40 vs. 0.45; P = 0.02). There was,
however, no statistically significant relationship between these genotypes and
quantitative traits of obesity in either a normal representative cohort (n =
1029) or an obesity cohort. Obese children were significantly taller than lean
children. This increase in height was independently associated with risk variants
of the TCF7L2 gene, whereas in the normal representative cohort height appeared
to be decreased in carriers of the minor alleles. In the obese cohort, three risk
alleles (rs7901695, rs7903146, and rs1225572) were significantly associated with 
higher fasting and 120-min blood glucose levels independent of sex, age, pubertal
stage, and body mass index. Fasting and peak insulin levels and HOMA-IR appeared 
with a similar tendency but were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate for the first time that TCF7L2 gene variants
confer an increased risk for early impairment of glucose metabolism in obese
children, which is consistent with adult studies identifying TCF7L2 as a major
diabetes susceptibility gene.

PMID: 17311858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):881-5. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

A genome-wide association study identifies novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes.

Sladek R(1), Rocheleau G, Rung J, Dina C, Shen L, Serre D, Boutin P, Vincent D,
Belisle A, Hadjadj S, Balkau B, Heude B, Charpentier G, Hudson TJ, Montpetit A,
Pshezhetsky AV, Prentki M, Posner BI, Balding DJ, Meyre D, Polychronakos C,
Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, Montreal H3A 1A4, Canada.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):828-30.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus results from the interaction of environmental factors
with a combination of genetic variants, most of which were hitherto unknown. A
systematic search for these variants was recently made possible by the
development of high-density arrays that permit the genotyping of hundreds of
thousands of polymorphisms. We tested 392,935 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 
a French case-control cohort. Markers with the most significant difference in
genotype frequencies between cases of type 2 diabetes and controls were
fast-tracked for testing in a second cohort. This identified four loci containing
variants that confer type 2 diabetes risk, in addition to confirming the known
association with the TCF7L2 gene. These loci include a non-synonymous
polymorphism in the zinc transporter SLC30A8, which is expressed exclusively in
insulin-producing beta-cells, and two linkage disequilibrium blocks that contain 
genes potentially involved in beta-cell development or function (IDE-KIF11-HHEX
and EXT2-ALX4). These associations explain a substantial portion of disease risk 
and constitute proof of principle for the genome-wide approach to the elucidation
of complex genetic traits.

PMID: 17293876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):911-8.

Ku70 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 competitively regulate beta-catenin and
T-cell factor-4-mediated gene transactivation: possible linkage of DNA damage
recognition and Wnt signaling.

Idogawa M(1), Masutani M, Shitashige M, Honda K, Tokino T, Shinomura Y, Imai K,
Hirohashi S, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division and ADP-Ribosylation in Oncology Project, National
Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Formation of the T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4) and beta-catenin nuclear complex is
considered crucial to embryonic development and colorectal carcinogenesis. We
previously reported that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) interacts with
the TCF-4 and beta-catenin complex and enhances its transcriptional activity.
However, its biological significance remains unexplained. Using
immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we found that two Ku proteins, Ku70
and Ku80, were also associated with the complex. Knockdown of Ku70 by RNA
interference increased the amount of beta-catenin associated with TCF-4 and
enhanced the transcriptional activity. PARP-1 competed with Ku70 for binding to
TCF-4. Treatment with bleomycin, a DNA-damaging alkylating agent, induced
polyADP-ribosylation of PARP-1 protein and inhibited its interaction with TCF-4. 
Bleomycin conversely increased the amounts of Ku70 coimmunoprecipitated with
TCF-4 and removed beta-catenin from TCF-4. We propose a working model in which
the transcriptional activity of TCF-4 is regulated by the relative amount of
Ku70, PARP-1, and beta-catenin proteins binding to TCF-4. Identification of the
functional interaction of Ku70 as well as PARP-1 with the TCF-4 and beta-catenin 
transcriptional complex may provide insights into a novel linkage between DNA
damage recognition/repair and Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17283121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 6;104(6):1989-94. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Nucleus- and cell-specific gene expression in monkey thalamus.

Murray KD(1), Choudary PV, Jones EG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Nuclei of the mammalian thalamus are aggregations of neurons with unique
architectures and input-output connections, yet the molecular determinants of
their organizational specificity remain unknown. By comparing expression profiles
of thalamus and cerebral cortex in adult rhesus monkeys, we identified
transcripts that are unique to dorsal thalamus or to individual nuclei within it.
Real-time quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization analyses confirmed the
findings. Expression profiling of individual nuclei microdissected from the
dorsal thalamus revealed additional subsets of nucleus-specific genes. Functional
annotation using Gene Ontology (GO) vocabulary and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
revealed overrepresentation of GO categories related to development,
morphogenesis, cell-cell interactions, and extracellular matrix within the
thalamus- and nucleus-specific genes, many involved in the Wnt signaling pathway.
Examples included the transcription factor TCF7L2, localized exclusively to
excitatory neurons; a calmodulin-binding protein PCP4; the bone extracellular
matrix molecules SPP1 and SPARC; and other genes involved in axon outgrowth and
cell matrix interactions. Other nucleus-specific genes such as CBLN1 are involved
in synaptogenesis. The genes identified likely underlie nuclear specification,
cell phenotype, and connectivity during development and their maintenance in the 
adult thalamus.

PMCID: PMC1783903
PMID: 17261798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):389-93.

Haplotypes of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and its upstream region
are associated with type 2 diabetes and age of onset in Mexican Americans.

Lehman DM(1), Hunt KJ, Leach RJ, Hamlington J, Arya R, Abboud HE, Duggirala R,
Blangero J, Göring HH, Stern MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Clinical Epidemiology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
lehman@uthscsa.edu

TCF7L2 acts as both a repressor and transactivator of genes, as directed by the
Wnt signaling pathway. Recently, several highly correlated sequence variants
located within a haplotype block of the TCF7L2 gene were observed to associate
with type 2 diabetes in three Caucasian cohorts. We previously reported linkage
of type 2 diabetes in the San Antonio Family Diabetes Study (SAFADS) cohort
consisting of extended pedigrees of Mexican Americans to the region of chromosome
10q harboring TCF7L2. We therefore genotyped 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) from nine haplotype blocks across the gene in 545 SAFADS subjects (178
diabetic) to investigate their role in diabetes pathogenesis. We observed nominal
association between four SNPs (rs10885390, rs7903146, rs12255372, and rs3814573) 
in three haplotype blocks and type 2 diabetes, age at diagnosis, and 2-h glucose 
levels (P = 0.001-0.055). Furthermore, we identified a common protective
haplotype defined by these four SNPs that was significantly associated with type 
2 diabetes and age at diagnosis (P = 4.2 x 10(-5), relative risk [RR] 0.69; P =
6.7 x 10(-6), respectively) and a haplotype that confers diabetes risk that
contains the rare alleles at SNPs rs10885390 and rs12255372 (P = 0.02, RR 1.64). 
These data provide evidence that variation in the TCF7L2 genomic region may
affect risk for type 2 diabetes in Mexican Americans, but the attributable risk
may be lower than in Caucasian populations.

PMID: 17259383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Diabetologia. 2007 Apr;50(4):747-51. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

A genetic variation of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene is associated with 
risk of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Horikoshi M(1), Hara K, Ito C, Nagai R, Froguel P, Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: It has been suggested that transcription factor 7-like 2 protein
(TCF7L2) plays an important role in glucose metabolism by regulating the
production level of glucagon-like peptide-1, a hormone which modifies
glucose-dependent insulin secretion. Recently, variants of TCF7L2 gene were
reported to confer an increased risk of type 2 diabetes in three different
samples from European and European-origin populations. We studied whether the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 were associated with type 2
diabetes in samples from a Japanese population.
METHODS: Five SNPs were genotyped in three different sample sets. Association
with type 2 diabetes was investigated in each, as well as in combined sample
sets.
RESULTS: The SNP rs7903146 was nominally associated with type 2 diabetes in the
initial (p = 0.08) and two replication sample sets (p = 0.05 and 0.06). For the
combined sample set, in which we successfully genotyped 1,174 type 2 diabetes
patients and 823 control subjects, rs7903146 showed a significant association
with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio = 1.69 [95% CI 1.21-2.36], p = 0.002) with the
same direction as the previous reports in samples from European and
European-origin populations. SNPs rs7903146 and rs7901695 were in complete
linkage disequilibrium. The rest of the five SNPs (rs7895340, rs11196205 and
rs12255372) did not show any significant associations with type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The consistent association between rs7903146 in
TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes in different ethnic groups, including the Japanese
population, suggests that TCF7L2 is a common susceptibility gene for type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 17245589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;15(3):342-6. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes in northern Sweden.

Mayans S(1), Lackovic K, Lindgren P, Ruikka K, Agren A, Eliasson M, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Department of Medical Biosciences, 
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

A recent study found association of one microsatellite and five single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in intron 3 of the TCF7L2 gene with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
the Icelandic, Danish and American populations. The aim of the present study was 
to investigate if those SNPs were associated to T2D in two (family- and
population-based) cohorts from northern Sweden. We genotyped four of the
associated SNPs in a case-control cohort consisting of 872 T2D cases and 857
controls matched with respect to age, sex and geographical origin and in a sample
of 59 extended families (148 affected and 83 unaffected individuals). Here, we
report replication of association between T2D and three SNPs in the case-control 
(rs7901695, P=0.003; rs7901346, P=0.00002; and rs12255372, P=0.000004) and two
SNPs in the family-based (rs7901695, P=0.01 and rs7901346, P=0.04) samples from
northern Sweden. This replication strengthens the evidence for involvement of
TCF7L2 in T2D.

PMID: 17245407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Horm Metab Res. 2007 Jan;39(1):46-52.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) are strongly
associated with type 2 diabetes but not with the metabolic syndrome in the
MONICA/KORA surveys.

Marzi C(1), Huth C, Kolz M, Grallert H, Meisinger C, Wichmann HE, Rathmann W,
Herder C, Illig T.

Author information: 
(1)GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany.

Recently, significant associations between common variants of the transcription
factor 7-like 2 gene ( TCF7L2) and type 2 diabetes have been reported. This study
was designed to replicate the reported associations of the two highly correlated 
(r (2)=0.86) TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms rs12255372 and rs7903146 with
type 2 diabetes in a case-control study of 2369 MONICA/KORA participants (678
cases/1691 controls from Augsburg, Germany). To further investigate the
pathogenic mechanism underlying these associations, we extended our analyses to
the metabolic syndrome (IDF, NCEP definitions) and its components in a
population-based study comprising 1404 male and female KORA participants aged
55-74 years. Results of our analyses strongly confirmed the minor T alleles as
risk variants for type 2 diabetes (rs7903146: OR (TvsC) [95% CI]=1.36
[1.18;1.58], p=0.00003, and rs12255372: OR (TvsG) [95% CI]=1.31 [1.13;1.51],
p=0.0003). Moreover, the T allele at rs7903146 was inversely associated with
log-transformed, HOMA-%B (beta=-0.07, p=0.005) as a measure of basal insulin
secretion, and log-transformed fasting insulin (beta=-0.06, p=0.02). No
association was found with insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the metabolic
syndrome. These findings support replication evidence that TCF7L2 variants
increase type 2 diabetes risk. TCF7L2 may primarily affect pancreatic beta cell
function.

PMID: 17226113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Feb;17(1):45-51.

The many ways of Wnt in cancer.

Polakis P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. ppolakis@gene.com

More than 20 years ago, the oncogenicity of a Wnt ligand was revealed in a series
of experiments originating with random proviral integration in mice. The
significance of Wnt signaling in human cancer has since been buttressed by the
identification of mutations in genes coding for the Wnt pathway components Axin, 
APC, and beta-catenin. This review summarizes the reported genetic defects in the
Wnt pathway, with an emphasis on their functional contribution to human tumor
progression.

PMID: 17208432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Genet. 2007 Feb;39(2):218-25. Epub 2007 Jan 7.

Refining the impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on type 2 diabetes and adaptive
evolution.

Helgason A(1), Pálsson S, Thorleifsson G, Grant SF, Emilsson V, Gunnarsdottir S, 
Adeyemo A, Chen Y, Chen G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Hinney A, Hansen T,
Andersen G, Borch-Johnsen K, Jorgensen T, Schäfer H, Faruque M, Doumatey A, Zhou 
J, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP, Rader DJ, Bagger Y, Christiansen C, Sigurdsson G,
Hebebrand J, Pedersen O, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Rotimi C,
Stefánsson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. agnar@decode.is

We recently described an association between risk of type 2diabetes and variants 
in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2; formerly TCF4), with a
population attributable risk (PAR) of 17%-28% in three populations of European
ancestry. Here, we refine the definition of the TCF7L2 type 2diabetes risk
variant, HapB(T2D), to the ancestral T allele of a SNP, rs7903146, through
replication in West African and Danish type 2 diabetes case-control studies and
an expanded Icelandic study. We also identify another variant of the same gene,
HapA, that shows evidence of positive selection in East Asian, European and West 
African populations. Notably, HapA shows a suggestive association with body mass 
index and altered concentrations of the hunger-satiety hormones ghrelin and
leptin in males, indicating that the selective advantage of HapA may have been
mediated through effects on energy metabolism.

PMID: 17206141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. BMC Med. 2006 Dec 20;4:34.

Effects of the diabetes linked TCF7L2 polymorphism in a representative older
population.

Melzer D(1), Murray A, Hurst AJ, Weedon MN, Bandinelli S, Corsi AM, Ferrucci L,
Paolisso G, Guralnik JM, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, RD&E Wonford Site, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW,
UK. david.melzer@pms.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: A polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has
been found to be associated with type 2 diabetes in case-control studies. We
aimed to estimate associations of the marker rs7903146 (C/T) polymorphism with
fasting glucose, lipids, diabetes prevalence and complications in an older
general population.
METHODS: In total, 944 subjects aged > or = 65 years from the population
representative InCHIANTI study were enrolled in this study. Those with fasting
blood glucose of > or = 7 mmol/l or physician diagnosis were considered diabetic.
Cut-off points for impaired fasting glucose (IFG) were > or = 5.6 mmol/l to < 7
mmol/l.
RESULTS: In the general population sample, minor (T) allele carriers of rs7903146
had higher fasting blood glucose (FBG) (p = 0.028) but lower fasting insulin (p =
0.030) and HOMA2b scores (p = 0.001), suggesting poorer beta-cell function. T
allele carriers also had smaller waist circumference (p = 0.009), lower
triglyceride levels (p = 0.006), and higher high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(p = 0.008). The prevalence of diabetes or IFG was 32.4% in TT carriers and 23.3%
in CC carriers; adjusted OR = 1.67 (95% confidence interval 1.05 to 2.65, p =
0.031). Within the diabetic and IFG groups, fewer T allele carriers had metabolic
syndrome features (p = 0.047) or had experienced a myocardial infarction (p =
0.037). Conversely, T allele carriers with diabetes had poorer renal function
(reduced 24-hour creatinine clearance, p = 0.013), and possibly more retinopathy 
(p = 0.067). Physician-diagnosed dementia was more common in the T carriers (in
diabetes p = 0.05, with IFG p = 0.024).
CONCLUSION: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism is associated with lower insulin
levels, smaller waist circumference, and lower risk lipid profiles in the general
elderly population. Patients with diabetes who are carriers of the minor allele
are less likely to have metabolic-syndrome features, but may experience more
microvascular complications, although the number of cases was small. If
replicated, these findings may have implications for developing treatment
approaches tailored by genotype.

PMCID: PMC1769391
PMID: 17181866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Dec 14;12(46):7482-7.

Effects of gastrin 17 on beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway in Colo320WT colon cancer
cells.

Cao J(1), Yu JP, Liu CH, Zhou L, Yu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Jiefang
Road 238, Wuhan 430060, Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To explore the effect of gastrin 17 (G17) on beta-catenin/T cell factor-4
(Tcf-4) signaling in colonic cancer cell line Colo320WT.
METHODS: The pCR3.1/GR plasmid, which expresses gastrin receptor,
cholecystokinin-2 receptor (CCK-2R), was transfected into a colonic cancer cell
line Colo320 by Lipofectamine (TM)2000 and the stably expressing CCK-2R clones
were screened by G418. The expression levels of gastrin receptor in the Colo320
and the transfected Colo320WT cell line were assayed by RT-PCR. Colo320WT cells
were treated with G17 in a time-dependent manner (0, 1, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h), then
with L365,260 (Gastrin(17) receptor blocker) for 30 min, and with G17 again for
12 h or L365,260 for 12 h. Expression levels of beta-catenin in a TX-100 soluble 
fraction and TX-100 insoluble fraction of Colo320WT cells treated with G17 were
detected by co-immuniprecipation and Western blot. Immunocytochemistry was used
to examine the distribution of beta-catenin in CoLoWT320 cells. Expression levels
of c-myc and cyclin D1 in Colo320WT cells treated with G17 were assayed by
Western blot.
RESULTS: Expression levels of beta-catenin in the TX-100 solution fraction
decreased apparently in a time-dependent fashion and reached the highest level
after G17 treatment for 12 h, while expression levels of beta-catenin in the
TX-100 insoluble fraction were just on the contrary. Immunocytochemistry showed
that beta-catenin was translocated from the cell membranes into the cytoplasm and
nucleus under G17 treatment. Expression levels of c-myc and cyclin D1 in the
G17-treated Colo320WT cells were markedly higher compared to the untreated
Colo320WT cells. In addition, the aforementioned G17-stimulated responses were
blocked by L365,260.
CONCLUSION: Gastrin17 activates beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling in Colo320WT cells, 
thereby leading to over-expression of c-myc and cyclin D1.

PMCID: PMC4087595
PMID: 17167838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Oncogene. 2006 Dec 4;25(57):7531-7.

Colorectal cancer and genetic alterations in the Wnt pathway.

Segditsas S(1), Tomlinson I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, London, UK.

In colorectal tumours, Wnt pathway genetics continues to be dominated by
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Germline mutations cause 
familial adenomatous polyposis and at least two-thirds of sporadic colorectal
tumours also acquire APC mutations, quite possibly as the initiating events in
tumorigenesis. These mutations almost always cause loss of the C-terminal
functions of the APC protein - probably involved in microtubule binding, cell
polarity and chromosome segregation - and deletion of the SAMP repeats that are
important for binding to axin and formation of the beta-catenin phosphorylation
complex. The truncated APC proteins are, in general, stable and almost certainly 
retain some activity in beta-catenin binding. The 'two hits' at APC are
coselected so as to produce an optimal activation of Wnt signalling (just-right
hypothesis). In a minority of colorectal tumours, Wnt activation can occur
through mutations that affect phosphorylation sites within exon 3 of
beta-catenin, causing protein stabilization. In other tumours, epigenetic
transcriptional silencing or mutation of the secreted frizzled-related proteins
may modulate Wnt levels. Mutations in the Wnt components AXIN1, AXIN2 and TCF4
have been found in microsatellite-unstable colon cancers, but it is not clear in 
every case whether these changes are functional. Therapeutic modulation of the
Wnt pathway remains an attractive therapeutic possibility for colorectal
carcinomas.

PMID: 17143297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3630-4.

Polymorphism in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene is associated
with reduced insulin secretion in nondiabetic women.

Munoz J(1), Lok KH, Gower BA, Fernandez JR, Hunter GR, Lara-Castro C, De Luca M, 
Garvey WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Sciences, 1675 Webb Nutrition Sciences Building, Room 
241, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. munozj@uab.edu

Recently, the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene on chromosome 10q25.2
has been linked with type 2 diabetes among Caucasians, with disease associations 
noted for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs12255372 and rs7903146. To
investigate mechanisms by which TCF7L2 could contribute to type 2 diabetes, we
examined the effects of these SNPs on clinical and metabolic traits affecting
glucose homeostasis in 256 nondiabetic female subjects (138 European Americans
and 118 African Americans) aged 7-57 years. Outcomes included BMI, percent body
fat, insulin sensitivity (S(i)), acute insulin response to glucose (AIR(g)), and 
the disposition index (DI). Homozygosity for the minor allele (TT) of SNP
rs12255372 occurred in 9% of individuals and was associated with a 31% reduction 
in DI values in a recessive model. The at-risk allele TT was also associated with
lower AIR(g) adjusted for S(i) in both ethnic groups, whereas rs12255372 genotype
was not associated with measures of adiposity or with S(i). The T allele of
rs12255372 was also associated with increased prevalence of impaired fasting
glucose. Genotypes at rs7903146 were not associated with any metabolic trait.
Lower S(i) and higher AIR(g) observed in the African-American compared with the
European-American subgroup could not be explained by the TCF7L2 genotype. Our
data suggest that the TCF7L2 gene is an important factor regulating insulin
secretion, which could explain its association with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17130514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):871-8. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

An antisense transcript induced by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling decreases E2F4.

Yochum GS(1), Cleland R, McWeeney S, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventative Medicine, OHSU Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland 97239, USA. yochumg@ohsu.edu

Wnt signaling induces the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and transcription 
of specific target genes via the DNA-binding proteins TCF/Lef. Although all known
beta-catenin target genes encode proteins, genome-wide RNA profiling studies
indicate that many transcripts do not have this capability. Transcription
factor-binding sites associated with these noncoding transcripts can be
identified using unbiased techniques such as serial analysis of chromatin
occupancy (SACO). We used this method to identify a beta-catenin-regulated
antisense RNA expressed in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells, a cellular model of
activated beta-catenin signaling. Genomic signature tags designating putative
beta-catenin-binding sites mapped to the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
E2F4 gene. We showed that both beta-catenin and TCF4 bind to the E2F4 3'-UTR site
in vivo, inducing expression of an E2F4 antisense transcript. LiCl, which mimics 
Wnt signaling, also induced expression of the E2F4 antisense transcript and
decreased E2F4 protein levels. This effect was blocked by a cDNA expressing the
E2F4 3'-UTR sense strand. The antisense-mediated decrease in E2F4 protein was
reflected by reduced E2F4 association with specific target genes, including
CCNA2, CDC2, PCNA, and Rad54. We propose that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by reducing the level of the E2F4 cell
cycle repressor via an antisense mechanism.

PMID: 17121828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochem J. 2007 Mar 15;402(3):515-23.

Post-translational palmitoylation and glycosylation of Wnt-5a are necessary for
its signalling.

Kurayoshi M(1), Yamamoto H, Izumi S, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Wnt-5a is a representative ligand that activates a beta-catenin-independent
pathway in Wnt signalling. In the present paper, the roles of the
post-translational modifications in the actions of Wnt-5a were investigated. We
found that Wnt-5a is modified with palmitate at Cys104 and glycans at Asn114,
Asn120, Asn311 and Asn325. The palmitoylation was not essential for the secretion
of Wnt-5a, but was necessary for its ability to suppress Wnt-3a-dependent T-cell 
factor transcriptional activity and to stimulate cell migration. Wnt-5a activated
focal adhesion kinase and this activation also required palmitoylation. Wild-type
Wnt-5a induced the internalization of Fz (Frizzled) 5, but a Wnt-5a mutant that
lacks the palmitoylation site did not. Furthermore, the binding of Wnt-5a to the 
extracellular domain of Fz5 required palmitoylation of Wnt-5a. These results
indicate that palmitoylation of Wnt-5a is important for the triggering of
signalling at the cell surface level and, therefore, that the lipid-unmodified
form of Wnt-5a cannot activate intracellular signal cascades. In contrast,
glycosylation was necessary for the secretion of Wnt-5a, but not essential for
the actions of Wnt-5a. Thus the post-translational palmitoylation and
glycosylation of Wnt-5a are important for the actions and secretion of Wnt-5a.

PMCID: PMC1863570
PMID: 17117926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. BMC Cancer. 2006 Nov 17;6:268.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variant is associated with familial breast
cancer risk: a case-control study.

Burwinkel B(1), Shanmugam KS, Hemminki K, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Sutter C,
Wappenschmidt B, Kiechle M, Bartram CR, Frank B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. b.burwinkel@dkfz.de <b.burwinkel@dkfz.de>

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is a critical component of
the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Aberrant TCF7L2 expression modifies Wnt signaling
and mediates oncogenic effects through the upregulation of c-MYC and cyclin D.
Genetic alterations in TCF7L2 may therefore affect cancer risk. Recently, TCF7L2 
variants, including the microsatellite marker DG10S478 and the nearly perfectly
linked SNP rs12233372, were identified to associate with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of the TCF7L2 rs12255372 variant on familial 
breast cancer (BC) risk by means of TaqMan allelic discrimination, analyzing
BRCA1/2 mutation-negative index patients of 592 German BC families and 735
control individuals.
RESULTS: The T allele of rs12255372 showed an association with borderline
significance (OR = 1.19, 95% C.I. = 1.01-1.42, P = 0.04), and the
Cochran-Armitage test for trend revealed an allele dose-dependent association of 
rs12255372 with BC risk (Ptrend = 0.04).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a possible influence of TCF7L2 rs12255372 on the 
risk of familial BC.

PMCID: PMC1665524
PMID: 17109766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10677-82.

Human arrest defective 1 acetylates and activates beta-catenin, promoting lung
cancer cell proliferation.

Lim JH(1), Park JW, Chun YS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Departments of Pharmacology and Physiology,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Arrest defective 1 (ARD1), an acetyltransferase, is essential for the yeast life 
cycle. Although its human homologue (hARD1) has been identified, its biological
functions in human cells remain unclear. In the present study, we examined the
biological function of hARD1. In H1299 and A549 lung cancer cells,
hARD1-silencing RNA inhibited cell proliferation and induced G(1) arrest. Cyclin 
D1 was also found to be down-regulated in these growth-arrested cells, and the
ectopic expression of cyclin D1 rescued cell growth. hARD1 knockdown repressed
the promoter activity of the cyclin D1 gene, which inhibited the transcription of
cyclin D1. Moreover, hARD1 knockdown reduced the binding of beta-catenin/TCF4
transcription factor to cyclin D1 promoter and repressed its transcriptional
activity. Inversely, hARD1 expression increased the transcriptional activity of
beta-catenin. Both endogenous and ectopically expressed hARD1 was
coimmunoprecipitated with beta-catenin. hARD1 knockdown did not affect
beta-catenin expression or degradation but noticeably reduced acetylated
beta-catenin. The beta-catenin binding and acetylation by hARD1 were observed in 
vitro. Therefore, it is suggested that hARD1 participates in proliferation of
lung cancer cells via the activation of beta-catenin.

PMID: 17108104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):5-7. Epub 2006 Nov 11.

TCF7L2 and type 2 diabetes--we WNT to know.

Smith U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45,
Gothenburg, Sweden. ulf.smith@medic.gu.se

PMID: 17102948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

TCF7L2: the biggest story in diabetes genetics since HLA?

Zeggini E(1), McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratories, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Old Road, Headington,
Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):63-7.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):59-62.

PMCID: PMC1760757
PMID: 17096114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):63-7. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Common variants in the TCF7L2 gene are strongly associated with type 2 diabetes
mellitus in the Indian population.

Chandak GR(1), Janipalli CS, Bhaskar S, Kulkarni SR, Mohankrishna P, Hattersley
AT, Frayling TM, Yajnik CS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Group, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad,
India.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

AIMS AND HYPOTHESIS: India has the greatest number of diabetic subjects in any
one country, but the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes mellitus in India is poorly
understood. Common non-coding variants in the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene 
(TCF7L2) have recently been strongly associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes in European populations. We investigated whether TCF7L2 variants are
also associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Indian population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We genotyped type 2 diabetes patients (n = 955) and
ethnically matched control subjects (n = 399) by sequencing three single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs4506565) in TCF7L2.
RESULTS: We observed a strong association with all the polymorphisms, including
rs12255372 (odds ratio [OR] 1.50 [95% CI = 1.24-1.82], p = 4.0 x 10(-5)),
rs4506565 (OR 1.48 [95% CI = 1.24-1.77], p = 2.0 x 10(-5)) and rs7903146 (OR 1.46
[95% CI = 1.22-1.75], p = 3.0 x 10(-5)). All three variants showed increased
relative risk when homozygous rather than heterozygous, with the strongest risk
for rs12255372 (OR 2.28 [95% CI = 1.40-3.72] vs OR 1.43 [95% CI = 1.11-1.83]). We
found no association of the TCF7L2 genotypes with age at diagnosis, BMI or WHR,
but the risk genotype at rs12255372 was associated with higher fasting plasma
glucose (p = 0.001), higher 2-h plasma glucose (p = 0.0002) and higher
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-R; p = 0.012) in
non-diabetic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study in Indian subjects replicates the strong association of
TCF7L2 variants with type 2 diabetes in other populations. It also provides
evidence that variations in TCF7L2 may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes by influencing both insulin secretion and insulin resistance.
TCF7L2 is an important gene for determining susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
mellitus and it transgresses the boundaries of ethnicity.

PMID: 17093941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):214-6. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

No major contribution of TCF7L2 sequence variants to maturity onset of diabetes
of the young (MODY) or neonatal diabetes mellitus in French white subjects.

Cauchi S, Vaxillaire M, Choquet H, Durand E, Duval A, Polak M, Froguel P.

PMID: 17093940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Dec;84(12):985-7. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

A high mobility group box-containing transcription factor leads to diabetes risk.

Luft FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Franz Volhard Clinic, HELIOS Kliniken Berlin, Medical Faculty of the Charité, 
Humboldt University, Berlin-Buch, Germany. luft@fvk-berlin.de

PMID: 17091236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Cell Biol. 2006 Nov 6;175(3):505-14.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium causes a
loss of Hedgehog expression, intestinal hyperplasia, and early postnatal
lethality.

Jones RG(1), Li X, Gray PD, Kuang J, Clayton F, Samowitz WS, Madison BB, Gumucio 
DL, Kuwada SK.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium, unlike in
epidermal and mammary epithelia, of mice does not result in decreased cell
adhesion and proliferation, but instead causes a profound increase in epithelial 
proliferation with dysplasia and polypoid structures. The increased epithelial
proliferation inhibited epithelial differentiation that caused severe
malnutrition and early postnatal lethality. The striking similarities between
beta1 integrin-deleted mice and neonatal mice with defective Hedgehog signaling
led to the discovery that Hedgehog expression was markedly reduced in the former 
mice. beta1 integrins were found to drive the expression of Hedgehogs in
intestinal epithelial cells in an HNF-3beta (Foxa2)-dependent fashion. The
expression of Tcf-4, a transcription factor known to be required for intestinal
epithelial stem cell proliferation, was increased and mislocalized in the
intestinal epithelia of the beta1 integrin-deleted mice and in newborn mice
treated with the Hedgehog signaling inhibitor cyclopamine. This study shows that 
beta1 integrins are key regulators of proliferation and homeostasis in the
intestine and achieve this not through anchorage-dependent effects but by
generating Hh expression and signaling.

PMCID: PMC2064526
PMID: 17088430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):6723-9.

E2-2 regulates the expansion of pro-B cells and follicular versus marginal zone
decisions.

Wikström I(1), Forssell J, Goncalves M, Colucci F, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

The E-proteins E2A, HeLa E-box binding protein, and E2-2 constitute a class of
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that differentially affect B cell
development. E2A is by far the most investigated and appears to operate at
several levels during B cell ontogeny. Less is known concerning the role of the
other E-proteins. To address the role of E2-2, we have performed transfers of
fetal liver (FL) cells into irradiated Rag-deficient mice. Although the transfer 
of E2-2-deficient cells alone can reconstitute all B cell subpopulations, albeit 
with a moderate reduction in cellularity, E2-2-deficient cells have a
disadvantage when transferred together with wild-type cells. Cultivation of
E2-2(-/-) day 14.5 FL cells on stromal cells and IL-7 revealed a reduced
frequency of responding B cell progenitors despite normal IL-7Ralpha surface
expression. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that E2-2 mRNA expression is high at 
the pro-B cell stage and drops sharply at the pre-B cell stage, consistent with a
role for E2-2 in pro-B cells. In contrast, E2A mRNA was most abundant in pre-B
cells. Analysis of the peripheral repertoire revealed that mice reconstituted
with E2-2(-/-) FL cells had an increased proportion of marginal zone (MZ) B
cells. Interestingly, E2-2 mRNA was elevated approximately 2-fold (p < 0.01) in
follicular compared with MZ B cells. Although E2A mRNA showed a similar tendency,
the difference was not significant. Collectively, our findings indicate that E2-2
is required for optimal expansion of pro-B cells, and also influences the
follicular vs MZ decision.

PMID: 17082585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Diabetes. 2006 Nov;55(11):3189-92.

TCF7L2 variation predicts hyperglycemia incidence in a French general population:
the data from an epidemiological study on the Insulin Resistance Syndrome (DESIR)
study.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Choquet H, Dina C, Born C, Marre M, Balkau B, Froguel P;
DESIR Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3635.

Recently, case-control studies demonstrated that a TCF7L2 (transcription factor
7-like 2 gene) noncoding variant (rs7903146 T at-risk allele) was strongly
associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. However, the predictive
value of this marker in a nonselected general population remains unknown. In this
study, our aim was to assess the contribution of this variant to the prevalence
and incidence of hyperglycemia (type 2 diabetes and impaired fasting glucose) and
insulin regulation in a 9-year prospective study of 4,976 middle-aged
participants in the French DESIR (Data from an Epidemiological Study on the
Insulin Resistance Syndrome) cohort. Our data support previous studies
associating the T at-risk allele with a higher prevalence of hyperglycemia at
baseline (P = 0.049) and a higher incidence of hyperglycemia after 9 years of
follow-up (P = 0.014). The population-attributable risk to develop hyperglycemia 
due to the T at-risk allele was estimated to be 10.4% at the end of the
prospective study. The most likely inheritance model was found to be additive (P 
= 0.002) rather than deviating from linearity (hazard ratio 1.21 [95% CI
1.05-1.39], P = 0.008) [corrected] An increase in the incidence of hyperglycemia 
was confirmed by survival analyses among C/C, C/T, and T/T carriers during the 9 
years of follow-up (P = 0.028 by log-rank test). Interestingly, in control
individuals, there was weak evidence of association of the T at-risk allele with 
reduced fasting insulin levels and insulin secretion index (homeostasis model
assessment of beta-cell function) in control individuals. We conclude that the
TCF7L2 T at-risk allele variation (rs7903146) predicts hyperglycemia incidence in
a general French population, possibly through a deleterious effect on insulin
secretion.

PMID: 17065361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):212-3. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Analysis of the type 2 diabetes gene, TCF7L2, in 13,795 type 1 diabetes cases and
control subjects.

Field SF, Howson JM, Smyth DJ, Walker NM, Dunger DB, Todd JA.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1780.

PMCID: PMC2151139
PMID: 17063324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):G599-607. Epub 2006 Oct 
19.

Dual alterations in casein kinase I-epsilon and GSK-3beta modulate beta-catenin
stability in hyperproliferating colonic epithelia.

Umar S(1), Wang Y, Morris AP, Sellin JH.

Author information: 
(1)Div of Gastroenterology, Univ of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555-0632, USA. shumar@utmb.edu

Casein kinase I (CKI)-epsilon and GSK-3beta phosphorylate beta-catenin at Ser(45)
(beta-cat(45)) and Thr(41)/Ser(37,33) (beta-cat(33,37,41)) residues, thereby
facilitating its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. We used a
Citrobacter rodentium-induced transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia (TMCH)
model to determine Ser/Thr phosphorylation and biological function of
beta-catenin during crypt hyperproliferation. TMCH was associated with 3-fold and
3.3-fold increases in CKI-epsilon cellular abundance and 2-fold and 1.8-fold
increase in its activity at 6 and 12 days after infection, respectively.
beta-Catenin coimmunoprecipitated with both cellular and nuclear CKI-epsilon and 
cellular axin at these time points. Cellular beta-catenin was constitutively
phosphorylated at Ser(45) and underwent subcellular redistribution to
cytoskeletal and nuclear fractions at days 6 and 12 of TMCH, respectively.
beta-cat(33,37,41), however, exhibited only subtle changes in either
phosphorylation status or subcellular distribution even after blocking
proteasomal degradation in vivo. Interestingly, GSK-3beta underwent increased
phosphorylation at Ser(9), leading to 40% and 70% decreases in its activity at
these time points, respectively. Coimmunoprecipitation studies exhibited strong
association of GSK-3beta with PKC-zeta at either time point. Cellular
beta-cat(45) stabilized and, along with unphosphorylated beta-catenin, underwent 
nuclear translocation, associated with nuclear accumulated Tcf-4 and cAMP
response element binding protein binding protein, and was significantly
acetylated, leading to increases in DNA binding. Priming of beta-catenin at
Ser(45) exists in vivo. However, beta-cat(45) does not necessarily enter the
degradation pathway. Impairment in linking beta-cat(45) to subsequent
GSK-3beta-mediated phosphorylation and degradation may account for increased
steady-state levels of both unphosphorylated as well as Ser(45)-phosphorylated
beta-catenin, which may be causally linked to increases in cell census during
TMCH.

PMID: 17053159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):293-300.

Crystal structure of a beta-catenin/BCL9/Tcf4 complex.

Sampietro J(1), Dahlberg CL, Cho US, Hinds TR, Kimelman D, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

The canonical Wnt pathway plays critical roles in embryonic development, stem
cell growth, and tumorigenesis. Stimulation of the Wnt pathway leads to the
association of beta-catenin with Tcf and BCL9 in the nucleus, resulting in the
transactivation of Wnt target genes. We have determined the crystal structure of 
a beta-catenin/BCL9/Tcf-4 triple complex at 2.6 A resolution. Our studies reveal 
that the beta-catenin binding site of BCL9 is distinct from that of most other
beta-catenin partners and forms a good target for developing drugs that block
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. The BCL9 beta-catenin binding domain (CBD) 
forms an alpha helix that binds to the first armadillo repeat of beta-catenin,
which can be mutated to prevent beta-catenin binding to BCL9 without affecting
cadherin or alpha-catenin binding. We also demonstrate that beta-catenin Y142
phosphorylation, which has been proposed to regulate BCL9-2 binding, does not
directly affect the interaction of beta-catenin with either BCL9 or BCL9-2.

PMID: 17052462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):59-62. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Association of variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in the Dutch Breda cohort.

van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV(1), Shiri-Sverdlov R, Zhernakova A, Strengman E, van
Haeften TW, Hofker MH, Wijmenga C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel
50 (UNS50/11), P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):1-4.

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: A strong association between susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
and common variants of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2), encoding an
enteroendocrine transcription factor involved in glucose homeostasis, has been
reported in three different populations (Iceland, Denmark and USA) by Grant et
al. We aimed to replicate these findings in a Dutch cohort.
METHODS: We analysed the genotypes of two intronic single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TCF7L2 gene in 502 unrelated type 2 diabetes patients and
in a set of healthy controls (n = 920). The two SNPs showed almost complete
linkage disequilibrium (D' = 0.91).
RESULTS: We were able to replicate the previously reported association in our
Breda cohort. The minor alleles of both variants were significantly
over-represented in cases (odds ratio [OR] 1.29, 95% CI 1.09-1.52, [Formula: see 
text] for rs12255372; OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.19-1.66, [Formula: see text] for
rs7903146). In addition, TCF7L2 haplotypes were analysed for association with the
disease. The analysis of haplotypes did not reveal any strong association beyond 
that expected from analysing individual SNPs. The TT haplotype carrying the minor
alleles was more frequent among cases (OR 1.38, [Formula: see text]).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data strongly confirm that variants of the TCF7L2
gene contribute to the risk of type 2 diabetes. The population-attributable risk 
from this factor in the Dutch type 2 diabetes population is 10%.

PMID: 17031610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. PLoS Med. 2006 Oct;3(10):e374.

Combining information from common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms improves
disease prediction.

Weedon MN(1), McCarthy MI, Hitman G, Walker M, Groves CJ, Zeggini E, Rayner NW,
Shields B, Owen KR, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes Research and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical
School, Exeter, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: A limited number of studies have assessed the risk of common diseases
when combining information from several predisposing polymorphisms. In most
cases, individual polymorphisms only moderately increase risk (approximately
20%), and they are thought to be unhelpful in assessing individuals' risk
clinically. The value of analyzing multiple alleles simultaneously is not well
studied. This is often because, for any given disease, very few common risk
alleles have been confirmed.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Three common variants (Lys23 of KCNJ11, Pro12 of PPARG, and
the T allele at rs7903146 of TCF7L2) have been shown to predispose to type 2
diabetes mellitus across many large studies. Risk allele frequencies ranged from 
0.30 to 0.88 in controls. To assess the combined effect of multiple
susceptibility alleles, we genotyped these variants in a large case-control study
(3,668 controls versus 2,409 cases). Individual allele odds ratios (ORs) ranged
from 1.14 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05 to 1.23) to 1.48 (95% CI, 1.36 to
1.60). We found no evidence of gene-gene interaction, and the risks of multiple
alleles were consistent with a multiplicative model. Each additional risk allele 
increased the odds of type 2 diabetes by 1.28 (95% CI, 1.21 to 1.35) times.
Participants with all six risk alleles had an OR of 5.71 (95% CI, 1.15 to 28.3)
compared to those with no risk alleles. The 8.1% of participants that were
double-homozygous for the risk alleles at TCF7L2 and Pro12Ala had an OR of 3.16
(95% CI, 2.22 to 4.50), compared to 4.3% with no TCF7L2 risk alleles and either
no or one Glu23Lys or Pro12Ala risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining information from several known common risk polymorphisms
allows the identification of population subgroups with markedly differing risks
of developing type 2 diabetes compared to those obtained using single
polymorphisms. This approach may have a role in future preventative measures for 
common, polygenic diseases.

PMCID: PMC1584415
PMID: 17020404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2903-8.

Transcription factor TCF7L2 genetic study in the French population: expression in
human beta-cells and adipose tissue and strong association with type 2 diabetes.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Dina C, Choquet H, Samson C, Gallina S, Balkau B,
Charpentier G, Pattou F, Stetsyuk V, Scharfmann R, Staels B, Frühbeck G, Froguel 
P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

Recently, the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene has been associated
with type 2 diabetes in subjects of European origin in the DeCode study. We
genotyped the two most associated variants (rs7903146 and rs12255372) in 2,367
French type 2 diabetic subjects and in 2,499 control subjects. Both the T-allele 
of rs7903146 and the T-allele of rs12255372 significantly increase type 2
diabetes risk with an allelic odds ratio (OR) of 1.69 (95% CI 1.55-1.83) (P = 6.0
x 10(-35)) and 1.60 (1.47-1.74) (P = 7.6 x 10(-28)), respectively. In nonobese
type 2 diabetic subjects (BMI <30 kg/m2, n = 1,346), the ORs increased to 1.89
(1.72-2.09) (P = 2.1 x 10(-38)) and 1.79 (1.62-1.97) (P = 5.7 x 10(-31)),
respectively. The rs7903146 T at-risk allele associates with decreased BMI and
earlier age at diagnosis in the type 2 diabetic subjects (P = 8.0 x 10(-3) and P 
= 3.8 x 10(-4), respectively), which is supported by quantitative family-based
association tests. TCF7L2 is expressed in most human tissues, including mature
pancreatic beta-cells, with the exception of the skeletal muscle. In the
subcutaneous and omental fat from obese type 2 diabetic subjects, TCF7L2
expression significantly decreased compared with obese normoglycemic individuals.
During rat fetal beta-cell differentiation, TCF7L2 expression pattern mimics the 
key marker NGN3 (neurogenin 3), suggesting a role in islet development. These
data provide evidence that TCF7L2 is a major determinant of type 2 diabetes risk 
in European populations and suggests that this transcription factor plays a key
role in glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 17003360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2890-5.

Common single nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF7L2 are reproducibly associated with
type 2 diabetes and reduce the insulin response to glucose in nondiabetic
individuals.

Saxena R(1), Gianniny L, Burtt NP, Lyssenko V, Giuducci C, Sjögren M, Florez JC, 
Almgren P, Isomaa B, Orho-Melander M, Lindblad U, Daly MJ, Tuomi T, Hirschhorn
JN, Ardlie KG, Groop LC, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA.

Recently, common noncoding variants in the TCF7L2 gene were strongly associated
with increased risk of type 2 diabetes in samples from Iceland, Denmark, and the 
U.S. We genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across TCF7L2 in
8,310 individuals in family-based and case-control designs from Scandinavia,
Poland, and the U.S. We convincingly confirmed the previous association of TCF7L2
SNPs with the risk of type 2 diabetes (rs7903146T odds ratio 1.40 [95% CI
1.30-1.50], P = 6.74 x 10(-20)). In nondiabetic individuals, the risk genotypes
were associated with a substantial reduction in the insulinogenic index derived
from an oral glucose tolerance test (risk allele homozygotes have half the
insulin response to glucose of noncarriers, P = 0.003) but not with increased
insulin resistance. These results suggest that TCF7L2 variants may act through
insulin secretion to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17003358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;66(18):9245-51.

Adenomatous polyposis coli determines sensitivity to histone deacetylase
inhibitor-induced apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Huang X(1), Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, North Dakota 58105, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) inhibit malignant cell growth and
induce apoptosis through unknown mechanisms. Here, we report that the expression 
status of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein determines the relative
sensitivity of colon cancer cells to HDAC inhibitor-induced apoptosis. HCA-7
cells (expressing wild-type beta-catenin and APC proteins) are more sensitive to 
apoptosis induced by HDAC inhibitors valproic acid (VPA) and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid than SW620 or HT-29 cells (both expressing mutant APC). When
wild-type APC protein was expressed using an inducible expression system, HT-29
cells became sensitive to apoptosis in response to VPA. Conversely, knocking down
of endogenous APC protein by small interfering RNA (siRNA) blocked VPA-induced
apoptosis in HCA-7 cells. APC mediated VPA-induced apoptosis through
down-regulation of survivin. The level of survivin protein decreased in HCA-7 and
HT-29/APC cells, but not in SW620 and HT-29/beta-Gal cells after VPA treatment.
Whereas knocking down of survivin by siRNA sensitized SW620 cells to VPA-induced 
apoptosis, overexpression of survivin blocked VPA-induced apoptosis in HCA-7
cells. Down-regulation of survivin transcription occurred through changes in
GSK-3beta/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling molecules. VPA also induced
proteasome-mediated degradation of survivin protein in HCA-7 cells. Furthermore, 
we have shown that APC mutation-mediated resistance to apoptosis can be overcome 
by cotreatment with Flavopiridol, which promotes survivin degradation. These
results suggest that APC is a critical determinant of HDAC inhibitor-induced
apoptosis in colon cancer cells and survivin is a potential target to enhance
apoptotic response to HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 16982769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. BMJ. 2006 Sep 9;333(7567):509-10.

Predictive genetic testing for type 2 diabetes.

Janssens AC, Gwinn M, Valdez R, Narayan KM, Khoury MJ.

PMCID: PMC1562463
PMID: 16960189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8418-26. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Rapid loss of intestinal crypts upon conditional deletion of the Wnt/Tcf-4 target
gene c-Myc.

Muncan V(1), Sansom OJ, Tertoolen L, Phesse TJ, Begthel H, Sancho E, Cole AM,
Gregorieff A, de Alboran IM, Clevers H, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Nederlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Inhibition of the mutationally activated Wnt cascade in colorectal cancer cell
lines induces a rapid G1 arrest and subsequent differentiation. This arrest can
be overcome by maintaining expression of a single Tcf4 target gene, the
proto-oncogene c-Myc. Since colorectal cancer cells share many molecular
characteristics with proliferative crypt progenitors, we have assessed the
physiological role of c-Myc in adult crypts by conditional gene deletion.
c-Myc-deficient crypts are lost within weeks and replaced by c-Myc-proficient
crypts through a fission process of crypts that have escaped gene deletion.
Although c-Myc(-/-) crypt cells remain in the cell cycle, they are on average
much smaller than wild-type cells, cycle slower, and divide at a smaller cell
size. c-Myc appears essential for crypt progenitor cells to provide the necessary
biosynthetic capacity to successfully progress through the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1636776
PMID: 16954380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Genetics. 2006 Nov;174(3):1565-72. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

High-resolution quantitative trait locus analysis reveals multiple diabetes
susceptibility loci mapped to intervals<800 kb in the species-conserved Niddm1i
of the GK rat.

Granhall C(1), Park HB, Fakhrai-Rad H, Luthman H.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Sweden.

Niddm1i, a 16-Mb locus within the major diabetes QTL in the diabetic GK rat,
causes impaired glucose tolerance in the congenic NIDDM1I strain. Niddm1i is
homologous to both human and mouse regions linked with type 2 diabetes
susceptibility. We employed multiple QTL analyses of congenic F2 progeny selected
for one recombination event within Niddm1i combined with characterization of
subcongenic strains. Fine mapping located one hyperglycemia locus within 700 kb
(Niddm1i4, P=5x10(-6)). Two adjacent loci were also detected, and the GK allele
at Niddm1i2 (500 kb) showed a glucose-raising effect, whereas it had a
glucose-lowering effect at Niddm1i3 (400 kb). Most proximally, Niddm1i1 (800 kb) 
affecting body weight was identified. Experimental data from subcongenics
supported the four loci. Sorcs1, one of the two known diabetes susceptibility
genes in the region, resides within Niddm1i3, while Tcf7l2 maps outside all four 
loci. Multiple-marker QTL analysis incorporating the effect of cosegregating QTL 
as cofactors together with genetically selected progeny can remarkably enhance
resolution of QTL. The data demonstrate that the species-conserved Niddm1i is a
composite of at least four QTL affecting type 2 diabetes susceptibility and that 
two adjacent QTL (Niddm1i2GK and Niddm1i3GK) act in opposite directions.

PMCID: PMC1667097
PMID: 16951059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2654-9.

Polymorphisms in the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated
with type 2 diabetes in the Amish: replication and evidence for a role in both
insulin secretion and insulin resistance.

Damcott CM(1), Pollin TI, Reinhart LJ, Ott SH, Shen H, Silver KD, Mitchell BD,
Shuldiner AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. cdamcott@medicine.umaryland.edu

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) regulates genes involved in cell
proliferation and differentiation. The TCF7L2 gene is located on chromosome 10q25
in a region of replicated linkage to type 2 diabetes. Recently, a microsatellite 
marker in intron 3 (DG10S478) and five correlated single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) were identified in Icelandic individuals that showed strong association
with type 2 diabetes, which was replicated in Danish and European-American
cohorts. We genotyped four of the SNPs (rs7901695, rs7903146, rs11196205, and
rs12255372) in Amish subjects with type 2 diabetes (n = 137), impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT; n = 139), and normal glucose tolerance (NGT; n = 342). We
compared genotype frequencies in subjects with type 2 diabetes with those with
NGT and found marginal association for rs7901695 (P = 0.05; odds ratio [OR]
1.51); comparison between NGT control subjects and the combined type 2
diabetes/IGT case group showed strong association with rs7901695 and rs7903146 (P
= 0.008-0.01; OR 1.53-1.57) and marginal association with rs11196205 and
rs12255372 (P = 0.07 and P = 0.04, respectively). In an expanded set of 698 Amish
subjects without diabetes, we found no association with insulin and glucose
levels during a 3-h oral glucose tolerance test. We also genotyped these SNPs in 
nondiabetic, non-Amish subjects (n = 48), in whom intravenous glucose tolerance
tests were performed, and found an association between rs7901695 and rs7903146
and insulin sensitivity (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005, respectively) and disposition
index (P = 0.04 and P = 0.007, respectively). These data provide replicating
evidence that variants in TCF7L2 increase the risk for type 2 diabetes and novel 
evidence that the variants likely influence both insulin secretion and insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 16936218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2649-53.

Association of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) variants with type 2
diabetes in a Finnish sample.

Scott LJ(1), Bonnycastle LL, Willer CJ, Sprau AG, Jackson AU, Narisu N, Duren WL,
Chines PS, Stringham HM, Erdos MR, Valle TT, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Mohlke KL,
Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA. ljst@umich.edu

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is part of the Wnt signaling pathway.
Genetic variants within TCF7L2 on chromosome 10q were recently reported to be
associated with type 2 diabetes in Icelandic, Danish, and American (U.S.)
samples. We previously observed a modest logarithm of odds score of 0.61 on
chromosome 10q, approximately 1 Mb from TCF7L2, in the Finland-United States
Investigation of NIDDM Genetics study. We tested the five associated TCF7L2
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants in a Finnish sample of 1,151 type 2
diabetic patients and 953 control subjects. We confirmed the association with the
same risk allele (P value <0.05) for all five SNPs. Our strongest results were
for rs12255372 (odds ratio [OR] 1.36 [95% CI 1.15-1.61], P = 0.00026) and
rs7903146 (1.33 [1.14-1.56], P = 0.00042). Based on the CEU HapMap data, we
selected and tested 12 additional SNPs to tag SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with
rs12255372. None of these SNPs showed stronger evidence of association than
rs12255372 or rs7903146 (OR < or =1.26, P > or = 0.0054). Our results strengthen 
the evidence that one or more variants in TCF7L2 are associated with increased
risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16936217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2645-8.

Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene and the risk of type 2
diabetes in large cohorts of U.S. women and men.

Zhang C(1), Qi L, Hunter DJ, Meigs JB, Manson JE, van Dam RM, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. cuilin.zhang@channing.harvard.edu

Emerging evidence indicates that variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene may play a role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. In a
prospective, nested, case-control study (n = 3,520) within the Nurses' Health
Study (687 type 2 diabetic case and 1,051 control subjects) and the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (886 case and 896 control subjects), we examined
the association of a common variant of the TCF7L2 gene (rs12255372 [T/G]) with
type 2 diabetes risk among Caucasians. Frequencies of the T-allele were
significantly higher among case than control subjects; each copy of the T-allele 
was associated with a 1.32-fold (P = 0.0002) and 1.53-fold (P < 0.0001) increased
type 2 diabetes risk in women and men, respectively. The odds ratios (95% CI)
associated with homozygous carriers of the T-allele were 1.86 (1.30-2.67) and
2.15 (1.48-3.13) in women and men, respectively. Population-attributable risks
for diabetes associated with the T-allele were 14.8 and 22.3% for women and men, 
respectively. In a meta-analysis of 3,347 case and 3,947 control subjects, each
copy of the T-allele was associated with a 1.48-fold increased risk (P <
10(-16)). Our findings confirm that the TCF7L2 gene represents an important locus
for predicting inherited susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16936216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2640-4.

Association analysis of 6,736 U.K. subjects provides replication and confirms
TCF7L2 as a type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene with a substantial effect on
individual risk.

Groves CJ(1), Zeggini E, Minton J, Frayling TM, Weedon MN, Rayner NW, Hitman GA, 
Walker M, Wiltshire S, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, 
Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3635.

Recent data suggest that common variation in the transcription factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2) gene is associated with type 2 diabetes. Evaluation of such associations
in independent samples provides necessary replication and a robust assessment of 
effect size. Using four TCF7L2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; including
the two most associated in the previous study), we conducted a case-control study
in 2,158 type 2 diabetic subjects and 2,574 control subjects and a family-based
association analysis in 388 parent-offspring trios all from the U.K. All SNPs
showed powerful associations with diabetes in the case-control analysis, with
strongest effects at rs7903146 (allele-wise relative risk 1.36 [95% CI
1.24-1.48], P = 1.3 x 10(-11)). Data were consistent with a multiplicative model.
The family-based analyses provided independent evidence for association at all
loci (e.g., rs4506565, 62% transmission, P = 7 x 10(-5)) with no parent-of-origin
effects. The frequency of diabetes-associated TCF7L2 genotypes was greater in
cases ascertained for positive family history and early onset (rs4606565, P =
0.02); the population-attributable risk, estimated from the least-selected cases,
is approximately 16%. The overall evidence for association for these variants (P 
= 4.4 x 10(-14) combining case-control and family-based analyses for rs4506565)
exceeds genome-wide significance criteria and clearly establishes TCF7L2 as a
type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene of substantial importance.

PMID: 16936215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;338:21-9.

Identification and mapping of paralogous genes on a known genomic DNA sequence.

Bina M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

The completion of whole genome sequencing projects offers the opportunity to
examine the organization of genes and the discovery of evolutionarily related
genes in a given species. For the beginners in the field, through a specific
example, this chapter provides a step-by-step procedure for identifying
paralogous genes, using the genome browser at UCSC (http://genome.ucsc.edu/). The
example describes identification and mapping in the human genome, the paralogs of
TCF12/HTF4. The example identifies TCF3 and TCF4 as paralogs of the TCF12/HTF4
gene. The example also identifies a related sequence, corresponding to a
pseudogene, in one of the introns of the JAK2 gene. The procedure described
should be applicable to the discovery and creation of maps of paralogous genes in
the genomic DNA sequences that are available at the genome browser at UCSC.

PMID: 16888348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 15;119(10):2294-303.

Induction of p16INK4A mediated by beta-catenin in a TCF4-independent manner:
implications for alterations in p16INK4A and pRb expression during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Excessive beta-catenin is considered to contribute to tumor progression by
inducing transcription of cell cycle-related genes such as cyclin D1 and c-myc.
In contrast, our recent studies demonstrated that beta-catenin could inhibit cell
proliferation through activation of p14(ARF)/p53/p21(WAF1) pathway during
trans-differentiation toward morular phenotype of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca)
cells. Here, we focused on associations with alterations in p16(INK4A) and pRb
expression during this process. In clinical cases, p16(INK4A) immunoreactivity
was found to frequently overlap with nuclear beta-catenin accumulation in
small-sized morules and surrounding glandular carcinomas (Sur-Ca), demonstrating 
a significant positive correlation (r = 0.447, p < 0.0001) overall, while the
immunoreactions showed stepwise decrease in enlarged morules, despite persistent 
accumulation of beta-catenin and p21(WAF1) in nuclei. Immunoreactivity for both
total pRb and its phosphorylated form was apparently decreased in all morules as 
compared to Sur-Ca lesions, with a significantly positive correlation. In cell
lines, transcriptional activation of p16(INK) (4A) promoter by active form
beta-catenin, as well as p21(WAF1), occurred through the region from -385 to -280
bp relative to the translation start site, in a TCF4-independent manner.
Moreover, cell proliferation was accompanied with phosphorylation of pRb and
increased p16(INK4A) expression, while its inhibition by serum starvation caused 
decreased expression of total pRb but not p16(INK4A), resulting in high relative 
amounts of the latter. These findings indicate that induction of p16(INK4A)
mediated by nuclear beta-catenin and p21(WAF1), along with loss of pRb
expression, may be important for initial steps during trans-differentiation of Em
Ca cells. In addition, its down-regulation is associated with progression of
lesions.

PMID: 16858682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):306-8.

Genetic variants and common diseases--better late than never.

O'Rahilly S, Wareham NJ.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):241-50.

PMID: 16855272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):241-50.

TCF7L2 polymorphisms and progression to diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention
Program.

Florez JC(1), Jablonski KA, Bayley N, Pollin TI, de Bakker PI, Shuldiner AR,
Knowler WC, Nathan DM, Altshuler D; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study Coordinating Center, George
Washington University, Rockville, Md 20852, USA. dppmail@biostat.bsc.gwu.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):306-8.

BACKGROUND: Common polymorphisms of the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene
(TCF7L2) have recently been associated with type 2 diabetes. We examined whether 
the two most strongly associated variants (rs12255372 and rs7903146) predict the 
progression to diabetes in persons with impaired glucose tolerance who were
enrolled in the Diabetes Prevention Program, in which lifestyle intervention or
treatment with metformin was compared with placebo.
METHODS: We genotyped these variants in 3548 participants and performed Cox
regression analysis using genotype, intervention, and their interactions as
predictors. We assessed the effect of genotype on measures of insulin secretion
and insulin sensitivity at baseline and at one year.
RESULTS: Over an average period of three years, participants with the
risk-conferring TT genotype at rs7903146 were more likely to have progression
from impaired glucose tolerance to diabetes than were CC homozygotes (hazard
ratio, 1.55; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.20 to 2.01; P<0.001). The effect
of genotype was stronger in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 1.81; 95 percent
confidence interval, 1.21 to 2.70; P=0.004) than in the metformin and
lifestyle-intervention groups (hazard ratios, 1.62 and 1.15, respectively; P for 
the interaction between genotype and intervention not significant). The TT
genotype was associated with decreased insulin secretion but not increased
insulin resistance at baseline. Similar results were obtained for rs12255372.
CONCLUSIONS: Common variants in TCF7L2 seem to be associated with an increased
risk of diabetes among persons with impaired glucose tolerance. The
risk-conferring genotypes in TCF7L2 are associated with impaired beta-cell
function but not with insulin resistance. (ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT00004992. [ClinicalTrials.gov]).

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMCID: PMC1762036
PMID: 16855264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):7024-31.

Regulation of human nitric oxide synthase 2 expression by Wnt beta-catenin
signaling.

Du Q(1), Park KS, Guo Z, He P, Nagashima M, Shao L, Sahai R, Geller DA, Hussain
SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO.), an important mediator of inflammation, and beta-catenin, a
component of the Wnt-adenomatous polyposis coli signaling pathway, contribute to 
the development of cancer. We have identified two T-cell factor 4 (Tcf-4)-binding
elements (TBE1 and TBE2) in the promoter of human inducible NO synthase 2 (NOS2).
We tested the hypothesis that beta-catenin regulates human NOS2 gene. Mutation in
either of the two TBE sites decreased the basal and cytokine-induced NOS2
promoter activity in different cell lines. The promoter activity was
significantly reduced when both TBE1 and TBE2 sites were mutated (P < 0.01).
Nuclear extract from HCT116, HepG2, or DLD1 cells bound to NOS2 TBE1 or TBE2
oligonucleotides in electrophoretic mobility shift assays and the specific
protein-DNA complexes were supershifted with anti-beta-catenin or anti-Tcf-4
antibody. Overexpression of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 significantly increased both
basal and cytokine-induced NOS2 promoter activity (P < 0.01), and the induction
was dependent on intact TBE sites. Overexpression of beta-catenin or Tcf-4
increased NOS2 mRNA and protein expression in HCT116 cells. Lithium chloride
(LiCl), an inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, increased cytosolic and
nuclear beta-catenin level, NOS2 expression, and NO. production in primary human 
and rat hepatocytes and cancer cell lines. Treatment with Wnt-3A-conditioned
medium increased beta-catenin and NOS2 expression in fetal human hepatocytes.
When administered in vivo, LiCl increased hepatic beta-catenin level in a
dose-dependent manner with simultaneous increase in NOS2 expression. These data
are consistent with the hypothesis that beta-catenin up-regulates NOS2 and
suggest a novel mechanism by which the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway may
contribute to cancer by increasing NO. production.

PMID: 16849547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):145-56.

Gene expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and sensitive to
bortezomib.

Shringarpure R(1), Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar K, Tai YT, Kessler B,
Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Chauhan D,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown impressive clinical activity alone 
and in combination with conventional and other novel agents for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma (MM). Although bortezomib is known to be a selective proteasome 
inhibitor, the downstream mechanisms of cytotoxicity and drug resistance are
poorly understood. However, resistance to bortezomib as a single agent develops
in the majority of patients, and activity in other malignancies has been less
impressive. To elucidate mechanisms of bortezomib resistance, we compared
differential gene expression profiles of bortezomib-resistant SUDHL-4 and
bortezomib-sensitive SUDHL-6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma lines in response to
bortezomib. At concentrations that effectively inhibited proteasome activity,
bortezomib induced apoptosis in SUDHL-6 cells, but not in SUDHL-4 cells. We
showed that overexpression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), ATF4,
ATF5, c-Jun, JunD and caspase-3 is associated with sensitivity to
bortezomib-induced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of heat shock protein
(HSP)27, HSP70, HSP90 and T-cell factor 4 is associated with bortezomib
resistance.

PMID: 16846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):731-3.

Statistical false positive or true disease pathway?

Todd JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust 
Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
Addenbrooke's Hospital Cambridge, Cambridgeshire CB2 2XY, UK.
john.todd@cimr.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Mar;39(3):281-2.

Three very recent reports provide convincing statistical evidence (P < 10(-8)),
at a genome-wide level, of the association of common polymorphisms with three
different common diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus (IRF5), prostate cancer
and type 1 diabetes (IFIH1 region). This adds to the trickle--soon to be a
flood--of disease association results that are highly unlikely to be false
positives. There are other convincing examples in the last 12 months: age-related
macular degeneration (CFH), type 1 diabetes (IL2RA, also known as CD25) and type 
2 diabetes (TCF7L2). Given 20 years of a literature full of irreproducible
results, what has changed?

PMID: 16804532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Versicherungsmedizin. 2006 Jun 1;58(2):94.

[Important diabetes gene detected].

[Article in German]

Bürger J.

PMID: 16800149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;291(5):E982-94. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Limited role for SREBP-1c in defective glucose-induced insulin secretion from
Zucker diabetic fatty rat islets: a functional and gene profiling analysis.

Parton LE(1), McMillen PJ, Shen Y, Docherty E, Sharpe E, Diraison F, Briscoe CP, 
Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Signaling Laboratories and Department of Biochemistry, School
of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.

Accumulation of intracellular lipid may contribute to defective insulin secretion
in type 2 diabetes. Although Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF; fa/fa) rat islets are
fat-laden and overexpress the lipogenic master gene, sterol regulatory element
binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), the contribution of SREBP-1c to the secretory
defects observed in this model remains unclear. Here we compare the gene
expression profile of lean control (fa/+) and ZDF rat islets in the absence or
presence of dominant-negative SREBP-1c (SREBP-1c DN). ZDF islets displayed
elevated basal insulin secretion at 3 mmol/l glucose but a severely depressed
response to 17 mmol/l glucose. While SREBP-1c DN reduced basal insulin secretion 
from ZDF islets, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was not improved. Of 57
genes differentially regulated in ZDF islets and implicated in glucose
metabolism, vesicle trafficking, ion fluxes, and/or exocytosis, 21 were
upregulated and 5 were suppressed by SREBP-1c DN. Genes underrepresented in ZDF
islets were either unaffected (Glut-2, Kir6.2, Rab3), stimulated
(voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel subunit alpha1D, CPT2, SUR2, rab9, syt13), or
inhibited (syntaxin 7, secretogranin-2) by SREBP-1c inhibition. Correspondingly, 
SREBP-1c DN largely corrected decreases in the expression of the transcription
factors Pdx-1 and MafA but did not affect the abnormalities in Pax6, Arx, hepatic
nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha), HNF3beta/Forkhead box-a2 (Foxa2), inducible
cyclic AMP early repressor (ICER), or transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
expression observed in ZDF islets. We conclude that upregulation of SREBP-1c and 
mild increases in triglyceride content do not explain defective
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from ZDF rats. However, overexpression of
SREBP-1c may contribute to enhanced basal insulin secretion in this model.

PMID: 16772326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2326-37. Epub 2006 May 25.

HIC1 attenuates Wnt signaling by recruitment of TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the
nuclear bodies.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Doubravska L, Fafilek B, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic.

The hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) gene is epigenetically inactivated in
cancer, and in addition, the haploinsufficiency of HIC1 is linked to the
development of human Miller-Dieker syndrome. HIC1 encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor that acts as a transcriptional repressor. Additionally, the 
HIC1 protein oligomerizes via the N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and forms discrete
nuclear structures known as HIC1 bodies. Here, we provide evidence that HIC1
antagonizes the TCF/beta-catenin-mediated transcription in Wnt-stimulated cells. 
This appears to be due to the ability of HIC1 to associate with TCF-4 and to
recruit TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the HIC1 bodies. As a result of the
recruitment, both proteins are prevented from association with the TCF-binding
elements of the Wnt-responsive genes. These data indicate that the intracellular 
amounts of HIC1 protein can modulate the level of the transcriptional stimulation
of the genes regulated by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC1478201
PMID: 16724116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Gen Virol. 2006 Jun;87(Pt 6):1613-23.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat prevents dephosphorylation of Sp1 by
TCF-4 in astrocytes.

Rossi A(1), Mukerjee R, Ferrante P, Khalili K, Amini S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 1900 N 12th Street (015-96), Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

Previous examination of the effect of TCF-4 on transcription of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) promoter in human astrocytic cells found
that TCF-4 affects the HIV-1 promoter through the GC-rich domain (nt -80 to nt
-68). Here, the physical interaction and a functional consequence of TCF4-Sp1
contact were characterized. It was shown that expression of TCF-4 in U-87 MG
(human astrocytic) cells decreased basal and Sp1-mediated transcription of the
HIV-1 promoter. Results from a GST pull-down assay, as well as combined
immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis of protein extracts from U-87 MG
cells, revealed an interaction of Sp1 with TCF-4. Using in vitro protein
chromatography, the region of Sp1 that contacts TCF-4 was mapped to aa 266-350.
It was also found that, in cell-free extracts, TCF-4 prevented dsDNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK)-mediated Sp1 phosphorylation. Surprisingly, TCF-4 failed 
to decrease Sp1-mediated transcription of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
and Sp1 phosphorylation in cells expressing HIV-1 Tat. Results from
immunoprecipitation/Western blotting demonstrated that TCF-4 lost its ability to 
interact with Sp1, but not with Tat, in Tat-transfected cells. Taken together,
these findings suggest that activity at the HIV-1 promoter is influenced by
phosphorylation of Sp1, which is affected by Tat and DNA-PK. Interactions among
TCF-4, Sp1 and/or Tat may determine the level of viral gene transcription in
human astrocytic cells.

PMID: 16690926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15405-11. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Physiological and functional interactions between Tcf4 and Daxx in colon cancer
cells.

Tzeng SL(1), Cheng YW, Li CH, Lin YS, Hsu HC, Kang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Daxx, a human cell death-associated protein, was isolated as a Tcf4-interacting
protein, using a yeast two-hybrid screen. Co-immunoprecipitation in HEK-293T
cells and yeast two-hybrid screen in Y190 cells were performed to identify the
interaction between Tcf4 with Daxx and to map the binding regions of Tcf4. In the
nucleus, Daxx reduced DNA binding activity of Tcf4 and repressed Tcf4
transcriptional activity. Overexpression of Daxx altered the expression of genes 
downstream of Tcf4, including cyclin D1 and Hath-1, and induced G1 phase arrest
in colon cancer cells. A reduction in Daxx protein expression was also observed
in colon adenocarcinoma tissue when compared with normal colon tissue. This
evidence suggests a possible physiological function of Daxx, via interaction with
Tcf4, to regulate proliferation and differentiation of colon cells.

PMID: 16569639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 12;343(3):893-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Beta-catenin control of T-cell transcription factor 4 (Tcf4) importation from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus contributes to Tcf4-mediated transcription in 293 cells.

Hsu HT(1), Liu PC, Ku SY, Jung KC, Hong YR, Kao C, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807,
Taiwan.

Beta-catenin has essential roles in morphogenesis and human cancer, both as a
subunit of adhesive complexes in the cell membrane and as a transcriptional
coactivator in the Wnt signaling pathway. In addition, beta-catenin also has the 
ability to transport lymphoid enhancer binding factor-1 into the nucleus. In this
study, we examined a constitutive active mutation, beta-catenin (T41A, S45A), for
its potential as a nuclear import receptor for T-cell transcription factor 4 in
293 cells. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that this constitutive active form of
beta-catenin increased the amount of Tcf4 in the nucleus about 4-5-fold compared 
to controls. However, the overall expression of Tcf4 remained the same with or
without over-expression of beta-catenin (T41A, S45A). T-cell transcription factor
4 reporter gene and electrophoretic mobility shift assay further indicated that
the increase in Tcf4 in the nucleus was consistent with its accrued DNA binding
capacity and transcription activity. Microscopic immunofluorescence examination
showed that Tcf4 was mainly located in the cytoplasm and transported into the
nucleus, without or with over-expression of beta-catenin (T41A, S45A),
respectively. Our results suggest that beta-catenin might be a major factor
regulating the import of Tcf4 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus, consequently
controlling its transcription activity.

PMID: 16564030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Cell Sci. 2006 Apr 1;119(Pt 7):1453-63.

Nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of beta-catenin is regulated by retention.

Krieghoff E(1), Behrens J, Mayr B.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Glückstr. 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

beta-catenin is the central signalling molecule of the canonical Wnt pathway,
where it activates target genes in a complex with LEF/TCF transcription factors
in the nucleus. The regulation of beta-catenin activity is thought to occur
mainly on the level of protein degradation, but it has been suggested that
beta-catenin nuclear localization and hence its transcriptional activity may
additionally be regulated via nuclear import by TCF4 and BCL9 and via nuclear
export by APC and axin. Using live-cell microscopy and fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP), we have directly analysed the impact of these
factors on the subcellular localization of beta-catenin, its nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling and its mobility within the nucleus and the cytoplasm. We show that
TCF4 and BCL9/Pygopus recruit beta-catenin to the nucleus, and APC, axin and
axin2 enrich beta-catenin in the cytoplasm. Importantly, however, none of these
factors accelerates the nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of beta-catenin, i.e.
increases the rate of beta-catenin nuclear import or export. Moreover, the
cytoplasmic enrichment of beta-catenin by APC and axin is not abolished by
inhibition of CRM-1-dependent nuclear export. TCF4, APC, axin and axin2 move more
slowly than beta-catenin in their respective compartment, and concomitantly
decrease beta-catenin mobility. Together, these data indicate that beta-catenin
interaction partners mainly regulate beta-catenin subcellular localization by
retaining it in the compartment in which they are localized, rather than by
active transport into or out of the nucleus.

PMID: 16554443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncogene. 2006 Jul 27;25(32):4441-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

TCF-4 isoforms absent in TCF-4 mutated MSI-H colorectal cancer cells colocalize
with nuclear CtBP and repress TCF-4-mediated transcription.

Cuilliere-Dartigues P(1), El-Bchiri J, Krimi A, Buhard O, Fontanges P, Fléjou JF,
Hamelin R, Duval A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U762, Paris, F-75010, France.

TCF-4 is the main effector of the Wnt/Wingless signalling pathway. As with other 
TCF/LEF factors, numerous alternative splicings at its 3' end affect its
expression. Such a mechanism leads to the synthesis of numerous TCF-4 isoforms
among which some contain binding domains for CtBP, an ubiquitous transcriptional 
corepressor. Of interest, we described a frequent TCF-4 frameshift mutation in
mismatch-repair deficient colorectal cancers (MSI-H cancers) that leads to the
selective loss of TCF-4 isoforms with CtBP binding abilities. We provide here
data that argue for a partial colocalization of CtBP with TCF-4 isoforms
containing CtBP binding domains in cellulo, and for a functional role of CtBP in 
repressing TCF-4 mediated transcription. We also demonstrate that such a
colocalization is not observed in MSI-H colorectal cancer cells that harbour the 
TCF-4 frameshift mutation, and that CtBP is not able to repress TCF-4-mediated
transcription in this context. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that 
CtBP would play a role in regulating TCF-4 mediated transcription upon its
binding with some TCF-4 isoforms encoded by alternatively spliced mRNA. They also
suggest a role for TCF-4 frameshift mutation during MSI-H colorectal tumour
progression, by regulating the relative proportion of the different TCF-4
isoforms.

PMID: 16547505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 2006 Jul 20;25(31):4361-9. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Repressor roles for TCF-4 and Sfrp1 in Wnt signaling in breast cancer.

Shulewitz M(1), Soloviev I, Wu T, Koeppen H, Polakis P, Sakanaka C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

Mutations in Wnt pathway genes are rare in human breast cancer, yet activation of
the pathway is evident from the misolocalization of beta-catenin. We searched for
relationships in the expression of Wnt pathway genes and found that both secreted
frizzled related protein 1 (Sfrp1) and TCF-4 transcripts were all highly
downregulated in a common subset of breast cancers relative to normal breast
tissue. Sfrp1 has been previously characterized as a Wnt inhibitor, and we found 
that interfering with its expression in the human mammary epithelial cell line
MCF10A activated Wnt signaling. Reduction of TCF-4 levels in breast cancer was
surprising as it is a transcription factor that is responsive to Wnt signaling.
Therefore, we investigated a possible inhibitory role for TCF-4 in human breast
cells as well as further characterizing Sfrp1. We identified CD24 as a Wnt target
in MCF10A cells and used its expression a marker of Wnt signaling. Interfering
with either Sfrp1 or TCF-4 in this cell line enhanced CD24 expression.
Furthermore, removal of TCF/LEF binding sites in a CD24-luciferase reporter
resulted in elevated reporter gene expression. Our results indicate that both
Sfrp1 and TCF-4 repress Wnt signaling in breast tissue and their downregulation
contributes to the activation of Wnt signaling.

PMID: 16532032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Horm Metab Res. 2006 Feb;38(2):137-8.

Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCFL2) - a novel factor involved in pathogenesis
of type 2 diabetes. Comment on: Grant et al., Nature Genetics 2006, Published
online 15 January 2006.

Kiessling A(1), Ehrhart-Bornstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dresden, Germany.
andrea.kiessling@uniklinikum-dresden.de

PMID: 16523417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. JAMA. 2006 Mar 1;295(9):987-8.

Gene variant confers risk of diabetes.

Hampton T.

PMID: 16507789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):2279-86.

SKI-606 decreases growth and motility of colorectal cancer cells by preventing
pp60(c-Src)-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of beta-catenin and its nuclear
signaling.

Coluccia AM(1), Benati D, Dekhil H, De Filippo A, Lan C, Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy.

Inhibition of deregulated protein tyrosine kinases represents an attractive
strategy for controlling cancer growth. However, target specificity is an
essential aim of this strategy. In this report, pp60(c-Src) kinase and
beta-catenin were found physically associated and constitutively activated on
tyrosine residues in human colorectal cancer cells. The use of specific
small-interfering RNAs (siRNA) validated pp60(c-Src) as the major kinase
responsible for beta-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation in colorectal cancer.
Src-dependent activation of beta-catenin was prevented by SKI-606, a novel Src
family kinase inhibitor, which also abrogated beta-catenin nuclear function by
impairing its binding to the TCF4 transcription factor and its trans-activating
ability in colorectal cancer cells. These effects were seemingly specific, as
cyclin D1, a crucial beta-catenin/TCF4 target gene, was also down-regulated by
SKI-606 in a dose-dependent manner accounting, at least in part, for the reduced 
growth (IC50, 1.5-2.4 micromol/L) and clonogenic potential of colorectal cancer
cells. Protein levels of beta-catenin remained substantially unchanged by
SKI-606, which promoted instead a cytosolic/membranous retention of beta-catenin 
as judged by immunoblotting analysis of cytosolic/nuclear extracts and cell
immunofluorescence staining. The SKI-606-mediated relocalization of beta-catenin 
increased its binding affinity to E-cadherin and adhesion of colorectal cancer
cells, with ensuing reduced motility in a wound healing assay. Interestingly, the
siRNA-driven knockdown of beta-catenin removed the effect of SKI-606 on
cell-to-cell adhesion, which was associated with prolonged stability of
E-cadherin protein in a pulse-chase experiment. Thus, our results show that
SKI-606 operates a switch between the transcriptional and adhesive function of
beta-catenin by inhibiting its pp60(c-Src)-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation;
this could constitute a new therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16489032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 1;119(Pt 5):819-27. Epub 2006 Feb 14.

APC inhibits ERK pathway activation and cellular proliferation induced by RAS.

Park KS(1), Jeon SH, Kim SE, Bahk YY, Holmen SL, Williams BO, Chung KC, Surh YJ, 
Choi KY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Inactivating mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC), and
activating mutations in RAS, occur in a majority of colorectal carcinomas.
However, the relationship between these changes and tumorigenesis is poorly
understood. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was reduced by
overexpressing APC in DLD-1 colorectal cancer cells. ERK activity was increased
by Cre-virus-induced Apc knockout in primary Apc(flox/flox) mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, indicating that APC inhibits ERK activity. ERK activity was
increased by overexpression and decreased by knock down of beta-catenin. The
activation of Raf1, MEK and ERK kinases by beta-catenin was reduced by
co-expression of APC. These results indicate that APC inhibits the ERK pathway by
an action on beta-catenin. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was reduced 
by the dominant negative form of TCF4, indicating that the ERK pathway regulation
by APC/beta-catenin signaling is, at least, partly caused by effects on
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene expression. The GTP loading and the protein level
of mutated RAS were decreased in cells with reduced ERK activity as a result of
APC overexpression, indicating that APC regulates RAS-induced ERK activation at
least partly by reduction of the RAS protein level. APC regulates cellular
proliferation and transformation induced by activation of both RAS and
beta-catenin signaling.

PMID: 16478791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Cell Physiol. 2006 May;207(2):287-92.

Repression of HIP/RPL29 expression induces differentiation in colon cancer cells.

Liu JJ(1), Huang BH, Zhang J, Carson DD, Hooi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

We had previously shown that the expression of heparin/heparan sulfate
interacting protein/ribosomal protein L29 (HIP/RPL29) was upregulated in colon
cancer tissues. The present study investigated the role of HIP/RPL29 in
differentiation in colon cancer cells. Inducing cellular differentiation in HT-29
cells by both sodium butyrate and glucose deprivation resulted in a significant
downregulation of HIP/RPL29 expression. The beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway is the
most important pathway controlling the switch between cellular differentiation
and proliferation in intestinal epithelial cells. Inducing differentiation by
dominant-negative inhibition of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes in LS174T cells 
also resulted in downregulation of HIP/RPL29. To determine whether a lower
expression of HIP/RPL29 could induce differentiation in cancer cells, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting HIP/RPL29 was transfected into LS174T cells.
The resultant knockdown of HIP/RPL29 expression induced cellular differentiation,
as shown by the increased expression of two known markers of differentiation in
LS174T cells, galectin-4 and mucin-2. In addition, the differentiation process
induced by repression of HIP/RPL29 expression was accompanied by the upregulation
of p21 and p53. In conclusion, HIP/RPL29 plays a role in the cellular
differentiation process in colon cancer cells. The differentiation process is at 
least partially mediated by the upregulation of p21 and p53 pathways.

PMID: 16475173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;34(9):599-600.

[The roles of important molecules of Wnt signaling pathway in non-small-cell lung
cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CY, Cui ZS, Lu Y, Zhang Y, Gao J, Wang EH.

PMID: 16468315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):929-39.

Activation of beta-catenin signaling in prostate cancer by peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase Pin1-mediated abrogation of the androgen receptor-beta-catenin
interaction.

Chen SY(1), Wulf G, Zhou XZ, Rubin MA, Lu KP, Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Hematology-Oncology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) interacts with beta-catenin and can suppress its
coactivation of T cell factor 4 (Tcf4) in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. Pin1 is a 
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase that stabilizes beta-catenin by inhibiting
its binding to the adenomatous polyposis coli gene product and subsequent
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta)-dependent degradation. Higher Pin1
expression in primary PCa is correlated with disease recurrence, and this study
found that Pin1 expression was markedly increased in metastatic PCa. Consistent
with this result, increased expression of Pin1 in transfected LNCaP PCa cells
strongly accelerated tumor growth in vivo in immunodeficient mice. Pin1
expression in LNCaP cells enhanced beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity, as
assessed using Tcf4-regulated reporter genes, and increased expression of
endogenous Tcf4 and c-myc. However, in contrast to results in cells with intact
PTEN and active GSK-3beta, Pin1 expression in LNCaP PCa cells, which are PTEN
deficient, did not increase beta-catenin. Instead, Pin1 expression markedly
inhibited the beta-catenin interaction with AR, and Pin1 abrogated the ability of
AR to antagonize beta-catenin/Tcf4 binding and transcriptional activity. These
findings demonstrate that AR can suppress beta-catenin signaling, that the
AR-beta-catenin interaction can be regulated by Pin1, and that abrogation of this
interaction can enhance beta-catenin/Tcf4 signaling and contribute to aggressive 
biological behavior in PCa.

PMCID: PMC1347015
PMID: 16428447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Int J Immunogenet. 2006 Feb;33(1):25-32.

Evidence for linkage and association between autoimmune thyroid diseases and the 
18q12-q21 region in a large Tunisian family.

Hadj Kacem H(1), Rebai A, Kaffel N, Abid M, Ayadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax;
Tunisie.

Many studies have shown linkage between IDDM6 locus on 18q12-q21 chromosome and
several autoimmune diseases, suggesting that it might harbour susceptibility
genes common to autoimmunity. Using 12 families deriving from a large Tunisian
multiplex family (the Akr family) from which 38 people were affected with
autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD), and 193 unrelated AITD patients, tested
against 100 healthy subjects, we tried to replicate the positive results
previously reported for the IDDM6. Akr members were genotyped with eight
microsatellite markers harbouring the IDDM6 region. Multipoint non-parametric
linkage analysis have shown a clear peak values of NPL score around D18S41 marker
(Z = 3.72, P = 0.0001). Family-based association test (FBAT) and transmission
disequilibrium test (TDT) have confirmed linkage results. In particular, a
significant association with allele 3 of D18S41 and allele 2 of D18S57 markers
was found. Case-control studies, using one intragenic microsatellite (locus
CTG18.1) marker in the immunoglobulin transcription factor (ITF2) gene, a 5'
flanking AC repeat of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 gene as well as two SNPs at
positions +52 and +1955 from transcription start site of BCL-2, showed no
significant association between neither genes and AITD. Our study is the first
replication of the 18q12-q21 chromosome region as a potential candidate to AITD
genetic susceptibility. The Akr family has shown evidence for linkage between
IDDM6 locus and AITD. Moreover, case-control study does not support the
involvement of ITF2 and BCL2 genes in AITD pathogenesis.

PMID: 16426239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nat Genet. 2006 Mar;38(3):320-3. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene confers risk of type 2
diabetes.

Grant SF(1), Thorleifsson G, Reynisdottir I, Benediktsson R, Manolescu A, Sainz
J, Helgason A, Stefansson H, Emilsson V, Helgadottir A, Styrkarsdottir U,
Magnusson KP, Walters GB, Palsdottir E, Jonsdottir T, Gudmundsdottir T, Gylfason 
A, Saemundsdottir J, Wilensky RL, Reilly MP, Rader DJ, Bagger Y, Christiansen C, 
Gudnason V, Sigurdsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. struan.grant@decode.is

We have previously reported suggestive linkage of type 2 diabetes mellitus to
chromosome 10q. We genotyped 228 microsatellite markers in Icelandic individuals 
with type 2 diabetes and controls throughout a 10.5-Mb interval on 10q. A
microsatellite, DG10S478, within intron 3 of the transcription factor 7-like 2
gene (TCF7L2; formerly TCF4) was associated with type 2 diabetes (P = 2.1 x
10(-9)). This was replicated in a Danish cohort (P = 4.8 x 10(-3)) and in a US
cohort (P = 3.3 x 10(-9)). Compared with non-carriers, heterozygous and
homozygous carriers of the at-risk alleles (38% and 7% of the population,
respectively) have relative risks of 1.45 and 2.41. This corresponds to a
population attributable risk of 21%. The TCF7L2 gene product is a high mobility
group box-containing transcription factor previously implicated in blood glucose 
homeostasis. It is thought to act through regulation of proglucagon gene
expression in enteroendocrine cells via the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 16415884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Oncogene. 2006 May 18;25(21):3065-70.

Interplay between VHL/HIF1alpha and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways during colorectal
tumorigenesis.

Giles RH(1), Lolkema MP, Snijckers CM, Belderbos M, van der Groep P, Mans DA, van
Beest M, van Noort M, Goldschmeding R, van Diest PJ, Clevers H, Voest EE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway initiates the transformation of
colorectal epithelial cells, although the transition to metastatic cancer
requires angiogenesis. We have investigated the expression of the von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor in the intestines from humans and mice.
Here, we show that VHL expression is regulated by TCF4 and is restricted to the
proliferative compartment at the bottom of intestinal crypts. Accordingly, VHL is
completely absent from the proliferative intestinal pockets of Tcf4(-/-)
perinatal mice. We observed complementary staining of the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) 1alpha to VHL in normal intestinal epithelium as well as in all
stages of colorectal cancer (CRC). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report demonstrating the presence of nuclear HIF1alpha in normoxic healthy 
adult tissue. Although we observed upregulated levels of VHL in very early CRC
lesions from sporadic and familial adenomatous polyposis patients - presumably
due to activated Wnt signaling - a clear reduction of VHL expression is observed 
in later stages of CRC progression, coinciding with stabilization of HIF1alpha.
As loss of VHL in later stages of CRC progression results in stabilization of
HIF, these data provide evidence that selection for VHL downregulation provides a
proangiogenic impulse for CRC progression.

PMID: 16407833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):318-28. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 have distinct roles in regulating Wnt target genes.

Standley HJ(1), Destrée O, Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology ML7007, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Wnt signaling pathways have essential roles in developing embryos and adult
tissue, and alterations in their function are implicated in many disease
processes including cancers. The major nuclear transducers of Wnt signals are the
Tcf/LEF family of transcription factors, which have binding sites for both the
transcriptional co-repressor groucho, and the co-activator beta-catenin. The
early Xenopus embryo expresses three maternally inherited Tcf/LEF mRNAs, and
their relative roles in regulating the expression of Wnt target genes are not
understood. We have addressed this by using antisense oligonucleotides to deplete
maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 mRNAs in oocytes. We find that XTcf1 represses
expression of Wnt target genes ventrally and laterally, and activates their
expression dorsally. Double depletions of XTcf1 and XTcf3 suggest that they act
cooperatively to repress Wnt target genes ventrally. In contrast, XTcf4 has no
repressive role but is required to activate expression of Xnr3 and chordin in
organizer cells at the gastrula stage. This work provides evidence for distinct
roles for XTcfs in regulating Wnt target gene expression.

PMID: 16325796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Hum Pathol. 2005 Dec;36(12):1294-301. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Nuclear translocations of beta-catenin and TCF4 in gastric cancers correlate with
lymph node metastasis but probably not with CD44 expression.

Chen XY(1), Wang ZC, Li H, Cheng XX, Sun Y, Wang XW, Wu ML, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute and Liaoning Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, College of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027, PR China.

Interaction of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4 is the end point of canonical Wnt
signaling, which is believed to trigger the transcription of multiple
cancer-associated genes, including CD44. So far, the combined status of
beta-catenin and TCF4 and its relevance for lymph node metastasis and CD44
expression have not been well studied in gastric cancers (GCs). To address these 
issues, we examined 31 GCs, 17 premalignant tissues, 10 noncancerous gastric
mucosae, 17 regional lymph node metastases, and 4 human GC cell lines (MGC803,
MGC823, AGS, and HGC-27) using immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence
staining, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot
analysis. Frequent TCF4 up-regulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin
were found in both primary and metastatic tumors. Standard CD44 was detected in
all gastric tissue samples. The frequency of variant CD44 expression increased in
parallel with stepwise gastrocarcinogenesis and tumor spread, but the rates of
detection did not match that of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4, especially in the 
premalignant and noncancerous samples. The data from the 4 cell lines were in
accordance with the in vivo findings in terms of beta-catenin nuclear
translocation, TCF4 activation, and CD44 expression. Our results suggest an
established Wnt signaling pathway in most GCs, a close correlation of
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated signaling with tumor dissemination, and the
unlikelihood of a direct effect of activated Wnt signaling on CD44 expression.
The influence of beta-catenin-TCF4 interaction on alternative CD44 splicing was
not established. These 3 alterations may be regarded as unfavorable features of
GC.

PMID: 16311123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1401-11. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Presenilin-1 interacts with plakoglobin and enhances plakoglobin-Tcf-4
association. Implications for the regulation of beta-catenin/Tcf-4-dependent
transcription.

Raurell I(1), Castaño J, Francí C, García de Herreros A, Duñach M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biofísica, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat 
de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Spain.

Alzheimer disease-linked Presenilin-1 (PS1) is a negative modulator of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 activity. However, the mechanism underlying this effect is not
well understood. We show here that the effects of PS1 on the activity of this
complex in epithelial cells are independent of its gamma-secretase activity and
its interaction with beta-catenin. As presented in this report PS1 also binds
plakoglobin with similar affinity as beta-catenin, although this interaction does
not involve equivalent residues in the two catenins. Moreover, PS1 association
with plakoglobin enhances the interaction of this molecule with Tcf-4 and
prevents its binding to DNA. These effects were observed with the unprocessed
form of PS1, which has higher affinity for plakoglobin and beta-catenin than
processed PS1. These results provide a new explanation for the effects of PS1 on 
gene transcription mediated by beta-catenin in epithelial cells.

PMID: 16306047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Feb;69(2):520-31. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Positive inter-regulation between beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 signaling and
endothelin-1 signaling potentiates proliferation and survival of prostate cancer 
cells.

Sun P(1), Xiong H, Kim TH, Ren B, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Jul;70(1):435.

Both malignant and normal prostate epithelial cells produce endothelin-1 (ET-1), 
a critical factor in prostate cancer (CaP) progression. beta-Catenin (beta-cat), 
a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway, is also implicated in CaP
progression via beta-cat/T cell factor (Tcf) signaling. We recently demonstrated 
that beta-cat/Tcf-4 regulates transcription of ET-1 in colon cancer cells. In the
present study, we found that Tcf-4 specifically bound to and activated the ET-1
promoter in vivo in human CaP cells and mouse prostate tissue. Expression of ET-1
in DU145 CaP cells was down-regulated by knocking down endogenous beta-cat or
Tcf-4. Ectopic activation of beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling significantly elevated
expression of ET-1 in LNCaP cells. In addition, genetic ablation of beta-cat
significantly inhibited transcription of ET-1 in primary prostate epithelial
cells. Meanwhile, exogenous ET-1 enhanced beta-cat/Tcf signaling and ET-1
expression in DU145 cells, which was blocked by both selective
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (LY294002) and endothelin-A
receptor antagonist cyclo(L-Leu-D-Trp-D-Asp-L-Pro-D-Val) (BQ123). Furthermore,
knockdown of either beta-cat or Tcf-4 substantially reduced cell proliferation
and potentiated paclitaxel-induced apoptosis in DU145 cells, which largely were
rescued by treatment with exogenous ET-1. Together, our results suggest that
beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling transcriptionally activates ET-1 in CaP cells;
meanwhile, ET-1 enhances beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling and in turn further increases
ET-1 expression in a PI3K-dependent manner. The positive inter-regulation between
beta-cat/Tcf-4 signaling and ET-1 signaling potentiates proliferation and
survival of CaP cells, thereby representing a novel mechanism that contributes to
CaP progression.

PMID: 16291872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Nov;20(11):1951-9. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

Missense mutations in LRP5 are not a common cause of idiopathic osteoporosis in
adult men.

Crabbe P(1), Balemans W, Willaert A, van Pottelbergh I, Cleiren E, Coucke PJ, Ai 
M, Goemaere S, van Hul W, de Paepe A, Kaufman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Patricia.Crabbe@UGent.be

We studied whether the LRP5 gene contributes to the clinical phenotype of IO in
men. Mutation analysis in 66 IO men revealed a range of sequence variants, of
which two missense variants were shown to be of functional
relevance.INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the LDL receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)
gene have been associated with extreme bone phenotypes, which makes LRP5 a
plausible candidate gene for idiopathic osteoporosis (IO).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 66 men with IO, all 23 exons and exon-intron boundaries
of the LRP5 gene were screened for mutations, and functional analyses were
performed for those that were putatively involved in the phenotype.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis in the IO probands revealed five missense mutations,
of which 1067C>T (S356L), 1364C>T (S455L), and 4609G>A (A1537T) were of potential
functional significance because they were located in highly conserved regions of 
LRP5 and not found in a control panel. Segregation analysis in the respective
families could not exclude their possible causality for IO. Furthermore,
functional analyses clearly showed an inhibitory effect of mutations 1067C>T and 
1364C>T on Wnt signal transduction. These effects are most likely caused by
impaired LRP5 synthesis in the case of 1067C>T and failure of protein trafficking
to the cell surface for 1364C>T.
CONCLUSIONS: For 2 of 66 IO probands, a mutation in the LRP5 gene with proven
functionality was found. The findings indicate that carrying an LRP5 mutation is 
a risk factor for IO, but that overall, IO in men is infrequently underlied by
such a mutation.

PMID: 16234968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Endocrinology. 2006 Jan;147(1):141-54. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Testosterone inhibits adipogenic differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells: nuclear
translocation of androgen receptor complex with beta-catenin and T-cell factor 4 
may bypass canonical Wnt signaling to down-regulate adipogenic transcription
factors.

Singh R(1), Artaza JN, Taylor WE, Braga M, Yuan X, Gonzalez-Cadavid NF, Bhasin S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Charles R. Drew
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90059, USA.
rajansingh@mednet.ucla.edu

Testosterone supplementation in men decreases fat mass; however, the mechanisms
by which it inhibits fat mass are unknown. We hypothesized that testosterone
inhibits adipogenic differentiation of preadipocytes by activation of androgen
receptor (AR)/beta-catenin interaction and subsequent translocation of this
complex to the nucleus thereby bypassing canonical Wnt signaling. We tested this 
hypothesis in 3T3-L1 cells that differentiate to form fat cells in adipogenic
medium. We found that these cells express AR and that testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone dose-dependently inhibited adipogenic differentiation as
analyzed by Oil Red O staining and down-regulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-alpha and -delta and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma2
protein and mRNA. These inhibitory effects of androgens were partially blocked by
flutamide or bicalutamide. Androgen treatment was associated with nuclear
translocation of beta-catenin and AR. Immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated
association of beta-catenin with AR and T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) in the presence of
androgens. Transfection of TCF4 cDNA inhibited adipogenic differentiation,
whereas a dominant negative TCF4 cDNA construct induced adipogenesis and blocked 
testosterone's inhibitory effects. Our gene array analysis indicates that
testosterone treatment led to activation of some Wnt target genes. Expression of 
constitutively activated AR fused with VP-16 did not inhibit the expression of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha in the absence of androgens. Testosterone
and dihydrotestosterone inhibit adipocyte differentiation in vitro through an
AR-mediated nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and activation of downstream
Wnt signaling. These data provide evidence for a regulatory role for androgens in
inhibiting adipogenic differentiation and a mechanistic explanation consistent
with the observed reduction in fat mass in men treated with androgens.

PMCID: PMC4417624
PMID: 16210377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 2;280(48):39795-801. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

TIS7 regulation of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 target gene osteopontin (OPN) is
histone deacetylase-dependent.

Vietor I(1), Kurzbauer R, Brosch G, Huber LA.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter, Division of Cell Biology, Medical University Innsbruck,
Fritz-Pregl-Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced sequence 7 (TIS7) acts as a
transcriptional co-repressor interacting with SIN3, the histone
deacetylase-containing complex. The overexpression of TIS7 down-regulates
expression of a specific set of genes. Homozygous deletion of this gene in mice
delays injury-induced muscle regeneration and inhibits muscle satellite cell
differentiation and fusion of myoblasts in vitro. Osteopontin (OPN), a known
beta-catenin/T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) downstream target gene, is up-regulated in
tumors and in cells with increased motility such as muscle cells. OPN promoter
sequence contains binding sites for Sp1, glucocorticoid receptor, E-box-binding
factors, octamer motif-binding protein, c-Myc, and other transcription factors.
Previously we have shown that TIS7 regulates the OPN expression through the
inhibition of the Sp1-activating effects. Here we show that TIS7 has the capacity
to inhibit OPN expression also through Lef-1, the second identified OPN
regulatory element. TIS7 has the capacity to down-regulate beta-catenin/Tcf-4
transcriptional activity. TIS7 homologous deletion in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
increased not only the TOPflash reporter gene transcriptional activity but also
the expression of c-Myc and OPN. Furthermore, we show that TIS7 overexpression
leads to the beta-catenin interaction with enzymatically active histone
deacetylases. We propose that TIS7 down-regulates the beta-catenin/Tcf-4
transcriptional activity via its interaction with histone deacetylase-containing 
complex thereby inhibiting the expression of beta-catenin downstream target genes
such as c-Myc and OPN. We hypothesize that TIS7 as a negative regulator of
transcriptional activity represses expression of OPN and beta-catenin/Tcf-4
target genes, which are involved in myogenesis, muscle maintenance, and
regeneration in a histone deacetylase dependent manner.

PMID: 16204248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37853-67. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Interaction of beta-catenin and TIF2/GRIP1 in transcriptional activation by the
androgen receptor.

Song LN(1), Gelmann EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20007-2197, USA.

The multifunctional oncoprotein beta-catenin interacts with the activation
function-2 domain of androgen receptor (AR) to stimulate androgen receptor
transcriptional activity, increase sensitivity, and broaden specificity of ligand
interactions. beta-Catenin interacts with androgen receptor in close proximity to
the binding groove for P160 coactivators such as transcriptional intermediary
factor-2 (TIF2)/glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein-1 (GRIP1).
beta-Catenin can also bind directly to TIF2/GRIP1. Both N- and C-terminal regions
of beta-catenin are needed for optimal interaction with TIF2/GRIP1. We show that 
distinct residues of beta-catenin are responsible for both binding and functional
interactions with androgen receptor and with TCF4, thus allowing the introduction
of missense mutations that selectively affect these interactions. beta-Catenin
and TIF2/GRIP1 are each able to mediate binding between the other and androgen
receptor in functional interactions that enhance ligand-dependent transcription. 
The data strongly imply that AR, beta-catenin, and TIF2/GRIP1 bind in a three-way
interaction that mediates transcription. Lastly, we observed that a beta-catenin 
C-terminal peptide containing 229 amino acids can bind TIF2/GRIP1 and AR but has 
a profound dominant inhibitory effect on ligand-dependent transcription. We
propose that beta-catenin may play an integral role in formation of the
androgen-receptor transcriptional complex.

PMID: 16141201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8009-23.

PIAS1 activates the expression of smooth muscle cell differentiation marker genes
by interacting with serum response factor and class I basic helix-loop-helix
proteins.

Kawai-Kowase K(1), Kumar MS, Hoofnagle MH, Yoshida T, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, 415 Lane Road, MR5, Room 1220, P.O. Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Although a critical component of vascular disease is modulation of the
differentiated state of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), the mechanisms
governing SMC differentiation are relatively poorly understood. We have
previously shown that E-boxes and the ubiquitously expressed class I basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, including E2-2 and E12, are important in
regulation of the SMC differentiation marker gene, the SM alpha-actin gene. The
aim of the present study was to identify proteins that bind to class I bHLH
proteins in SMC and modulate transcriptional regulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes. Herein we report that members of the protein inhibitor of activated
STAT (PIAS) family interact with class I bHLH factors as well as serum response
factor (SRF). PIAS1 interacted with E2-2 and E12 based on yeast two-hybrid
screens, mammalian two-hybrid assays, and/or coimmunoprecipitation assays.
Overexpression of PIAS1 significantly activated the SM alpha-actin promoter and
mRNA expression, as well as SM myosin heavy chain and SM22alpha, whereas a small 
interfering RNA for PIAS1 decreased activity of these promoters, as well as
endogenous mRNA expression, and SRF binding to SM alpha-actin promoter within
intact chromatin in cultured SMC. Of significance, PIAS1 bound to SRF and
activated SM alpha-actin promoter expression in wild-type but not SRF(-/-)
embryonic stem cells. These results provide novel evidence that PIAS1 modulates
transcriptional activation of SMC marker genes through cooperative interactions
with both SRF and class I bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC1234309
PMID: 16135793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 14;336(1):142-9.

A negative regulatory element-dependent inhibitory role of ITF2B on IL-2 receptor
alpha gene.

Lu Y(1), Sheng DQ, Mo ZC, Li HF, Wu NH, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, China.

Despite the fact that the negative regulatory element (NRE) within the upstream
regulatory region of human IL-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) gene has been
identified two decades ago, mechanisms of the NRE function on the gene are
hitherto unknown. In this paper, we report for the first time that the
immunoglobulin transcription factor 2B (ITF2B) encoded by transcription factor 4 
(TCF4) gene is a NRE binding protein. The full-length TCF4 cDNA clone was
obtained from a HTLV-1 transformed human peripheral T cell MACHERMAKER cDNA
library with NRE as the bait in yeast one-hybrid system. The NRE binding ability 
of ITF2B was further confirmed in chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay.
Competitive RT-PCR-based promoter activity assay showed that over-expression of
ITF2B protein inhibited the expression of IL-2Ralpha gene in Jurkat cells in an
NRE-dependent manner. The function of ITF2B on the inhibition of both the
IL-2Ralpha and the 5'LTR activity of HIV-1 shed light on the essence of NRE
binding protein as a potential target for immune therapy and treatment in AIDS
patients.

PMID: 16126178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Anim Breed Genet. 2005 Aug;122(4):281-4.

An independent confirmation of a quantitative trait locus for milk yield and
composition traits on bovine chromosome 26.

Jiang Z(1), De S, Garcia MD, Griffin KB, Wu XL, Xiao Q, Michal JJ, Sharma BS,
Jansen GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-6351, USA. jiangz@wsu.edu

Several reports have demonstrated that bovine chromosome 26 (BTA26) harbours
significant or suggestive quantitative trait loci (QTL) for milk production and
composition traits in dairy cattle. Our previous study showed that a C/T
substitution in the bovine TCF7L2 gene on BTA26 was significantly linked to QTL
for protein yield (PY) in a Canadian dairy cattle population. Actually, this
polymorphism was one of the markers derived from a genome-wide screening of QTL
for milk PY using an amplified fragment length polymorphism technique combined
with a DNA pooling strategy. In the present study, 990 Holstein bulls with
complete genotype and phenotype data from 14 sire families were analysed to
confirm, if the QTL effects exist in other populations. Statistical analysis
revealed that this marker was significantly associated with PY, protein
percentage, milk yield and fat yield (FY) (p < 0.001) in the US Holstein
population. These results indicate that this QTL region has a pleiotrophic
effecton different milk traits and is portable in different populations.

PMID: 16060496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mutat Res. 2005 Dec 11;591(1-2):161-72. Epub 2005 Jul 27.

Lysosomal trafficking of beta-catenin induced by the tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate.

Dashwood WM(1), Carter O, Al-Fageeh M, Li Q, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, 571 Weniger Hall, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331-6512, USA.

beta-Catenin is a cadherin-binding protein involved in cell-cell adhesion, which 
also functions as a transcriptional activator when complexed in the nucleus with 
members of the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family of
proteins. There is considerable interest in mechanisms that down-regulate
beta-catenin, since this provides an avenue for the prevention of colorectal and 
other cancers in which beta-catenin is frequently over-expressed. We show here
that physiologically relevant concentrations of the tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) inhibited beta-catenin/TCF-dependent reporter
activity in human embryonic kidney 293 cells transfected with wild type or mutant
beta-catenins, and there was a corresponding decrease in beta-catenin protein
levels in the nuclear, cytosolic and membrane-associated fractions. However,
beta-catenin accumulated as punctate aggregates in response to EGCG treatment,
including in human colon cancer cells over-expressing beta-catenin endogenously. 
Confocal microscopy studies revealed that the aggregated beta-catenin in HEK293
cells was extra-nuclear and co-localized with lysosomes, suggesting that EGCG
activated a pathway involving lysosomal trafficking of beta-catenin. Lysosomal
inhibitors leupeptin and transepoxysuccinyl-l-leucylamido(4-guanido)butane
produced an increase in beta-catenin protein in total cell lysates, without a
concomitant increase in beta-catenin transcriptional activity. These data provide
the first evidence that EGCG facilitates the trafficking of beta-catenin into
lysosomes, presumably as a mechanism for sequestering beta-catenin and
circumventing further nuclear transport and activation of beta-catenin/TCF/LEF
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2276571
PMID: 16054165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Nature. 2005 Sep 8;437(7056):281-5. Epub 2005 Jul 10.

Interaction of phosphorylated c-Jun with TCF4 regulates intestinal cancer
development.

Nateri AS(1), Spencer-Dene B, Behrens A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, CR UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn 
Fields Laboratories, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

The proto-oncoprotein c-Jun is a component of the AP-1 transcription factor, the 
activity of which is augmented in many tumour types. An important mechanism in
the stimulation of AP-1 function is amino-terminal phosphorylation of c-Jun by
the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs). Phosphorylated c-Jun is biologically more
active, partially because it acquires the ability to interact with binding
partners. Here we show that phosphorylated c-Jun interacts with the HMG-box
transcription factor TCF4 to form a ternary complex containing c-Jun, TCF4 and
beta-catenin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed JNK-dependent
c-Jun-TCF4 interaction on the c-jun promoter, and c-Jun and TCF4 cooperatively
activated the c-jun promoter in reporter assays in a beta-catenin-dependent
manner. In the Apc(Min) mouse model of intestinal cancer, genetic abrogation of
c-Jun N-terminal phosphorylation or gut-specific conditional c-jun inactivation
reduced tumour number and size and prolonged lifespan. Therefore, the
phosphorylation-dependent interaction between c-Jun and TCF4 regulates intestinal
tumorigenesis by integrating JNK and APC/beta-catenin, two distinct pathways
activated by WNT signalling.

PMID: 16007074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jan 1;118(1):35-42.

Transactivation of MCP-1/CCL2 by beta-catenin/TCF-4 in human breast cancer cells.

Mestdagt M(1), Polette M, Buttice G, Noël A, Ueda A, Foidart JM, Gilles C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental and Tumour Biology, University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium.

The loss of E-cadherin expression and the translocation of beta-catenin to the
nucleus are frequently associated with the metastatic conversion of epithelial
cells. In the nucleus, beta-catenin binds to the TCF/LEF-1 (T-cell factor/
lymphoid enhancer factor) transcription factor family resulting in the activation
of several genes, some of them having important implications in tumour
progression. In our study, we investigated the potential regulation of monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) expression by the beta-catenin/TCF pathway.
This CC-chemokine has been implicated in tumour progression events such as
angiogenesis or tumour associated macrophage (TAM) infiltration. We thus
demonstrated that MCP-1 expression correlates with the reorganization of the
E-cadherin/beta-catenin complexes. Indeed, MCP-1 was expressed by invasive breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, BT549 and Hs578T), which do not express E-cadherin but 
was not produced by noninvasive breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and T47D)
expressing high level of E-cadherin. In addition, the MCP-1 promoter was
activated in BT549 breast cancer cells transfected with beta-catenin and TCF-4
cDNAs. The MCP-1 mRNA level was similarly upregulated. Moreover, we showed that
MCP-1 mRNA was downregulated after transfection with a siRNA against beta-catenin
in both BT549 and Hs578T cells. Our results therefore identify MCP-1 as a target 
of the beta-catenin/TCF/LEF pathway in breast tumour cells, a regulation which
could play a key role in breast tumour progression.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2965755
PMID: 16003740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Placenta. 2005 Aug;26(7):527-39.

Tissue-specific and ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors in
human placental trophoblasts.

Meinhardt G(1), Husslein P, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna, AKH,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Tissue-specific class B basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors,
dimerising with ubiquitously produced class A bHLH proteins, play a major role in
murine trophoblast development. Here, we investigated expression patterns of
class A and B bHLH factors in the human placenta and different trophoblast
culture systems. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and RNase protection assay revealed
expression of the tissue-restricted factors Hash-2, I-mfa and Stra13 in placentae
of early and late pregnancy, in purified villous trophoblasts as well as in
invasive trophoblasts isolated from first trimester villous explant cultures.
Accordingly, RNA in situ hybridisation localised Hash-2, I-mfa and Stra13 to the 
trophoblast epithelium, cell columns and extravillous trophoblasts invading
maternal decidua. Villous stromal cells in situ and cultivated placental
fibroblasts also produced I-mfa and Stra13 but failed to express Hash-2. The
widely expressed class A proteins, E12/E47 were absent from all placental cell
types while ITF-2 was restricted to placental stromal cells of early and late
gestation. In contrast, HEB was identified in all trophoblast cell types using
RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. The negative HLH-regulators
Id-1 and Id-2 lacking the DNA-binding domain, were detected in villous stromal
cells and different cytotrophoblast subtypes but were absent from the syncytium. 
The data suggest that a complex interplay of activators (Hash-2, HEB) and
repressors (Stra13, I-mfa) could be involved in extravillous trophoblast
differentiation whereas downregulation of Id proteins could play a role in
syncytialisation.

PMID: 15993702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Pathol. 2005 Jul;167(1):233-42.

The loss of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPase 3 expression is 
an early event during the multistep process of colon carcinogenesis.

Brouland JP(1), Gélébart P, Kovàcs T, Enouf J, Grossmann J, Papp B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris,
France.

Calcium accumulation in the endoplasmic reticulum is accomplished by
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPases (SERCA enzymes). To better 
characterize the role of SERCA3 in colon carcinogenesis, its expression has been 
investigated in colonic epithelium, benign lesions, adenomas, and
adenocarcinomas. In addition, the regulation of SERCA3 expression was analyzed in
the context of the adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4)
pathway and of specificity protein 1 (Sp1)-like factor-dependent transcription.
We report that SERCA3 expression increased along the crypts as cells
differentiated in normal colonic mucosa and in hyperplastic polyps, was
moderately and heterogeneously expressed in colonic adenomas with expression
levels inversely correlated with the degree of dysplasia, was barely detectable
in well and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas, and was absent in poorly
differentiated tumors. Inhibition of Sp1-like factor-dependent transcription
blocked SERCA3 expression during cell differentiation, and SERCA3 expression was 
induced by the expression of dominant-negative TCF4 in colon cancer cells. These 
data link SERCA3 expression to the state of differentiation of colonic epithelial
cells, and relate SERCA3 expression, already decreased in adenomas, to enhanced
adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin/TCF4-dependent signaling and deficient
Sp1-like factor-dependent transcription. In conclusion, intracellular calcium
homeostasis becomes progressively anomalous during colon carcinogenesis as
reflected by deficient SERCA3 expression.

PMCID: PMC1603437
PMID: 15972967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Aug 1;95(5):1057-68.

Wnt-mediated regulation of chondrocyte maturation: modulation by TGF-beta.

Dong Y(1), Drissi H, Chen M, Chen D, Zuscik MJ, Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Wnt proteins are expressed during limb morphogenesis, yet their role and
mechanism of action remains unclear during long bone growth. Wnt expression,
effects and modulation of signaling events by BMP and transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) were evaluated in chick embryonic chondrocytes.
Chondrocyte cell cultures underwent spontaneous maturation with increased
expression of colX and this was associated with an increase in the expression of 
multiple Wnts, including Wnt 4, 5a, 8c, and 9a. Both parathyroid hormone related 
peptide (PTHrP) and TGF-beta inhibited colX, but had disparate effects on Wnt
expression. While TGF-beta strongly inhibited all Wnts, PTHrP did not inhibit
either Wnt8c or Wnt9a and had lesser effects on the expression of the other Wnts.
BMP-2 induced colX expression, and also markedly increased Wnt8c expression.
Overexpression of beta-catenin and/or T cell factor (TCF)-4 also induced the type
X collagen promoter. Overexpression of Wnt8c induced maturation, as did
overexpression of beta-catenin. The Wnt8c/beta-catenin maturational effects were 
enhanced by BMP-2 and inhibited by TGF-beta. TGF-beta also inhibited activation
of the Topflash reporter by beta-catenin, suggesting a direct inhibitory effect
since the Topflash reporter contains only beta-catenin binding sequences. In turn
beta-catenin inhibited activation of the p3TP-Luc reporter by TGF-beta, although 
the effect was partial. Thus, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is a critical regulator 
of the rate of chondrocyte differentiation. Moreover, this pathway is modulated
by members of the TGF-beta family and demonstrates the highly integrated nature
of signals controlling endochondral ossification.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2649667
PMID: 15962307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;11(12):4580-8.

Activation of p53-dependent apoptosis by acute ablation of glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta in colorectal cancer cells.

Ghosh JC(1), Altieri DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

PURPOSE: The restoration of checkpoint mechanisms may provide a rational
anticancer approach, but the molecular circuitries of how this can be achieved
therapeutically are poorly understood. A pivotal signaling network in colorectal 
cancer cells involves glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta), a
multifunctional kinase whose role in tumor cell survival is not defined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used molecular, genetic, and pharmacologic antagonists of
GSK3beta in p53+/+ or p53-/- colorectal cancer cells. We monitored kinase
activity in immunoprecipitation, protein expression by immunoblotting, and cell
death by multiparametric flow cytometry. A xenograft colorectal cancer model was 
used to study antitumor activity in vivo.
RESULTS: Treatment of p53+/+ colorectal cancer cells with pharmacologic
inhibitors of GSK3beta resulted in sustained elevation of p53, with up-regulation
of p21(Waf1/Cip1) and loss of survivin levels. Molecular targeting of GSK3beta by
overexpression of a GSK3beta dominant-negative mutant, or acute-silencing of
GSK3beta by RNA interference, reproduced the induction of transcriptionally
active p53 in colorectal cancer cells. This pathway was recapitulated by
deregulated Wnt/T-cell factor signaling, with elevation of the tumor suppressor
p14ARF, and reduced expression of the p53 antagonist, MDM2. Rather than cell
cycle arrest, GSK3beta blockade resulted in p53-dependent apoptosis, which was
contributed by acute loss of survivin and inhibition of colorectal cancer growth 
in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute ablation of GSK3beta in colorectal cancer cells activates
p53-dependent apoptosis and antagonizes tumor growth. This pathway may be
exploited for rational treatment of colorectal cancer patients retaining
wild-type p53.

PMID: 15958644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;11(12):4295-304.

Elevated expression of Wnt antagonists is a common event in hepatoblastomas.

Koch A(1), Waha A, Hartmann W, Hrychyk A, Schüller U, Waha A, Wharton KA Jr,
Fuchs SY, von Schweinitz D, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany.

Hepatoblastomas are the most frequent malignant liver tumors of childhood. A high
frequency of activating beta-catenin mutations in hepatoblastomas indicates that 
the Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in the development of this
embryonic neoplasm. Stabilization of beta-catenin leads to an increased formation
of nuclear beta-catenin-T-cell factor complexes and altered expression of
Wnt-inducible target genes. In this study, we analyzed the mRNA expression levels
of nine Wnt genes, including c-JUN, c-MYC, CYCLIN D1, FRA-1, NKD-1, ITF-2, MMP-7,
uPAR, and beta-TRCP, by competitive reverse transcription-PCR. We analyzed 23
hepatoblastoma biopsies for which matching liver tissue was available, 6
hepatoblastoma cell lines, and 3 human fetal liver samples. beta-TRCP and NKD-1
were highly expressed in all hepatoblastoma samples, independent of the
beta-catenin mutational status, in comparison with their nontumorous
counterparts. beta-TRCP mRNA overexpression was associated with accumulation of
intracytoplasmic and nuclear beta-TrCP protein. In human liver tumor cells
without beta-catenin mutations, Nkd-1 inhibited the Wnt-3a-activated
Tcf-responsive-luciferase reporter activity, whereas Nkd-1 in hepatoblastomas
with beta-catenin mutations had no antagonistic effect. Our data emphasize the
inhibitory effect of beta-TrCP and Nkd-1 on the Wnt signaling pathway in a manner
analogous to Conductin (AXIN2) and Dkk-1, inhibitors shown previously to be
up-regulated in hepatoblastomas. Our findings indicate that overexpression of the
Wnt antagonists Nkd-1 and beta-TrCP reveals an activation of the Wnt signaling
pathway as a common event in hepatoblastomas. We propose that Nkd-1 and beta-TrCP
may be used as possible diagnostic markers for the activated Wnt signaling
pathway in hepatoblastomas.

PMID: 15958610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Gastroenterology. 2005 Jun;128(7):1919-36.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 is a component of the oncogenic T-cell
factor-4/beta-catenin complex.

Idogawa M(1), Yamada T, Honda K, Sato S, Imai K, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapy Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: T-cell factor (TCF)-4 regulates a certain set of genes related
to growth and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. Aberrant
transactivation of these TCF-4-regulated genes by beta-catenin protein plays a
crucial role in early intestinal carcinogenesis, and the transcriptional
machinery of the TCF-4/beta-catenin complex is likely to contain targets for
molecular therapy. We explored the molecular composition of the
TCF-4/beta-catenin transcriptional complex by means of proteomics.
METHODS & RESULTS: A protein of approximately 112 kilodaltons was consistently
coimmunoprecipitated with FLAG-tagged TCF-4 transiently expressed in HEK293
cells, and the protein was identified by mass spectrometry as poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1). PARP-1 physically interacted with TCF-4 and augmented the 
transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. Knockdown of PARP-1
by RNA interference significantly suppressed both transcriptional activity and
proliferation by colorectal cancer cells. Auto-polyADP-ribosylation of the PARP-1
protein induced by DNA damage inhibited the functional interaction of PARP-1 with
TCF-4. PARP-1 was overexpressed in the intestinal adenomas of patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis and multiple intestinal polyposis mice. The
expression of PARP-1 was closely associated with the accumulation of beta-catenin
and with the undifferentiated status of intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified PARP-1 as a novel coactivator of the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. Although PARP-1 has been believed to play a
protective role against carcinogenesis, these expression patterns and functional 
properties of PARP-1 were highly suggestive of its participation in early
colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15940627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Gastroenterology. 2005 Jun;128(7):1907-18.

Oncogenic K-ras stimulates Wnt signaling in colon cancer through inhibition of
GSK-3beta.

Li J(1), Mizukami Y, Zhang X, Jo WS, Chung DC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Two key genetic events underlying the development of colon
cancer are activation of the K-ras and Wnt signaling pathways. We have previously
shown that these 2 pathways can cooperate to regulate vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) gene expression. The goal of this study was to define the molecular
basis for this interaction.
METHODS: The effects of K-ras(Val12) on VEGF and T-cell factor 4 (TCF-4) promoter
activity, nuclear levels of beta-catenin and beta-catenin/TCF-4 complexes,
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) phosphorylation, and GSK-3beta kinase 
activity were measured. LY294002 and PD98059 were used to define the role of
specific ras effector pathways.
RESULTS: Oncogenic K-ras up-regulated the activity of the VEGF promoter, and
selective mutagenesis of TCF-4 binding sites significantly blocked this
induction. K-ras(Val12) also induced the activity of a heterologous TCF-4
reporter construct in Caco-2 and HeLa cells. LY294002 and dominant negative
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase nearly completely blocked this induction.
K-ras(Val12) increased the stability of beta-catenin, the levels of nuclear
beta-catenin, and the formation of nuclear beta-catenin/TCF-4 complexes, and
these effects were also blocked by LY294002. Finally, K-ras(Val12) inhibited the 
kinase activity of total cellular GSK-3beta and GSK-3beta complexed with Axin.
This effect was not mediated through phosphorylation at serine 9 but did depend
on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a unique cooperative interaction between 2
critical oncogenic pathways in colorectal tumorigenesis and highlight the pivotal
role of GSK-3beta.

PMID: 15940626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Br J Cancer. 2005 Jun 20;92(12):2233-9.

HOXB13 is downregulated in colorectal cancer to confer TCF4-mediated
transactivation.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Zhang H, Lee SJ, Sheng H, Loehrer PJ, Gardner TA, Jeng MH, Kao
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Mutations in the Wnt signalling cascade are believed to cause aberrant
proliferation of colorectal cells through T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) and its
downstream growth-modulating factors. HOXB13 is exclusively expressed in prostate
and colorectum. In prostate cancers, HOXB13 negatively regulates
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transactivation and subsequently inhibits cell growth.
To study the role of HOXB13 in colorectal tumorigenesis, we evaluated the
expression of HOXB13 in 53 colorectal tumours originated from the distal left
colon to rectum with their matching normal tissues using quantitative RT-PCR
analysis. Expression of HOXB13 is either lost or diminished in 26 out of 42 valid
tumours (62%), while expression of TCF4 RNA is not correlated with HOXB13
expression. TCF4 promoter analysis showed that HOXB13 does not regulate TCF4 at
the transcriptional level. However, HOXB13 downregulated the expression of TCF4
and its target gene, c-myc, at the protein level and consequently inhibited
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated signalling. Functionally, forced expression of HOXB13
drove colorectal cancer (CRC) cells into growth suppression. This is the first
description of the downregulation of HOXB13 in CRC and its mechanism of action is
mediated through the regulation of TCF4 protein stability. Our results suggest
that loss of HOXB13 may be an important event for colorectal cell transformation,
considering that over 90% of colorectal tumours retain mutations in the
APC/beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2361828
PMID: 15928669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Lett. 2006 Feb 20;233(1):165-71.

Genetic and cellular characterizations of human TCF4 with microsatellite
instability in colon cancer and leukemia cell lines.

Chang HR(1), Cheng TL, Liu TZ, Hu HS, Hsu LS, Tseng WC, Chen CH, Tsao DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung Hsien 840, 
Taiwan, ROC.

It has been reported that the mutational inactivation of the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) and beta-catenin genes play important roles in colorectal
carcinogenesis. However, alteration of the components in the Wnt signaling
pathway in colorectal cancer (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) has been
elucidated. To define the precise role of the Wnt signaling components in CRC and
leukemia cell lines with MSI, mutational analyses of the T cell factor 4 (TCF4)
genes were performed. Here we describe for the first time a TCF4 MSI+ phenotype
in leukemia cell lines except in colon cancer cell lines. Moreover, we found that
these cell lines exhibited deletion and insertion of 1-2A in an (A)9 repeat so as
to result in (A)7, (A)8, (A)10 and (A)11 repeat, respectively. To characterize
the cellular function of these special TCF4 mutant clones, transient transfection
and fluorescent microscopy were analyzed and the results revealed that the TCF4
frameshift gene products all localized in nuclei. Surprisingly, these TCF4
frameshift mutants lost transcriptional activity with beta-catenin and
down-regulate the target gene expression. These results delineate a novel role
for MSI+TCF4 in leukemia and colon cancer progression.

PMID: 15905022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biophys J. 2005 Aug;89(2):1214-26. Epub 2005 May 13.

Backbone dynamics of a symmetric calmodulin dimer in complex with the
calmodulin-binding domain of the basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor
SEF2-1/E2-2: a highly dynamic complex.

Larsson G(1), Schleucher J, Onions J, Hermann S, Grundström T, Wijmenga SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umeå, Sweden.

Calmodulin (CaM) interacts specifically as a dimer with some dimeric
basic-Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors via a novel high affinity
binding mode. Here we report a study of the backbone dynamics by (15)N-spin
relaxation on the CaM dimer in complex with a dimeric peptide that mimics the CaM
binding region of the bHLH transcription factor SEF2-1. The relaxation data were 
measured at multiple magnetic fields, and analyzed in a model-free manner using
in-house written software designed to detect nanosecond internal motion. Besides 
picosecond motions, all residues also experience internal motion with an
effective correlation time of approximately 2.5 ns with squared order parameter
(S(2)) of approximately 0.75. Hydrodynamic calculations suggest that this can be 
attributed to motions of the N- and C-terminal domains of the CaM dimer in the
complex. Moreover, residues with significant exchange broadening are found. They 
are clustered in the CaM:SEF2-1mp binding interface, the CaM:CaM dimer interface,
and in the flexible helix connecting the CaM N- and C-terminal domains, and have 
similar exchange times (approximately 50 micros), suggesting a cooperative
mechanism probably caused by protein:protein interactions. The dynamic features
presented here support the conclusion that the conformationally heterogeneous
bHLH mimicking peptide trapped inside the CaM dimer exchanges between different
binding sites on both nanosecond and microsecond timescales. Nature has thus
found a way to specifically recognize a relatively ill-fitting target. This novel
mode of target-specific binding, which neither belongs to lock-and-key nor
induced-fit binding, is characterized by dimerization and continuous exchange
between multiple flexible binding alternatives.

PMCID: PMC1366606
PMID: 15894636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. FEBS Lett. 2005 May 23;579(13):2965-71. Epub 2005 Apr 21.

The inhibitory mechanism of curcumin and its derivative against beta-catenin/Tcf 
signaling.

Park CH(1), Hahm ER, Park S, Kim HK, Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Seoul National University,
Korea.

We investigated the inhibitory mechanism of curcumin and its derivative (CHC007) 
against beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling in various cancer cell lines. 
Curcumin is known to inhibit beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity in HCT116 
cells but not in SW620 cells. To clarify the inhibitory effect of curcumin
against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling, we tested several cancer cell lines. In
addition, in order to verify the inhibitory mechanism, we performed reporter gene
assay, Western blot, immunoprecipitation, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Since inhibitors downregulated the transcriptional activity of
beta-catenin/Tcf in HEK293 cells transiently transfected with S33Y mutant
beta-catenin gene, whose product is not induced to be degraded by adenomatous
polyposis coli-Axin-glycogen synthase kinase 3beta complex, we concluded that the
inhibitory mechanism was related to beta-catenin itself or downstream components.
Western blot analysis suggested that no change in the amount of cytosolic and
membranous beta-catenin in a cell occurred; however, nuclear beta-catenin and
Tcf-4 proteins were markedly reduced by inhibitors and this lead to the
diminished association of beta-catenin with Tcf-4 and to the reduced binding to
the consensus DNA. In the present study, we demonstrate that curcumin and its
derivative are excellent inhibitors of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in all tested
cancer cell lines and the reduced beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity is
due to the decreased nuclear beta-catenin and Tcf-4.

PMID: 15893313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Biochem J. 2005 Sep 1;390(Pt 2):493-9.

The human D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase gene is transcriptionally activated through
the beta-catenin-TCF4 pathway.

Ghiselli G(1), Agrawal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 1020
Locust Street, JAH 371, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
Giancarlo.Ghiselli@jefferson.edu

Heparan sulphate (HS) is a ubiquitous constituent of the extracellular matrix
that is required for the biological activity of circulating soluble and insoluble
extracellular ligands. GLCE (D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase), an enzyme responsible
for the epimerization of D-glucuronic acid into L-iduronic acid of HS, endows the
nascent polysaccharide chain with the ability to bind to growth factors and
cytokines. In order to examine the mechanism of regulation of GLCE expression,
the functional organization of the human GLCE gene promoter has been
investigated. Studies utilizing stepwise deleted and site-directed mutagenized
promoter constructs have shed light on the functional relevance of two cis-acting
binding elements for the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex (where TCF4 stands for T-cell 
factor 4) that are located in the enhancer region of the promoter. The ability of
the putative binding sequences to bind the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex has been
confirmed through electrophoretic mobility-shift and supershift analyses. We have
found that, in a set of human colon carcinoma cell lines, the expression of GLCE 
correlates with the degree of activation of the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation
complex. Furthermore, the ectopic expression of beta-catenin-TCF4 in cells that
constitutively express low levels of the transactivation complex produces a
significant increase of GLCE transcript level and, at the same time, enhances the
rate of D-glucuronic acid epimerization in HS. The data obtained are consistent
with the idea that the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation pathway plays a major
role in modulating GLCE expression, thus contributing to the regulation of HS
biosynthesis and its structural organization.

PMCID: PMC1198929
PMID: 15853773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(9):3506-18.

SUMO-1 modification of PIASy, an E3 ligase, is necessary for PIASy-dependent
activation of Tcf-4.

Ihara M(1), Yamamoto H, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

We have previously shown that modification of Tcf-4, a transcription factor in
the Wnt pathway, with SUMO by PIASy, a SUMO E3 ligase, enhances its
transcriptional activity. Since PIASy itself was also modified with SUMO-1, we
studied the role of sumoylation of PIASy in the regulation of Tcf-4. Lys(35) was 
found to be a sumoylation site of PIASy. PIASy(K35R), in which Lys(35) was
mutated to Arg, did not enhance sumoylation of Tcf-4, although this PIASy mutant 
did not lose the ligase activity of sumoylation for other proteins. Wild-type
PIASy and PIASy(K35R) showed a distinct distribution in the nucleus, although
both were colocalized with Tcf-4. Promyelocytic leukemia protein, which is
involved in transcriptional regulation, was associated with PIASy(K35R) more
frequently than wild-type PIASy in the nucleus. PIASy(K35R) could not stimulate
the transcriptional activity of Tcf-4 under the conditions in which wild-type
PIASy enhanced it. Conjugation of SUMO-1 to the amino terminus of PIASy(K35R)
neither enhanced sumoylation of Tcf-4 nor stimulated the transcriptional activity
of Tcf-4. These results suggest that sumoylation of Lys(35) in PIASy determines
the nuclear localization of PIASy and that it is necessary for PIASy-dependent
sumoylation and transcriptional activation of Tcf-4.

PMCID: PMC1084305
PMID: 15831457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Lab Invest. 2005 Jun;85(6):768-79.

Upregulation of TCF4 expression as a transcriptional target of beta-catenin/p300 
complexes during trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kitasato,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Nuclear stabilization of beta-catenin and its interaction with TCF/LEF factors
are key events in transduction of the Wnt/beta-catenin signal pathway. Our
previous study indicated that nuclear beta-catenin accumulation provides an
initial signal for trans-differentiation toward the squamoid phenotype of
endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells in a TCF4-dependent manner, which makes this 
a possible factor for a positive prognosis. However, little is known about
regulation of TCF4 expression in Em Cas. We show here that beta-catenin can
directly induce transcription from the TCF4 promoter, the effect being enhanced
by the p300 coactivator. In clinical cases, nuclear beta-catenin accumulation was
found to frequently overlap with TCF4 immunoreactivity in morules and surrounding
glandular carcinoma lesions, showing a significant positive correlation (r =
0.82, P < 0.0001), in contrast to areas of squamous metaplasia (SqM) within Em
Cas. In cases with coexistence of two squamoid features in trans-differentiated
areas, loss of nuclear beta-catenin and TCF4 immunoreactivity was closely related
to change in the morphology from the morular to the SqM phenotype. The TCF4
promoter contains a single consensus TCF-binding site that is critical for
activation by beta-catenin. The p300 coactivator, in particular N-terminal
residues 1 to 670, appears sufficient to enhance beta-catenin-dependent
transcription, again with TCF4-dependence. These findings indicate that a
positive feedback loop of TCF4 expression mediated by beta-catenin/p300 may be
important for initial steps during trans-differentiation of Em Ca cells. In
addition, its downregulation is associated with induction of a
more-differentiated squamoid phenotype.

PMID: 15806138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Neoplasia. 2005 Feb;7(2):99-108.

Genetic and epigenetic changes of components affecting the WNT pathway in
colorectal carcinomas stratified by microsatellite instability.

Thorstensen L(1), Lind GE, Løvig T, Diep CB, Meling GI, Rognum TO, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

An unselected series of 310 colorectal carcinomas, stratified according to
microsatellite instability (MSI) and DNA ploidy, was examined for mutations
and/or promoter hypermethylation of five components of the WNT signaling cascade 
[APC, CTNNB1 (encoding beta-catenin), AXIN2, TCF4, and WISP3] and three genes
indirectly affecting this pathway [CDH1 (encoding E-cadherin), PTEN, and TP53].
APC and TP53 mutations were each present more often in microsatellite-stable
(MSS) tumors than in those with MSI (P < .001 for both). We confirmed that the
aneuploid MSS tumors frequently contained TP53 mutations (P < .001), whereas
tumors with APC mutations and/or promoter hypermethylation revealed no
associations to ploidy. Mutations in APC upstream of codons 1020 to 1169,
encoding the beta-catenin binding site, were found in 15/144 mutated tumors and
these patients seemed to have poor clinical outcome (P = .096). Frameshift
mutations in AXIN2, PTEN, TCF4, and WISP3 were found in 20%, 17%, 46%, and 28% of
the MSI tumors, respectively. More than half of the tumors with heterozygote
mutations in AXIN2 were concurrently mutated in APC. The present study showed
that more than 90% of all samples had alteration in one or more of the genes
investigated, adding further evidence to the vital importance of activated WNT
signaling in colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1501125
PMID: 15802015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(1):33-41.

Loss of beta 1 integrin function results in upregulation of connexin expression
in embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.

Czyz J(1), Guan K, Zeng Q, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University,
Cracow, Poland.

We show that loss of beta1 integrin function affects connexin (Cx) expression in 
embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Both loss of beta1 integrin
function and inhibition of integrin clustering by RGD peptides in wild type ES
cells correlated with upregulated expression of gap junctional proteins in
ES-derived cardiomyocytes. The upregulation of connexin transcript levels in
beta1 integrin-deficient cells is paralleled by a higher fraction of cells
co-expressing Cx40 and Cx43. These observations demonstrate that the expression
of connexins in developing cardiomyocytes is correlated to integrin-dependent
mechanisms. Further, we found that upregulated cardiac connexin expression in
beta1 integrin-deficient cells is related to Rho- and Wnt-dependent pathways.
beta1 integrin-deficient cardiac cells displayed high levels of cytoplasmic
gamma- and beta-catenins throughout the differentiation period. The
administration of lithium, an activator of beta-catenin-dependent pathways,
resulted in up-regulated connexin mRNA levels in wild type cardiomyocytes at
intermediate, but not at early stages, indicating that the effects are restricted
to advanced stages of cardiac differentiation. On the other hand, inhibition of
Rho-dependent integrin signaling by treatment of cardiac cells with exoenzyme C3 
resulted in immediate up-regulation of cardiac connexin transcript levels at
early differentiation stages. Our data indicate that integrin function affects
connexin expression in cardiomyocytes via direct effects on RhoA-dependent
signaling mechanisms at early differentiation stages and of
beta-catenin/Wnt-dependent pathways at advanced stages.

PMID: 15744665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2005 Mar 18;44(13):1987-90.

A small-molecule agonist of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Liu J(1), Wu X, Mitchell B, Kintner C, Ding S, Schultz PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, SR202, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

PMID: 15724259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;65(2):493-8.

Calcium sensing receptor in human colon carcinoma: interaction with Ca(2+) and
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3).

Chakrabarty S(1), Wang H, Canaff L, Hendy GN, Appelman H, Varani J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. schakrab@mdanderson.org

Recent studies show that the human parathyroid calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) is
expressed in human colon epithelium and functions to regulate epithelial
proliferation and differentiation. In this study, we show that the cells of the
colon crypt acquire CaSR expression as they differentiate and migrate towards the
apex of the crypt. CaSR expression was weak in colon carcinomas with a
more-differentiated histologic pattern, whereas CaSR expression was undetectable 
in less-differentiated tumors. We found that Ca(2+) and/or 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)
stimulated CaSR promoter activity and CaSR protein expression in the human colon 
carcinoma CBS cells, which possessed a functional CaSR. Both agents concomitantly
induced a series of changes in the CBS cells that influence proliferation and
differentiation, but cellular responses to the two agents were not identical.
Ca(2+) strongly induced E-cadherin expression and inhibited the expression of the
nuclear transcription factor, TCF4. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) was weaker in its effect on
E-cadherin and was not able to inhibit TCF4 expression. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) was as
strong or stronger than Ca(2+) in its induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors, P21 and p27. It is concluded that CaSR may function in the colon to
regulate epithelial differentiation and that loss of CaSR expression may be
associated with abnormal differentiation and/or malignant progression.
Extracellular Ca(2+) and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) are potential candidates involved in
regulating CaSR expression in the colon and the chemopreventive actions of Ca(2+)
and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in colon cancer may be mediated, in part, through the CaSR.

PMID: 15695391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 4;328(1):227-34.

Quercetin, a potent inhibitor against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 colon
cancer cells.

Park CH(1), Chang JY, Hahm ER, Park S, Kim HK, Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Dysregulation of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a central role in early events in
colorectal carcinogenesis. We examined the effect of quercetin, a famous
anti-tumor agent, against beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 cells. Quercetin
inhibited the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/Tcf in SW480 and also in
HEK293 cells transiently transfected with constitutively active mutant
beta-catenin gene, whose product is not induced to be degraded by
APC-Axin-GSK3beta complex, so we concluded that its inhibitory mechanism was
related to beta-catenin itself or downstream components. To investigate the
precise inhibitory mechanism, we performed EMSA showing that binding of the Tcf
complexes to its specific DNA-binding sites was strongly suppressed by quercetin.
Immunoprecipitation analysis also showed that the binding of beta-catenin to
Tcf-4 was also disrupted by quercetin. Western blot analysis proved these
decreased bindings resulted from decreased level of beta-catenin and Tcf-4
product in nucleus caused by quercetin. Together, we suggest that quercetin is an
excellent inhibitor of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling in SW480 cell lines, and the
reduced beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activity is due to the decreased nuclear
beta-catenin and Tcf-4 proteins.

PMID: 15670774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Chin Med J (Engl). 2005 Jan 20;118(2):136-40.

Expression of T cell factor-4 in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Li CY(1), Wang Y, Cui ZS, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Devices and Supplies, Center of Medical Laboratory
Technology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: T cell factor-4 (TCF-4) plays an important role in development and
carcinogenesis. Recently, the role of TCF-4 has been described in colon cancer
and other cancers. However, whether TCF-4 plays a similar role in lung cancer is 
unknown. To answer this question, we studied the expression of TCF-4 protein and 
mRNA in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the relation of TCF-4 expression
pattern to histological type and cell differentiation.
METHODS: Tissue samples from sixty cases of pathologically diagnosed NSCLC and
eight normal tissue samples were obtained between September 2001 and March 2003. 
Immunohistochemistry was used to investigate the distribution of TCF-4 protein.
The staining patterns of the tumors were divided into 4 categories: nuclear
staining alone or nuclear staining greater than cytoplasmic staining; cytoplasmic
staining or cytoplasmic staining greater than nuclear staining; equal nuclear and
cytoplasmic staining; no nuclear staining or cytoplasmic staining. The integrated
optical density (OD) values of all sections were analyzed by UIC MetaMorph image 
analysis software. The expression of TCF-4 mRNA was detected by one-step reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The integrated density values
of the PCR products were analyzed semi-quantitatively.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed that there was no expression of TCF-4 in
normal tissue. However, TCF-4 was expressed in 86.7% (52/60) of NSCLC samples,
mainly in the nuclei of tumor cells. Furthermore, there was a significant
difference in TCF-4 localization patterns between squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas (P < 0.05). The integrated OD values of TCF-4 expression was
significantly higher in tumors with moderate-poor cell differentiation than in
well differentiated tumors (51.63 +/- 6.67 vs 46.13 +/- 12.31, P < 0.01). There
was no TCF-4 mRNA expression in normal tissue. However, 63.9% (23/36) of
carcinoma samples expressed TCF-4 mRNA. TCF-4 mRNA expression was significantly
higher in tumors with moderate-poor cell differentiation than in well
differentiated tumors (P < 0.05). There were no significant differences in mRNA
expression in comparison with histological type.
CONCLUSIONS: The sub-cellular distribution of TCF-4 may correlate with NSCLC
histological type. High expression of TCF-4 mRNA and protein may be associated
with the degree of cell differentiation in NSCLC.

PMID: 15667799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Blood. 2005 May 1;105(9):3699-706. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Flt3 tandem duplication mutations cooperate with Wnt signaling in leukemic signal
transduction.

Tickenbrock L(1), Schwäble J, Wiedehage M, Steffen B, Sargin B, Choudhary C,
Brandts C, Berdel WE, Müller-Tidow C, Serve H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology, and Oncology, University of Münster,
Domagkstr. 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Activating Flt3 mutations occur in about 30% of patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), often as in-frame internal tandem duplication (ITD) at the
juxtamembrane domain of the receptor. These mutations transform hematopoietic
cell lines and primary mouse bone marrow. Here, we analyzed the interaction
between oncogenic Flt3-ITD mutations and the Wingless-type (Wnt) signaling
pathway in the myeloid progenitor cell line 32D. Microarray analyses revealed
higher mRNA expression of Frizzled-4, a receptor for Wnt ligands in 32D/Flt3-ITD 
cells. Findings were verified by quantitative realtime reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and on the protein level.
Compared with 32D/Flt3-WT (wild-type) cells, 32D/Flt3-ITD cells also showed
greatly enhanced beta-catenin protein levels, irrespective of their exposure to
Wnt3a, a ligand inducing the canonical Wnt signal transduction pathway. In
addition, 5 of 7 AML samples with Flt3-ITD mutations expressed high beta-catenin 
protein levels, whereas patients with wild-type Flt3 did not. Also, Flt3-ITD
induced enhanced T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent transcriptional activity and the
induction of the Wnt target gene c-myc. In the presence of Flt3-WT or Flt3-ITD
signaling, Wnt3a slightly increased 32D cell proliferation. However, transfection
experiments with dominant-negative (dn) TCF4 revealed a strong dependence of
Flt3-ITD-mediated clonogenic growth on TCF activity. Taken together, our results 
indicate that Flt3-ITD and Wnt-dependent signaling pathways synergize in myeloid 
transformation.

PMID: 15650056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 3;24(6):1098-103.

The Wnt antagonist DICKKOPF-1 gene is a downstream target of beta-catenin/TCF and
is downregulated in human colon cancer.

González-Sancho JM(1), Aguilera O, García JM, Pendás-Franco N, Peña C, Cal S,
García de Herreros A, Bonilla F, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4,
E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Wnt glycoproteins regulate homeostasis and development by binding to membrane
Frizzled-LRP5/6 receptor complexes. Wnt signaling includes a canonical pathway
involving cytosolic beta-catenin stabilization, nuclear translocation and gene
regulation, acting as a co-activator of T-cell factor (TCF) proteins, and
noncanonical pathways that activate Rho, Rac, JNK and PKC, or modulate Ca(2+)
levels. DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) encodes a secreted Wnt antagonist that binds to LRP5/6
and induces its endocytosis, leading to inhibition of the canonical pathway. We
show that activation of canonical signaling by Wnt1 or ectopic expression of
active beta-catenin, TCF4 or LRP6 mutants induces transcription of the human
DKK-1 gene. Multiple beta-catenin/TCF4 sites in the DKK-1 gene promoter
contribute to this activation. In contrast, Wnt5a, which signals through
noncanonical pathways, does not activate DKK-1. Northern and Western blot studies
show that activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway by treatment with lithium or
Wnt3a-conditioned medium, or by stable expression of either Wnt1 or beta-catenin,
increases DKK-1 RNA and protein, thus initiating a negative feedback loop.
However, we found that DKK-1 expression decreases in human colon tumors, which
suggests that DKK-1 acts as a tumor suppressor gene in this neoplasia. Our data
indicate that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is downregulated by the induction of
DKK-1 expression, a mechanism that is lost in colon cancer.

PMID: 15592505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):7107-17. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Systematic peptide array-based delineation of the differential beta-catenin
interaction with Tcf4, E-cadherin, and adenomatous polyposis coli.

Gail R(1), Frank R, Wittinghofer A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung strukturelle Biologie, Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Nuclear accumulation of the complex between beta-catenin and proteins of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family is a hallmark of many cancers. Targeting this
interaction for drug development is complicated by the fact that E-cadherin and
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) bind to overlapping sites on beta-catenin.
Inhibiting their interactions might actually promote tumor growth. To identify
selective beta-catenin binding hot spots of Tcf4, E-cadherin, and APC, array
technology with peptides of up to 53 amino acids length was used. Interactions
were monitored by a quantitative fluorescent readout, which was shown to
represent a monitor of true equilibrium binding constants. We identified minimal 
binding motifs in the beta-catenin ligands and showed that most of the 15-mer and
20-mer repeats of APC did not interact, at least when non-phosphorylated, and
defined a consensus binding motif also present in APC. We confirmed previously
found hot spots and identified new ones. The method allowed us to locate a
hydrophobic pocket that was relevant for the Tcf, but not the E-cadherin
interaction, and would thus constitute an ideal drug target site.

PMID: 15591320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Mar 1;94(4):835-47.

T-cell factor-4-dependent up-regulation of fibronectin is involved in fibroblast 
growth factor-2-induced tube formation by endothelial cells.

Kanda S(1), Miyata Y, Kanetake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Deletion of fibronectin or its receptor, alpha(5) integrin, interferes with the
formation of a functional circulation in mice. We hypothesized that
alpha(5)beta(1) integrin/fibronectin interaction may be involved in
differentiation of endothelial cells during angiogenesis. We examined the effect 
of blocking antibody against alpha(5)beta(1) integrin in fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2)-induced angiogenesis by Matrigel plug assay. Although the
antibody did not inhibit the recruitment of endothelial cells into plugs, it
inhibited organization of lumen-containing capillaries. The antibody also
inhibited FGF-2-induced tube formation by murine brain capillary endothelial
cells (IBE cells) cultured in type I collagen gels. We previously showed that
FGF-2 failed to induce tube formation by IBE cells expressing kinase-dead c-Fyn
(KDFyn cells). Association with beta-catenin enhances the transcriptional
activity of T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4), which up-regulates the expression of
fibronectin. FGF-2 induced association of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and
up-regulation of fibronectin in IBE cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Expression of 
mutant TCF-4, which does not associate with beta-catenin, inhibited FGF-2-induced
tube formation and expression of fibronectin in IBE cells. FGF-2-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of beta-catenin, and association with TCF-4 was increased in IBE 
cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Taken together, interaction of alpha(5)beta(1)
integrin and fibronectin is involved in FGF-2-induced tube formation by
endothelial cells and up-regulation of fibronectin through TCF-4 seemed to be
involved in this process.

PMID: 15578569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):215-25. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4 associate in a molecular complex with the Myc
promoter in dysplastic renal tissue and cooperate to control Myc transcription.

Hu MC(1), Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Renal dysplasia, the major cause of childhood renal failure in humans, arises
from perturbed renal morphogenesis and molecular signaling during embryogenesis. 
Recently, we discovered induction of molecular crosstalk between Smad1 and
beta-catenin in the TgAlk3QD mouse model of renal medullary cystic dysplasia. Our
finding that Myc, a Smad and beta-catenin transcriptional target and effector of 
renal epithelial dedifferentiation, is misexpressed in dedifferentiated
epithelial tubules provided a basis for investigating coordinate transcriptional 
control by Smad1 and beta-catenin in disease. Here, we report enhanced
interactions between a molecular complex consisting of Smad1, beta-catenin and
Tcf4 and adjacent Tcf- and Smad-binding regions located within the Myc promoter
in TgAlk3QD dysplastic renal tissue, and Bmp-dependent cooperative control of Myc
transcription by Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4. Analysis of nuclear extracts
derived from TgAlk3QD and wild-type renal tissue revealed increased levels of
Smad1/beta-catenin molecular complexes, and de novo formation of
chromatin-associated Tcf4/Smad1 molecular complexes in TgAlk3QD tissues. Analysis
of a 476 nucleotide segment of the 1490 nucleotide Myc genomic region upstream of
the transcription start site demonstrated interactions between Tcf4 and the Smad 
consensus binding region and associations of Smad1, beta-catenin and Tcf4 with
oligo-duplexes that encode the adjacent Tcf- and Smad-binding elements only in
TgAlk3QD tissues. In collecting duct cells that express luciferase under the
control of the 1490 nucleotide Myc genomic region, Bmp2-dependent stimulation of 
Myc transcription was dependent on contributions by each of Tcf4, beta-catenin
and Smad1. These results provide novel insights into mechanisms by which
interacting signaling pathways control transcription during the genesis of renal 
dysplasia.

PMID: 15576399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 20;24(4):597-604.

beta-Catenin activates the growth factor endothelin-1 in colon cancer cells.

Kim TH(1), Xiong H, Zhang Z, Ren B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, UCSD
School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Endothelin-1 (EDN1) is a growth factor that is frequently produced by cancer
cells and plays a critical role in tumorigenesis. However, the molecular
mechanism controlling the expression of EDN1 in cancers is unknown. Constitutive 
activation of beta-catenin pathway is responsible for the initiation of the vast 
majority of colon cancers. Here we show that the EDN1 gene is directly regulated 
by beta-catenin in colon cancer cells. A specific DNA element within the EDN1
promoter is required for activation, and is associated with beta-catenin's
cognate DNA binding partner, TCF4, in vivo. Inhibition of beta-catenin signaling 
results in lowered expression of EDN1, while enhancement of beta-catenin
signaling leads to further activation of the gene. Significantly elevated EDN1
expression occurs in 80% of primary human colon cancers, consistent with it being
a direct target of beta-catenin. Furthermore, EDN1 is able to rescue colon cancer
cells from growth arrest and apoptosis resulting from inhibition of beta-catenin 
signaling, implicating a key role of EDN1 in promoting the oncogenic function of 
beta-catenin. These results indicate EDN1 overexpression as a major cause in
colon cancers and reveal further details of the genetic programs responsible for 
tumorigenesis of colon cancers.

PMID: 15558022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Oncol. 2004 Dec;25(6):1685-92.

Differential expression and splicing isoform analysis of human Tcf-4
transcription factor in brain tumors.

Howng SL(1), Huang FH, Hwang SL, Lieu AS, Sy WD, Wang C, Hong YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
ROC.

Tcf family transcription factors are the downstream effectors of the Wnt signal
transduction pathway that regulates developmental and oncogenetic processes among
species. The alternative splicing of consecutive exons in the 3' part of the
Tcf-4 gene and an error-prone A9 repeat in exon 17 have recently been examined in
several tumors. To further understand the roles played by differential expression
and splicing isoforms of human Tcf-4 in brain tumorigenesis, the expression of
the 3' part of the Tcf-4 gene (exons 10-17) was analyzed by RT-PCR, nested RT-PCR
and DNA sequencing. The results showed that at least 13 of the Tcf-4 alternative 
splicing isoforms were found and most of them were overexpressed in various brain
tumors. L3 isoform was particularly dominant in metastasis. Several novel
splicing isoforms were identified. One that contains different combinations of
exon 16 (10-11-12-16-17, S5) was found in normal brain and pituitary adenoma but 
not in astrocytoma, meningioma or metastasis, whereas the other that contains
part of intron 16, designated exon-16', was found in metastasis. Overall 23% of
sequencing analysis in brain tumors exhibited frameshift mutations in an A9
repeat region of exon 17. These mutants exhibited 2-base or 1-base deletion (A7, 
A8) and 1-base insertion (A10). Nonetheless, in vitro functional assay showed
that these mutants did not affect the transactivity of Tcf-4 comparing to
wild-type Tcf-4. Collectively, our data suggest that a large number of
alternative splicing isoforms may together with variable mutations of A9 repeat
region maintain balanced pools of Tcf-4 isoforms during brain tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15547706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1457-64. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

TCF-4 mediates cell type-specific regulation of proglucagon gene expression by
beta-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.

Yi F(1), Brubaker PL, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell & Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 2M1,
Canada.

The proglucagon gene (glu) encodes glucagon, expressed in pancreatic islets, and 
the insulinotropic hormone GLP-1, expressed in the intestines. These two hormones
exert critical and opposite effects on blood glucose homeostasis. An intriguing
question that remains to be answered is whether and how glu gene expression is
regulated in a cell type-specific manner. We reported previously that the glu
gene promoter in gut endocrine cell lines was stimulated by beta-catenin, the
major effector of the Wnt signaling pathway, whereas glu mRNA expression and
GLP-1 synthesis were activated via inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, 
the major negative modulator of the Wnt pathway (Ni, Z., Anini, Y., Fang, X.,
Mills, G. B., Brubaker, P. L., & Jin, T. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 1380-1387).
We now show that beta-catenin and the glycogen synthase kinase-3beta inhibitor
lithium do not activate glu mRNA or glu promoter expression in pancreatic cell
lines. In the intestinal GLUTag cell line, but not in the pancreatic InR1-G9 cell
line, the glu promoter G2 enhancer-element was activated by lithium treatment via
a TCF-binding motif. TCF-4 is abundantly expressed in the gut but not in
pancreatic islets. Furthermore, both TCF-4 and beta-catenin bind to the glu gene 
promoter, as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Finally, stable
introduction of dominant-negative TCF-4 into the GLUTag cell line repressed basal
glu mRNA expression and abolished the effect of lithium on glu mRNA expression
and GLP-1 synthesis. We have therefore identified a unique mechanism that
regulates glu expression in gut endocrine cells only. Tissue-specific expression 
of TCF factors thus may play a role in the diversity of the Wnt pathway.

PMID: 15525634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Cancer. 2005 Mar 1;113(6):891-8.

Overexpression of human pituitary tumor transforming gene (hPTTG), is regulated
by beta-catenin /TCF pathway in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhou C(1), Liu S, Zhou X, Xue L, Quan L, Lu N, Zhang G, Bai J, Wang Y, Liu Z,
Zhan Q, Zhu H, Xu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, PR China.

Overexpression of human pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) is wildly
detected in many tumors, including esophageal cancer. Besides overexpression of
PTTG in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) tissues and cells, we detected 
accumulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin in ESCC. In our study, a putative
TCF4-binding element (TBE) was identified in PTTG promoter region. The activity
of PTTG promoter containing the TBE was activated by S37Abeta-catenin and
inhibited by dominant-negative TCF. Furthermore, the activation by
S37Abeta-catenin was mostly abrogated among PTTG promoter region without the TBE 
or with a mutant one. By using biotin-streptavidin pull-down assay, we also found
that the TBE among PTTG promoter bound to TCF-4 protein. Moreover, levels of PTTG
mRNA and protein were increased by S37Abeta-catenin. Finally, it is noticeable
that we detected a correlation between beta-catenin localization and PTTG
expression in 69 primary ESCC (p<0.01). In brief, our study shows that
overexpression of PTTG in ESCC is likely due to the activation of
beta-catenin/WNT signaling. As a target gene of beta-catenin/TCF pathway, PTTG
may play an important role in tumorigenesis of human ESCC.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15514942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7237-40.

Cleavage of beta-catenin by calpain in prostate and mammary tumor cells.

Rios-Doria J(1), Kuefer R, Ethier SP, Day ML.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Department of Urology,
Michigan Urology Center, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Mutations in the NH(2)-terminal regulatory domain of the beta-catenin gene lead
to aberrant stabilization and accumulation of the protein and increased
TCF/LEF-dependent transcription. Although these mutations are common in some
cancers, they are infrequent in prostate and breast cancer. We have found that
metastatic prostate cancer specimens, obtained through a rapid autopsy tissue
procurement program, expressed a novel M(r) 75,000 proteolytic fragment of
beta-catenin (beta-cat(75)). beta-Cat(75) was also expressed in multiple prostate
and breast cancer cell lines and was closely associated with the activity of the 
calcium-dependent protease, calpain. In a prostate cancer cDNA microarray,
m-calpain RNA levels were found to be significantly increased in metastatic
disease compared with normal prostate. We showed calpain-dependent generation of 
beta-cat(75) in cell culture and in vitro. Molecular mapping revealed that
calpain cleavage removed the NH(2)-terminal regulatory domain of the beta-catenin
protein. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with ionomycin led to increased accumulation of
beta-cat(75) in the nucleus and TCF-dependent transcriptional activity.
Overexpression of a similar beta-catenin fragment that lacks the NH(2)-terminal
132 amino acids and has transforming potential activated TCF-dependent
transcription. Given the low frequency of mutation-induced activation of
beta-catenin in prostate and breast cancers, proteolytic cleavage of beta-catenin
by calpain may represent a novel mechanism by which the protein is activated
during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15492240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 28;23(50):8260-71.

Cross-talk between Rac1 GTPase and dysregulated Wnt signaling pathway leads to
cellular redistribution of beta-catenin and TCF/LEF-mediated transcriptional
activation.

Esufali S(1), Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway is observed in numerous cancers, and is
particularly important in colon cancer. We demonstrate that Rac1 GTPase can
significantly increase the signaling activity of beta-catenin in cells with
inherent dysregulation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Expression of
dominant-negative (N17)Rac1 mutant in colon cancer cells caused a marked
inhibition of Wnt signaling, as determined by the TCF/LEF-responsive (TOPFLASH)
transcription assay. Expression of a constitutively active (V12)Rac1 mutant
caused up to 40-fold induction from the TOPFLASH promoter, and this was dependent
on the presence of stabilized beta-catenin. This induction was completely blocked
by the expression of dominant-negative TCF-4, suggesting that beta-catenin and
TCF-4 complex formation is required for Rac1-mediated transcription. Furthermore,
we show that Cyclin D1, an important biological Wnt target gene, is regulated by 
Rac1 in a beta-catenin/TCF-dependent manner. We observed that Rac1
co-immunoprecipitates with beta-catenin and TCF-4 only in its active GTP-bound
form. Both cell fractionation studies and fluorescence microscopy indicate that
overexpression of V12Rac1 results in increased cytosolic and nuclear expression
of beta-catenin. Interestingly, mutation of the polybasic region of Rac1, which
prevents its nuclear localization, also caused an appreciable decrease in nuclear
localization of beta-catenin, and effectively abolished its
beta-catenin-dependent transcription co-activator function. Taken together, our
data demonstrate a novel mechanism of Wnt pathway regulation whereby activation
of Rac1 amplifies the signaling activity of stabilized/mutated beta-catenin by
promoting its accumulation in the nucleus, and synergizing with beta-catenin to
augment TCF/LEF-dependent gene transcription.

PMID: 15377999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6390-3.

p73 isoforms can induce T-cell factor-dependent transcription in gastrointestinal
cells.

Tomkova K(1), Belkhiri A, El-Rifai W, Zaika AI.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Health Center of Excellence, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

A new p53 family member, p73, and its isoform DeltaNp73 are increasingly
recognized in cancer research as important players in tumorigenesis, as well as
in chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity. Despite substantial structural similarities
to p53, accumulating evidence suggests that p53 and p73 may play different roles 
in human tumorigenesis. In this study, we have investigated the role of p73 and
DeltaNp73 in upper gastrointestinal tumorigenesis. Our results indicate that p73 
and DeltaNp73 are frequently overexpressed in >60% of primary adenocarcinomas of 
the stomach and esophagus. We have demonstrated that this overexpression can lead
to the suppression of p73 transcriptional and apoptotic activity in
gastrointestinal cells. Moreover, it induces beta-catenin up-regulation and
T-cell factor/lymphocyte enhancement factor-dependent transcription. Wild-type
p53, but not mutant p53, can inhibit this effect. Our results demonstrate a novel
mechanism for activation of beta-catenin in gastrointestinal tumors and support
the concept that overexpression of p73 isoforms can play an important role in
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15374945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6363-7.

Galectin-3, a novel binding partner of beta-catenin.

Shimura T(1), Takenaka Y, Tsutsumi S, Hogan V, Kikuchi A, Raz A.

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University Medical School, Detroit,
Michigan 48201, USA.

Galectin-3 (gal-3), a pleiotrophic protein, is an important regulator of tumor
metastasis, which like beta-catenin shuttles between the nucleus and the cytosol 
in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. We report herein that beta-catenin
stimulation of cyclin D1 and c-myc expression is gal-3 dependent. Gal-3 binds to 
beta-catenin/Tcf complex, colocalizes with beta-catenin in the nucleus, and
induces the transcriptional activity of Tcf-4 as determined by the TOP/FOPFLASH
reporter system. We have identified the beta-catenin-gal-3-binding sequences,
which are in the NH2 and COOH termini of the proteins encompassing amino acid
residues 1 to 131 and 143 to 250, respectively. These data indicate that gal-3 is
a novel binding partner for beta-catenin involved in the regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 15374939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Science. 2004 Aug 27;305(5688):1286-9.

E protein silencing by the leukemogenic AML1-ETO fusion protein.

Zhang J(1), Kalkum M, Yamamura S, Chait BT, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The AML1-ETO fusion protein, generated by the t(8;21) chromosomal translocation, 
is causally involved in nearly 15% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases. This
study shows that AML1-ETO, as well as ETO, inhibits transcriptional activation by
E proteins through stable interactions that preclude recruitment of
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivators. These interactions are mediated by 
a conserved ETO TAF4 homology domain and a 17-amino acid p300/CBP and ETO target 
motif within AD1 activation domains of E proteins. In t(8;21) leukemic cells,
very stable interactions between AML1-ETO and E proteins underlie a t(8;21)
translocation-specific silencing of E protein function through an aberrant
cofactor exchange mechanism. These studies identify E proteins as AML1-ETO
targets whose dysregulation may be important for t(8;21) leukemogenesis, as well 
as an E protein silencing mechanism that is distinct from that associated with
differentiation-inhibitory proteins.

PMID: 15333839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):45669-75. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Activator protein 2alpha associates with adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin 
and Inhibits beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity in colorectal
cancer cells.

Li Q(1), Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute and Department of Environmental and Molecular
Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6512, USA.

In most human colorectal cancers, mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli
gene (APC) or CTNNB1 constitutively activate the beta-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) signaling pathway. Here, we show that the
transcription factor activator protein (AP)-2alpha inhibited a
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter in human embryonic kidney 293 cells and in
two human colorectal cancer lines, despite the fact that beta-catenin and TCF-4
protein levels were unchanged in the nucleus. Co-immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that AP-2alpha formed a complex with APC and beta-catenin and that
AP-2alpha disrupted beta-catenin/TCF-4 interactions in the nucleus. Thus,
AP-2alpha.APC.beta-catenin complex formation appears to suppress beta-catenin
transactivation by shifting the pool of nuclear beta-catenin toward an inactive
form, having reduced binding to TCF/LEF transcription factors. Glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays showed that AP-2alpha physically associated with
APC rather than with beta-catenin, and the AP-2alpha binding site was identified 
in the N terminus of APC, involving both the heptad and armadillo repeat domains,
whereas the APC binding site in AP-2alpha was in the basic region of the
C-terminal DNA binding domain. These findings provide the first evidence for a
specific interaction between the tumor suppressor protein APC and the
transcription factor AP-2alpha, and they suggest a link between the Wnt signaling
pathway and various other pathways of development and differentiation associated 
with AP-2alpha.

PMCID: PMC2276578
PMID: 15331612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):390-401.

Autoregulation of canonical Wnt signaling controls midbrain development.

Kunz M(1), Herrmann M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (TH), 76131 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

After the primary anterior-posterior patterning of the neural plate, a subset of 
wnt signaling molecules including Xwnt-1, Xwnt-2b, Xwnt-3A, Xwnt-8b are still
expressed in the developing brain in a region spanning from the posterior part of
the diencephalon to the mesencephalon/metencephalon boundary. In this expression 
field, they are colocalized with the HMG-box transcription factor XTcf-4. Using
antisense morpholino loss-of-function strategies, we demonstrate that the
expression of this transcription factor depends on Xwnt-2b, which itself is under
the control of XTcf-4. Marker gene analyses reveal that this autoregulatory loop 
is important for proper development of the midbrain and the isthmus. Staining for
NCAM reveals a lack of dorsal neural tissue in this area. This reduction is
caused by a reduced proliferation rate as shown by staining for PhosphoH3
positive nuclei. In rescue experiments, we demonstrate that individual isoforms
of XTcf-4 control the development of different parts of the brain. XTcf-4A
restored the expression of the mesencephalon marker genes pax-6 and wnt-2b but
not the isthmus marker gene en-2. XTcf-4C, in contrast, restored en-2, but had
only weak effects on pax-6 and wnt-2b. Thus, autoregulation of canonical Wnt
signaling and alternative expression of different isoforms of XTcf-4 is essential
for specifying the developing CNS.

PMID: 15328021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5767-74.

A novel mechanism of chemoprotection by sulforaphane: inhibition of histone
deacetylase.

Myzak MC(1), Karplus PA, Chung FL, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331,
USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a compound found at high levels in broccoli and broccoli
sprouts, is a potent inducer of phase 2 detoxification enzymes and inhibits
tumorigenesis in animal models. SFN also has a marked effect on cell cycle
checkpoint controls and cell survival and/or apoptosis in various cancer cells,
through mechanisms that are poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that SFN 
acts as an inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In human embryonic kidney 293
cells, SFN dose-dependently increased the activity of a beta-catenin-responsive
reporter (TOPflash), without altering beta-catenin or HDAC protein levels.
Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts from these cells had diminished HDAC activity,
and both global and localized histone acetylation was increased, compared with
untreated controls. Studies with SFN and with media from SFN-treated cells
indicated that the parent compound was not responsible for the inhibition of
HDAC, and this was confirmed using an inhibitor of glutathione S-transferase,
which blocked the first step in the metabolism of SFN, via the mercapturic acid
pathway. Whereas SFN and its glutathione conjugate (SFN-GSH) had little or no
effect, the two major metabolites SFN-cysteine and SFN-N-acetylcysteine were
effective HDAC inhibitors in vitro. Finally, several of these findings were
recapitulated in HCT116 human colorectal cancer cells: SFN dose-dependently
increased TOPflash reporter activity and inhibited HDAC activity, there was an
increase in acetylated histones and in p21(Cip1/Waf1), and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed an increase in acetylated histones bound to
the P21 promoter. Collectively, these findings suggest that SFN may be effective 
as a tumor-suppressing agent and as a chemotherapeutic agent, alone or in
combination with other HDAC inhibitors currently undergoing clinical trials.

PMID: 15313918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):41004-11. Epub 2004 Jul 26.

Calcium/calmodulin inhibition of transcriptional activity of E-proteins by
prevention of their binding to DNA.

Saarikettu J(1), Sveshnikova N, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

The Ca2+ sensor protein calmodulin can interact with the DNA binding basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain of E12, E47, and SEF2-1 (E2-2), which belong to
the E-protein subclass of bHLH transcription factors. This interaction inhibits
the DNA binding of these bHLH proteins in vitro, and an ionophore that increases 
intracellular Ca2+ can inhibit transcriptional activation by the E-proteins. Here
we have attempted to determine if these phenomena reflect a direct
calmodulin-dependent inhibition of DNA binding by E-proteins in vivo. We show
that calmodulin overexpression inhibits the transcriptional activity of E12, E47,
and SEF2-1. We have compared calmodulin effects on DNA binding in vitro and on
activation of transcription in vivo using a series of E12 mutants harboring
defined alterations within the basic sequence of the bHLH domain that reduce
their ability to bind calmodulin to varying degrees. We find a striking direct
correlation between the ability of calmodulin to inhibit their DNA binding in
vitro and the ability of overexpressed calmodulin or cellular Ca2+ mobilization
to inhibit their transcriptional activity in vivo. Furthermore, E12 and
overexpressed calmodulin were co-localized in the nucleus, and calmodulin
pull-down experiments with cell extracts showed a Ca2+-dependent interaction
between calmodulin and E12 but not with a calmodulin inhibition-deficient E12
mutant. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that calmodulin overexpression leads
to decreased binding of E12 and E47, but not a calmodulin inhibition-deficient
E12 mutant, to the DNA recognition sequence in vivo. The data suggest that Ca2+
signaling can inhibit the transcriptional activities of E-proteins through direct
binding of Ca2+/calmodulin to the basic sequence of E-proteins, resulting in
inhibition of their DNA binding.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15280352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Jul 30;222(1-2):83-91.

Id2 is a primary partner for the E2-2 basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
in the human placenta.

Liu YP(1), Burleigh D, Durning M, Hudson L, Chiu IM, Golos TG.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center and the Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI 53715, USA.

We screened a term placental cDNA library by the yeast two-hybrid approach with
Id2, a negative regulator of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors. Of the clones
obtained, approximately one-third were the E2-2 bHLH transcription factor. Id2
and E2-2 were shown to interact in direct two-hybrid assays in yeast cells, as
well as immunoprecipitation assays in mammalian cells. Immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated co-localization of both Id2 and E2-2 in placental
trophoblasts. Co-transfection of JEG-3 cells with E2-2 and Id2, and a luciferase 
reporter construct under the control of the human chorionic gonadotropin
alpha-subunit promoter revealed that E2-2 had a negative effect on
CGalpha-subunit transcription, which could be relieved by overexpression of Id2. 
The library was in turn rescreened with E2-2, and Id2 and Id1 were essentially
the only clones obtained. We conclude that Id2 is a primary binding partner for
the bHLH transcription factor E2-2 in the human placenta.

PMID: 15249128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ai Zheng. 2004 Jul;23(7):737-41.

[Indomethacin induces apoptosis through inhibition of survivin regulated by
beta-catenin/TCF4 in human colorectal cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu HX(1), Zhang G, Wang YH, Zhou CQ, Bai JF, Xu NZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021, P.R.China. xningzhi@public.bta.net.cn

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Although Wnt pathway plays important role in colorectal
carcinogenesis, but the mechanism of this pathway in anti-apoptosis is not clear.
This study is to investigate the molecular mechanism of Wnt pathway in
anti-apoptosis.
METHODS: Survivin promoter region was constructed into luciferase reporter system
(pGL3-sur1.8kb). The recombinants pGL3-sur1.8kb were cotransfected with pRL-SV40 
into HCT116 cells and the activities were detected with Dual-luciferase reporter 
assay system. Cell apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry. Protein level of
survivin and beta-catenin was detected by Western Blot.
RESULTS: Survivin could be up-regulated by beta-catenin and down-regulated by
TCF4DeltaN in transcriptional level. beta-catenin/TCF4 dependent apoptosis
induced by indomethacin could suppress survivin transcription. Overexpression of 
survivin could partially recover the beta-catenin/TCF4 dependent apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of survivin affected by beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway
plays an important role in apoptosis induced by NSAIDs indomethacin in HCT116
cells. The beta-catenin/TCF4-survivin pathway may be a potential target in
treatment of colon cancer.

PMID: 15248904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Hepatology. 2004 Jul;40(1):167-76.

Identification of the leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 2 as a direct target gene
of beta-catenin in the liver.

Ovejero C(1), Cavard C, Périanin A, Hakvoort T, Vermeulen J, Godard C, Fabre M,
Chafey P, Suzuki K, Romagnolo B, Yamagoe S, Perret C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département GDPM, Paris, France.

To clarify molecular mechanisms underlying liver carcinogenesis induced by
aberrant activation of Wnt pathway, we isolated the target genes of beta-catenin 
from mice exhibiting constitutive activated beta-catenin in the liver.
Adenovirus-mediated expression of oncogenic beta-catenin was used to isolate
early targets of beta-catenin in the liver. Suppression subtractive hybridization
was used to identify the leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 2 (LECT2) gene as a
direct target of beta-catenin. Northern blot and immunohistochemical analyses
demonstrated that LECT2 expression is specifically induced in different mouse
models that express activated beta-catenin in the liver. LECT2 expression was not
activated in livers in which hepatocyte proliferation was induced by a
beta-catenin-independent signal. We characterized by mutagenesis the LEF/TCF
site, which is crucial for LECT2 activation by beta-catenin. We further
characterized the chemotactic property of LECT2 for human neutrophils. Finally,
we have shown an up-regulation of LECT2 in human liver tumors that expressed
aberrant activation of beta-catenin signaling; these tumors constituted a subset 
of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and most of the hepatoblastomas that were
studied. In conclusion, our results show that LECT2, which encodes a protein with
chemotactic properties for human neutrophils, is a direct target gene of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the liver. Since HCC develops mainly in patients
with chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis induced by viral or inflammatory factors,
understanding the role of LECT2 in liver carcinogenesis is of interest and may
lead to new therapeutic perspectives.

PMID: 15239100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Ther. 2004 Jul;10(1):150-61.

Optimization of a synthetic beta-catenin-dependent promoter for tumor-specific
cancer gene therapy.

Lipinski KS(1), Djeha HA, Gawn J, Cliffe S, Maitland NJ, Palmer DH, Mountain A,
Irvine AS, Wrighton CJ.

Author information: 
(1)ML Research, Keele University Science Park, Keele, Staffordshire ST5 5SP, UK. 
kai.lipinski@mlresearch.co.uk

We recently published the construction and evaluation of a
beta-catenin-dependent, highly active promoter, CTP1, and its possible
application for the treatment of colorectal cancer using gene-directed enzyme
prodrug therapy with adenoviral (Ad) vectors. Alternative Ad-based approaches
such as tumor-specific, replication-competent vectors and/or exploiting
therapeutic gene products with intrinsic toxic activity, such as gibbon ape
leukemia virus fusogenic membrane glycoprotein, diphtheria toxin A (DTA), and
ricin, would demand a very tightly regulated promoter to avoid breakthrough
replication and toxicity in nontumor tissue and Ad producer cell lines. In this
study we optimized the activity/specificity profile of the synthetic
beta-catenin-dependent promoter by varying its basal promoter, the number of Tcf 
binding sites, and the distance between these and the basal promoter. The optimal
promoter, CTP4, showed virtually undetectable expression in cells with normal
beta-catenin regulation but high level expression in cells deregulated for
beta-catenin. Using CTP4 we were able to generate, for the first time to our
knowledge, an Ad vector expressing fully active wild-type DTA without the need
for time-consuming and cumbersome production systems. CTP4 should be the promoter
of choice for Ad-based gene therapies of tumors deregulated for beta-catenin. We 
provide preliminary evidence that these may include prostate and ovarian as well 
as colorectal cancer.

PMID: 15233950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Res. 2004 May 1;64(9):3046-51.

HOXB13 homeodomain protein suppresses the growth of prostate cancer cells by the 
negative regulation of T-cell factor 4.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Lee SJ, Wang C, Jeng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. chjung@iupui.edu

In prostate gland, HOXB13 is highly expressed from the embryonic stages to
adulthood. However, the function of HOXB13 in normal cell growth and
tumorigenesis is not yet known. We investigated the role of HOXB13 and mechanism 
by which it functions in HOXB13-negative cells. Expression of HOXB13 was forced
in HOXB13-negative PC3 prostate cancer cells using a liposome-mediated gene
transfer approach. Compared with the control clones, HOXB13-expressing PC3 cells 
exhibited significant inhibition of in vitro and in vivo cell growth with G1 cell
cycle arrest mediated by the suppression of cyclin D1 expression. Because cyclin 
D1 is mainly regulated by beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF), TCF-4 response
element was used in a reporter gene transcription assay, demonstrating that
HOXB13 significantly inhibits TCF-4-mediated transcriptional activity in both
prostate and nonprostate cells. This inhibition occurred in a dose-responsive
manner and was specific to TCF-4 response element. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that HOXB13 down-regulates the expression of TCF-4 and its
responsive genes, c-myc and cyclin D1. HOXB13 also suppressed the activity of
natural c-myc promoter. This study suggests that HOXB13, a transcription factor, 
functions as a cell growth suppressor by negatively regulating the expression of 
TCF-4, which eventually provides negative signals for cell proliferation. This
observation will provide valuable insight into the molecular basis of prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15126340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Exp Cell Res. 2004 May 1;295(2):469-87.

Human neuroblastoma cells exposed to hypoxia: induction of genes associated with 
growth, survival, and aggressive behavior.

Jögi A(1), Vallon-Christersson J, Holmquist L, Axelson H, Borg A, Påhlman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, University 
Hospital MAS, Lund University, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

We have recently found that cells derived from human neuroblastoma, a sympathetic
nervous system (SNS) tumor, dedifferentiate and acquire a neural crest-like
phenotype when exposed to hypoxia. In the present study, global analysis of gene 
expression and quantitative PCR of relevant genes showed that hypoxia provokes a 
general adaptive response in neuroblastoma cells and confirm loss of the neuronal
phenotype and gain of stem-cell characteristics. Of the approximately 17,000
genes and ESTs analyzed, 199 were consistently upregulated and 36 were
downregulated more than 2-fold by hypoxia. As anticipated, several genes involved
in glucose and iron metabolism and neovascularization were upregulated, the
latter group we here show to include the gene encoding chromogranin C and its
cleavage product, secretoneurin, a vascular smooth muscle cell mitogen. We also
observed upregulation of genes implicated in cell survival and growth, such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), neuropilin 1, adrenomedullin, and
IGF-2. Several metallothioneins, which are linked to tumor drug resistance, were 
upregulated, whereas the expression of MDR1 decreased. In hypoxic neuroblastoma
cells, proneuronal lineage specifying transcription factors, and their
dimerization partner E2-2, were downregulated, whereas their inhibitors Id2 and
HES-1 were induced, providing a molecular mechanism for the hypoxia-provoked
dedifferentiation of neuroblastoma cells.

PMID: 15093745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3404-14.

Acetylation of beta-catenin by p300 regulates beta-catenin-Tcf4 interaction.

Lévy L(1), Wei Y, Labalette C, Wu Y, Renard CA, Buendia MA, Neuveut C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncogenèse et Virologie Moléculaire (INSERM U579), Institut Pasteur,
75015 Paris, France.

Lysine acetylation modulates the activities of nonhistone regulatory proteins and
plays a critical role in the regulation of cellular gene transcription. In this
study, we showed that the transcriptional coactivator p300 acetylated
beta-catenin at lysine 345, located in arm repeat 6, in vitro and in vivo.
Acetylation of this residue increased the affinity of beta-catenin for Tcf4, and 
the cellular Tcf4-bound pool of beta-catenin was significantly enriched in
acetylated form. We demonstrated that the acetyltransferase activity of p300 was 
required for efficient activation of transcription mediated by beta-catenin/Tcf4 
and that the cooperation between p300 and beta-catenin was severely reduced by
the K345R mutation, implying that acetylation of beta-catenin plays a part in the
coactivation of beta-catenin by p300. Interestingly, acetylation of beta-catenin 
had opposite, negative effects on the binding of beta-catenin to the androgen
receptor. Our data suggest that acetylation of beta-catenin in the arm 6 domain
regulates beta-catenin transcriptional activity by differentially modulating its 
affinity for Tcf4 and the androgen receptor. Thus, our results describe a new
mechanism by which p300 might regulate beta-catenin transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC381622
PMID: 15060161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Res. 2004 Feb;14(1):74-80.

Aberrant expression and function of TCF4 in the proliferation of hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line BEL-7402.

Zhao DH(1), Hong JJ, Guo SY, Yang RL, Yuan J, Wen CY, Zhou KY, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Biotechnology, College of Life
Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097, Jiangsu, China.

Wnt signaling pathway is essential for development and tumorigenesis, however,
this signaling pathway in the progress of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains 
unclear. In this paper, we studied the function of human T-cell transcription
factor-4 (TCF4), a key factor of Wnt signaling pathway, on the proliferation of
HCC cell line. We showed that the expression of TCF4 mRNA in HCC cell line
BEL-7402 was higher than that in immortalized normal liver cell line L02.
Blockage of Wnt pathway by Delta-NTCF4, a dominant negative TCF4, could suppress 
BEL-7402 cells growth and decrease the expression of cyclin D1 and c-myc, two of 
target genes of Wnt pathway. On the other hand, stimulating Wnt pathway by
introducing a degradation-resistant -catenin S37A could increase BEL-7402 cells
proliferation. But all the treatments had no effect on L02 cells. Our data
indicated that TCF4 might be another key factor in Wnt pathway involved in HCC
cells proliferation and TCF4 could be an effective therapeutic target for
suppressing the growth of hepatocellular cancers.

PMID: 15040893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 22;23(19):3376-84.

Identification of Tcf-4 as a transcriptional target of p53 signalling.

Rother K(1), Johne C, Spiesbach K, Haugwitz U, Tschöp K, Wasner M, Klein-Hitpass 
L, Möröy T, Mössner J, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Max-Bürger-Forschungszentrum,
Universität Leipzig, Johannisallee 30, Leipzig D-04103, Germany.

T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 is a main transcription factor to pass on Wnt/beta-catenin 
signalling. The tumour suppressor protein p53 contributes as a transcription
factor to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis induction. Mutations of components in
p53 and Wnt/beta-catenin signalling networks play a part in tumour formation.
Here, we identify the Tcf-4 gene as a downstream effector of p53. Induction of
wild-type p53 in a tet-off regulated human colon cell system leads to the
reduction of Tcf-4 mRNA and protein levels. Also, mRNA of the Tcf-4 target gene
uPAR is downregulated after p53 induction. Expression of a luciferase reporter
controlled by the Tcf-4 promoter is repressed by wild-type p53, but not by a p53 
mutant deficient in DNA binding. Such a regulation is seen in cell lines of
different origin. These findings directly link Wnt/beta-catenin signalling and
p53 tumour suppressor function and may provide a mechanism by which loss of p53
function contributes to progression in the adenoma/carcinoma sequence in colon
tumours. Furthermore, since Tcf-4 is expressed in many tissues and downregulation
of Tcf-4 by p53 is seen in several different cell types, this regulation likely
plays a role in proliferation control of all tissues that can express p53 and
Tcf-4.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 14990988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):5-6.

Wnt breakers in colon cancer.

Clevers H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands. clevers@niob.knaw.nl

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2004 Jan;5(1):91-102.

Beta-catenin and Tcf4 are the downstream effectors of the Wnt signaling cascade. 
In colorectal cancer, mutations in Wnt cascade genes such as APC lead to the
inappropriate formation of beta-catenin/Tcf4 complexes. Earlier work has
predicted that disruption of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 protein-protein interaction
could revert the proliferative phenotype of colorectal cancer cells. In this
issue of Cancer Cell, Shivdasani and colleagues have explored high-throughput
screening of compound libraries in a search for small molecule inhibitors of the 
Wnt cascade. Ultimately, such inhibitors could become a novel class of smart
anticancer drugs.

PMID: 14749120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14879-88. Epub 2004 Jan 27.

The human Frizzled 6 (HFz6) acts as a negative regulator of the canonical Wnt.
beta-catenin signaling cascade.

Golan T(1), Yaniv A, Bafico A, Liu G, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Previously we have cloned the human Frizzled 1 (HFz1) and shown that it transmits
the Wnt-3a-induced canonical pathway. We also cloned the human Frizzled 6 (HFz6) 
and show in the present study that, as opposed to HFz1, HFz6 did not activate the
canonical Wnt pathway following exposure to various Wnts, whether belonging to
the Wnt-1 or to the Wnt-5a group. Moreover we show that HFz6 repressed
Wnt-3a-induced canonical signaling when co-expressed with HFz1. HFz6 repressed
the canonical Wnt cascade activated also by various Wnt signaling intracellular
mediators such as Dishevelled-1, a stabilized beta-catenin(S33Y) mutant, and
LiCl-mediated repression of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta activity. Removal of
HFz6 N'- or C'-terminal sequences abolished HFz6 repressive activity. As the HFz6
repressive effect was not associated with a decrease in the level of
beta-catenin, it is suggested that HFz6 does not affect beta-catenin
stabilization, implying that HFz6 transmits a repressive signaling that
cross-talks with and inhibits the canonical Wnt pathway downstream of
beta-catenin destruction complex. HFz6 did not affect the level of nuclear T-cell
factor 4 (TCF4) nor did it affect beta-catenin.TCF4 complex formation. However,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that HFz6 repressed the binding
of TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor transcription factors to target DNA. Moreover we 
present data suggesting that HFz6 activates the transforming growth
factor-beta-activated kinase-NEMO-like kinase pathway that blocks TCF/lymphoid
enhancer factor binding to target promoters, thereby inhibiting the ability of
beta-catenin to activate transcription of Wnt target genes.

PMID: 14747478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):8726-34.

TIP49 regulates beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic transformation and T-cell factor
target gene induction via effects on chromatin remodeling.

Feng Y(1), Lee N, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Beta-catenin has a key role in Wnt signaling via effects on T-cell factor
(TCF)-mediated transcription. Mutational defects in beta-catenin regulation are
seen in many cancers, leading to elevated beta-catenin levels, enhanced binding
of beta-catenin to TCFs, and increased expression of TCF-regulated genes. Factors
cooperating with beta-catenin in transcription of TCF-regulated genes are not
well defined. TIP49, an ATPase previously implicated as a cofactor for oncogenic 
transformation by c-Myc, has been shown to bind to beta-catenin. We found that
expression of an ATPase-deficient mutant form of TIP49 (TIP49D302N) substantially
inhibited beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic transformation of immortalized rat
epithelial cells and anchorage-independent growth of human colon cancer cells
with deregulated beta-catenin. The TIP49D302N mutant inhibited
beta-catenin-mediated activation of TCF-dependent cellular genes. Similar
inhibition of the expression of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent genes was seen with
small interfering RNA approaches against endogenous TIP49. TIP49 was found in
complexes with chromatin remodeling and histone-modifying factors and cofactors, 
including the TIP60 histone acetylase-associated proteins
transactivation/transformation-domain associated protein (TRRAP) and BAF53. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation methods, the TIP49, TIP60, and TRRAP proteins were 
found to interact with sequences in the regulatory region of the gene for ITF-2, 
a TCF-dependent cellular gene. The ability of TIP49D302N to inhibit ITF-2 gene
expression was linked to decreased acetylation of histones in the vicinity of the
TCF-binding sites in the ITF-2 promoter region. We suggest that TIP49 is an
important cofactor in beta-catenin/TCF gene regulation in normal and neoplastic
cells, likely functioning in chromatin remodeling.

PMID: 14695187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Chin Med J (Engl). 2003 Dec;116(12):1885-92.

Alterations of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 instead of GSK-3beta contribute to
activation of Wnt pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cui J(1), Zhou X, Liu Y, Tang Z, Romeih M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Medical Center of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. jian.cui@mail.jci.tju.edu

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study is to investigate the inappropriate activation 
of Wnt pathway in the hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: We analyzed the alterations of three key components of Wnt pathway,
beta-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) and T cell factor 4
(Tcf-4), in 34 samples of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and paracancerous normal
liver by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction-single strand
conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP), direct sequencing, semi-quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: We found 61.8% (21/34) of all the HCCs examined showed an abnormal
beta-catenin protein accumulation in the cytoplasm or nuclei. RT-PCR-SSCP and
direct sequencing showed that beta-catenin exon 3 mutations existed in 44.1%
(15/34) of the HCCs. No mutations of GSK-3beta or Tcf-4 were detected in HCCs.
Moreover, mRNA of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 but not GSK-3beta was found to be over
expressed in HCCs. On analyzing the relationship between alterations of
beta-catenin or Tcf-4 and C-myc or Cyclin D1 expression, we found that the
mutations of beta-catenin as well as over expression of beta-catenin or Tcf-4
gene were independently correlated with C-myc gene over expression in HCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present findings strongly suggest mutations of beta-catenin as
well as over expression of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 gene activate the Wnt pathway
in HCC independently with the target gene most likely to be C-myc.

PMID: 14687479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Cell. 2003 Dec;5(6):937-44.

A Tcf4-positive mesodermal population provides a prepattern for vertebrate limb
muscle patterning.

Kardon G(1), Harfe BD, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Nai;ve myogenic cells migrate from the somites into the developing vertebrate
limb, where they simultaneously differentiate into myotubes and form distinct
anatomical muscles. Limb signals have been hypothesized to direct the pattern of 
muscles formed, but the molecular nature of these signals and the identity of the
cells that produce them have remained unclear. We have identified a population of
lateral plate-derived limb mesodermal cells in both chick and mouse that
expresses the transcription factor Tcf4 in a muscle-specific pattern
independently of the muscle cells themselves. Functional experiments in the chick
demonstrate that TCF4 and the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway in these limb mesodermal
cells are critical for muscle patterning. We propose that Tcf4-expressing cells
establish a prepattern in the limb mesoderm that determines the sites of myogenic
differentiation and thus establishes the basic pattern of limb muscles.

PMID: 14667415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2201-9.

Reconstructed beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling in yeast applicable to functional
evaluation of APC mutations.

Yamada H(1), Furuuchi K, Aoyama T, Kataoka A, Hamada J, Tada M, Okushiba S, Kondo
S, Moriuchi T, Katoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In human genetics and molecular oncology, mutation research is necessary not only
to identify mutations in nucleic acid sequences, but also to analyze the loss of 
function caused by mutant proteins. We reconstructed a protein-protein network
system of human beta-catenin and TCF4, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. beta-Catenin 
and TCF4 proteins form a complex and transactivate reporter genes. Co-expressed
wild-type APC with beta-catenin and TCF4 inhibit the transcriptional activity of 
the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in yeast, as well as in mammals. This unique method
in which the beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling pathway is reconstructed in vivo may
prove useful for the functional evaluation of APC mutants, including a type of
APC truncated and missense mutants influenced to the ability of binding to
beta-catenin.

PMCID: PMC1892379
PMID: 14633595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12584-9. Epub 2003 Oct 17.

Nitric oxide-donating aspirin inhibits beta-catenin/T cell factor (TCF) signaling
in SW480 colon cancer cells by disrupting the nuclear beta-catenin-TCF
association.

Nath N(1), Kashfi K, Chen J, Rigas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical
School, New York, NY 10031.

Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway and altered Beta-catenin expression are central 
early events in colorectal carcinogenesis. We studied the ortho, meta, and para
(o-, m-, and p-) positional isomers of NO-donating aspirin (NO-ASA), a
chemopreventive agent against colon cancer, for their effect on Beta-catenin/T
cell factor (TCF) signaling. In human SW480 colon carcinoma cells, cell-growth
inhibition by NO-ASA [IC50 values for p-, o-, and m- were 48.1 +/- 4.3 (mean
+/-SEM), 60.4 +/- 2.1, and 900 +/-50 microM, respectively] was accompanied by
significant inhibition of Beta-catenin signaling. We determined
Beta-catenin-dependent TCF-4 transcriptional activity by measuring the activity
of the luciferase gene placed under the control of TCF-4 regulatory sequences.
The IC50 values for Beta-catenin/TCF-4-signaling inhibition by NO-ASA were: o-,
2.6 +/- 0.4; m-, 15 +/- 5; p-, 1.1 +/- 0.1 microM; and for ASA, >5,000 microM.
Total or nuclear levels of Beta-catenin and its distribution in the cell were not
altered by NO-ASA, as judged by protein expression levels and semiquantitative
immunofluorescence analysis. NO-ASA disrupted the association of Beta-catenin and
TCF-4 in the nucleus, whereas ASA did not affect it. NO-ASA reduced the
expression of cyclin D1, a downstream target gene that plays an important role in
colon carcinogenesis. In contrast, a structural analog of NO-ASA lacking the -NO2
moiety did not affect TCF-4 transcriptional activity. Thus, NO-ASA inhibits
Beta-catenin-mediated TCF activity by preventing the formation of the
Beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex. This effect, occurring at NO-ASA concentrations far
below those required to inhibit cell growth, may be a critical early event in the
chemopreventive activity of NO-ASA against colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC240661
PMID: 14566053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6116-20.

Involvement of the FGF18 gene in colorectal carcinogenesis, as a novel downstream
target of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor complex.

Shimokawa T(1), Furukawa Y, Sakai M, Li M, Miwa N, Lin YM, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan.

To search for potential molecular targets for development of novel anticancer
drugs, we have been analyzing expression profiles of clinical samples from cancer
patients, using a genome-wide cDNA microarray. In experiments with colon cancer
cells, the gene encoding fibroblast growth factor 18 (FGF18) was among those that
showed elevated expression. The promoter region of this gene was found to contain
putative Tcf4-binding motifs; moreover a reporter-gene assay using luciferase
activity as a marker and an electromobility shift assay indicated that FGF18 is a
downstream transcription target in the beta-catenin/Tcf4 pathway. We showed that 
exogenous FGF18 promoted growth of NIH3T3 cells in an autocrine manner and that
transfection of FGF18 short interfering RNAs suppressed growth of colon cancer
cells in culture. Our results indicate that FGF18 is activated in colon cancers
as a direct downstream target of the Wnt signaling pathway and that it might
represent a marker for early diagnosis and a molecular target for treatment of
this life-threatening tumor.

PMID: 14559787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Jan;25(1):47-59. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

A functional genomics approach for the identification of putative tumor
suppressor genes: Dickkopf-1 as suppressor of HeLa cell transformation.

Mikheev AM(1), Mikheeva SA, Liu B, Cohen P, Zarbl H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Biology, Division of Public Health, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98104-2092, USA.

We described previously the isolation and characterization of two non-tumorigenic
revertants from the HeLa cervical carcinoma cell line, and demonstrated that loss
of the transformed phenotype in these cells was the result of dominant somatic
mutations. The goal of the present study was to use cDNA microarrays to identify 
candidate tumor suppressors among the set of genes whose increased expression
correlated with loss of tumorigenicity in both revertants. Among the genes with
significantly increased expression levels in both HA and HF revertants we
identified Insulin Growth Factor Binding Protein-3 (IGFBP-3) and the Dickkopf-1
(DKK-1) genes. Both of these genes encode secreted proteins implicated in the
modulation cell growth and differentiation, and IGFBP-3 was shown previously to
have tumor suppressing activity. To test the hypothesis that increased expression
of IGFBP-3 or the DKK-1 genes could have contributed to the suppression of
tumorigenicity in the revertants, we expressed IGFBP-3 or DKK-1 in HeLa cells,
and assessed their effects on anchorage dependent and independent growth, and
tumor formation in athymic nude mice. Ectopic expression of IGFBP-3 or DKK-1
resulted in significantly decreased growth in soft agar. HeLa cells expressing
ectopic IGFBP-3 or DKK-1 showed statistically significant differences in the
kinetics of tumor formation. In any tumors that arose in animals injected with
the IGFBP-3 expressing cells, there was a complete loss of IGFBP-3 activity, as
measured by binding to IGF-1 and IGF-2 proteins. All tumors that arose after
injection of cells expressing DKK-1, invariably showed almost a complete loss of 
ectopic DKK-1 expression. The observations that loss of DKK-1 expression or
IGFBP-3 activity was required for tumorigenicity suggested that both proteins
encode putative tumor suppressor genes. We also show that while DKK-1 expression 
does not affect cell growth in vitro, the protein does sensitize cells to
apoptosis. We also demonstrated that effect of DKK-1 was not due to inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF4-regulated transcription. Taken together, our results indicate
that somatic cell genetics combining with gene expression profiling may be a
useful approach for the identification of functional suppressors of malignant
cell growth.

PMID: 14555616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Langenbecks Arch Chir Suppl Kongressbd. 1998;115(Suppl I):303-6.

[beta-catenin overexpression in metastasized colorectal carcinoma--an important
mechanism in progression of the disease?].

[Article in German]

Mann B(1), Gratchev A, Riede E, Schmidt-Wolf I, Trojanek B, Moyer P, Hanski C,
Buhr HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chirurgische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität
Berlin, 12200 Berlin. mann@ukbf.fu-berlin.de

The protein beta-catenin can not be degraded in CRC due to different reasons.
This leads to an increased formation of beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex, which has a
strong transcription factor activity. We investigated the mRNA expression of
beta-catenin and Tcf4 in N, T and M in 12 cell lines and in tissues samples of 14
patients. We found a significant increase of beta-catenin mRNA expression in the 
primary tumors and in the metastases. These data show for the first time that
apart from the known mechanisms the overexpression of beta-catenin mRNA can be an
additional factor contributing to the increase of beta-catenin amount in cells of
CRC. The resulting increased transcription of hitherto unknown target genes might
be involved in the progression and the metastatic process of CRC.

PMID: 14518265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 3;309(4):830-5.

APC 3 x 15 beta-catenin-binding domain potentiates beta-catenin association to
TBP and upregulates TCF-4 transcriptional activity.

Roura S(1), Martínez D, Piedra J, Miravet S, García de Herreros A, Duñach M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cel.lular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003, Barcelona, Spain. sroura@hsp.santpau.es

Beta-catenin plays a dual role as a regulatory component of adherens junctions
and as a transcriptional cofactor. The nuclear activity of this protein is
controlled by adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein. We have analyzed the
effect on beta-catenin-dependent transcription of a beta-catenin binding domain
present in APC, consisting in three 15-amino acid repeats (APC 3 x 15).
Association of this fragment prevents the interaction of beta-catenin with
E-cadherin but not with TCF-4. Transfection of this fragment to several cell
lines increases the transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin-TCF-4 complex
and promotes the translocation of beta-catenin to the nucleus. Moreover, previous
binding of APC 3 x 15 facilitates the association of beta-catenin to the TATA
box-associated protein. Therefore, APC 3 x 15 domain plays a positive role in the
control of transcriptional activity of beta-catenin-TCF-4 and can contribute to
explain the role of the truncated forms of APC in colon tumorigenesis.

PMID: 13679048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Cancer. 2003 Nov 1;107(2):229-37.

Overexpression of the beta-catenin binding domain of cadherin selectively kills
colorectal cancer cells.

Pierce M(1), Wang C, Stump M, Kamb A.

Author information: 
(1)Deltagen Proteomics, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

The beta-catenin pathway is involved in growth, differentiation and tumor
formation. Suppression of pathway activity by expressed inhibitors can cause
growth arrest or apoptosis in certain colon carcinoma lines. We compare the
effects of 2 pathway inhibitors, a VE-cadherin cytoplasmic domain fragment
(Cad5CD) and a truncated, dominant-negative Tcf4 (TcfDN), using a microplate
assay for cell death and microarray gene expression analysis. The cell-lethal
assay shows that Cad5CD, when expressed in HT29 human colon tumor cells and 3
non-colon lines, selectively kills the HT29 cells. Cad5CD overexpression inhibits
beta-catenin/Tcf4 transcriptional activity, as determined by results from
microarray experiments. Our results support the view that beta-catenin is an
attractive anti-cancer target, especially if the Cad5CD binding site or Cad5CD
itself can be exploited for drug development. In addition, therapeutically
relevant phenotypes such as drug selectivity may be difficult to predict from
gene expression analysis alone. Other more specialized phenotypic tests such as
cell-lethal assays may be required.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12949799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5602-13.

Functional localization and competition between the androgen receptor and T-cell 
factor for nuclear beta-catenin: a means for inhibition of the Tcf signaling
axis.

Mulholland DJ(1), Read JT, Rennie PS, Cox ME, Nelson CC.

Author information: 
(1)The Prostate Centre, Jack Bell Research, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3Z6.
djm@interchange.ubc.ca

Recent reports suggest that the beta-catenin-T-cell factor (Tcf) (BCT) signaling 
pathway is important in the progression of prostate cancer. Evidence suggests
that the androgen receptor (AR) can repress BCT-mediated transcription both in
prostate cancer and colon cancer cells (Chesire and Isaacs, 2002). In this study,
we validate such findings and show that repression of BCT signaling is
facilitated by competition between the AR and Tcf. Measurements of the Tcf
transcriptional reporter (TOPFLASH) indicated that AR+DHT-mediated repression can
inhibit BCT transcription in the presence of WT and exogenous activating
beta-catenin (Delta1-130 bp). Transient transfections in SW480 cells
(APC(mut/mut)) showed that this mode of repression is functionally independent of
APC-mediated beta-catenin ubiquitination. Using a recently developed red
flourescent protein (HcRed), we demonstrate novel observations about the nuclear 
distribution of Tcf. Furthermore, with the use of red (HcRed-AR and HcRed-Tcf)
and green fusion proteins (beta-catenin-EGFP), we provide morphological evidence 
of a reciprocal balance of nuclear beta-catenin-EGFP (BC-EGFP). By cotransfecting
in LNCaP prostate tumor cells and using quantitative imaging software, we
demonstrated a 62.0% colocalization of HcRed-AR and BC-EGFP in the presence of
DHT and 63.3% colocalization of HcRed-Tcf/BC-EGFP in the absence of DHT.
Costaining for activated RNA Pol II (phosphoserine 2) and HcRed-Tcf suggested
that Tcf foci contain transcriptional 'hotspots' validating that these sites have
the capacity for transcriptional activity. Given this apparent androgen-dependent
competition for nuclear BC-EGFP, we chose to assess our hypothesis by in vivo and
in vitro binding assays. SW480 cells transiently transfected with an AR
expression construct, treated with DHT and immunoprecipitated for Tcf showed less
associated beta-catenin when compared to Tcf precipitates from untreated cells.
Furthermore, by treating cells with DHT+Casodex, we were able to abrogate the
androgen-sensitive AR/beta-catenin interaction, in addition to relieving
transcriptional repression of the TOPFLASH reporter. In vitro binding assays,
with increasing amounts of AR(S35), resulted in decreased Tcf(S35) association
with immunoprecipitated recombinant beta-catenin-HIS. These data suggest that in 
steady-state conditions, AR has the ability to compete out Tcf binding for
beta-catenin. Finally, using SW480 cells, we show that AR-mediated repression of 
the BCT pathway has implications for cell cycle progression and in vitro growth. 
Using FACs analysis, we observed a 26.1% increase in accumulation of cells in the
G1 phase of the cell cycle, while in vitro growth assays showed a 35% reduction
in viable cells transfected with AR+DHT treatment. Together, our data strongly
suggest that a reciprocal balance of nuclear beta-catenin facilitates AR-mediated
repression of BCT-driven transcription and cell growth.

PMID: 12944908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 15;63(16):4792-5.

BP75, bromodomain-containing M(r) 75,000 protein, binds dishevelled-1 and
enhances Wnt signaling by inactivating glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta.

Kim S(1), Lee J, Park J, Chung J.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Cell Growth Regulation and
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Yusong, Taejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

To identify novel regulators of Wnt signaling, we performed yeast two-hybrid
analyses with Dvl-1 and identified BP75 as a candidate. Here, we demonstrated
that BP75 directly interacts with Dvl-1 in mammalian cells and enhances
TCF-dependent gene expression induced by Dvl-1. In support of these results, BP75
in cooperation with Dvl-1 was found to facilitate dephosphorylation at Tyr216 of 
glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and consequently inhibit its kinase activity.
Furthermore, the nuclear translocation and formation of vesicular structures of
beta-catenin were induced by BP75 and Dvl-1 in a synergistic manner.
Collectively, these results provided us a novel mechanism in Wnt signaling where 
BP75 plays important regulatory roles between glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and 
Dvl.

PMID: 12941796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Jul 25;83(14):1270-3.

[Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway in renal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong K(1), Lin GT, Zhang ZW, Chang ZJ, Na YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urology, Department of Urology, First Hospital of Peking
University. Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the transduction of Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway,
especially the function of T cell factor 4 (TCF(4)), in renal carcinoma.
METHODS: A renal carcinoma yeast two hybrid library and a human TCF(4) yeast two 
hybrid expression vector were constructed. Proteins interacting with the bait
protein human TCF(4) were obtained from the renal carcinoma yeast two hybrid
library by reverse yeast two hybrid system.
RESULTS: 67 positive clones interacting with the bait protein TCF(4) were
obtained by reverse yeast two hybrid system, including 18 beta-catenin clones, 24
TCF(4) clones and 25 unknown clones.
CONCLUSION: Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway exists in renal carcinoma. TCF(4), its
important signal factor, interacts with beta-catenin and forms homodimer or
homocopolymer by itself, thus displaying its constitutive transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 12930646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;17(11):2152-61. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

TCF and Groucho-related genes influence pituitary growth and development.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Potok MA, Cha KB, Gridley T, Stifani S, Meeldijk J, Clevers H, 
Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, 4301
MSRBIII, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

Mutations in the prophet of PIT1 gene (PROP1) are the most common cause of
multiple pituitary hormone deficiency in humans; however, the mechanism of PROP1 
action is not well understood. We report that Prop1 is essential for dorsally
restricted expression of a Groucho-related gene, transducin-like enhancer of
split 3 (Tle3), which encodes a transcriptional corepressor. Deficiency of a
related gene, amino terminal enhancer of split (Aes), causes pituitary anomalies 
and growth insufficiency. TLE3 and AES have been shown to interact with TCF/LEF
(transcripiton factors of the T cell-specific and lymphoid enhancer specific
group) family members in cell culture systems. In the absence of TCF4 (Tcf7L2),
Prop1 levels are elevated, pituitary hyperplasia ensues and palate closure is
abnormal. Thus, we demonstrate that Tcf4 and Aes influence pituitary growth and
development, and place Tcf4 and Tle3 in the genetic hierarchy with Prop1.

PMID: 12907761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5366-75.

T-cell factor 4N (TCF-4N), a novel isoform of mouse TCF-4, synergizes with
beta-catenin to coactivate C/EBPalpha and steroidogenic factor 1 transcription
factors.

Kennell JA(1), O'Leary EE, Gummow BM, Hammer GD, MacDougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 E. Catherine Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

We have cloned T-cell factor 4N (TCF-4N), an alternative isoform of TCF-4, from
developing pituitary and 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. This protein contains the
N-terminal interaction domain for beta-catenin but lacks the DNA binding domain. 
While TCF-4N inhibited coactivation by beta-catenin of a TCF/lymphoid-enhancing
factor (LEF)-dependent promoter, TCF-4N potentiated coactivation by beta-catenin 
of several non-TCF/LEF-dependent promoters. For example, TCF-4N synergized with
beta-catenin to activate the alpha-inhibin promoter through functional and
physical interactions with the orphan nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1
(SF-1). In addition, TCF-4N and beta-catenin synergized with the adipogenic
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) to induce 
leptin promoter activity. The mechanism by which beta-catenin and TCF-4N
coactivated C/EBPalpha appeared to involve p300, based upon synergy between these
important transcriptional regulators. Consistent with TCF-4N's redirecting the
actions of beta-catenin in cells, ectopic expression of TCF-4N in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes partially relieved the block of adipogenesis caused by
beta-catenin. Thus, we propose that TCF-4N inhibits coactivation by beta-catenin 
of TCF/LEF transcription factors and potentiates the coactivation by beta-catenin
of other transcription factors, such as SF-1 and C/EBPalpha.

PMCID: PMC165725
PMID: 12861022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 17;547(1-3):1-6.

Lef/Tcf-dependent Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during Xenopus axis specification.

Geng X(1), Xiao L, Lin GF, Hu R, Wang JH, Rupp RA, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yue-yang Road 320, 200031, Shanghai, PR
China

Though the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is known to play key roles during
Xenopus axis specification, whether it signals exclusively through Lef/Tcf
transcription factors in this process remains unclear. To investigate this issue,
we generated transgenic frog embryos expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)
driven by a Lef/Tcf-dependent and Wnt/beta-catenin-responsive promoter. This
promoter is highly sensitive and even detects maternal beta-catenin activity
prior to the large-scale transcription of zygotic genes. Unexpectedly, GFP
expression was observed only in some, but not all, known
Wnt/beta-catenin-positive territories in Xenopus early development. Furthermore, 
ubiquitous expression of dominant Lef-1 protein variants from transgenes revealed
that zygotic Lef/Tcf activity is required for the ventroposterior development of 
Xenopus embryos. In summary, our results suggest that endogenous Wnt/beta-catenin
activity does not result in obligatory Lef/Tcf-dependent gene activation, and
that the ventroposteriorizing activity of zygotic Wnt-8 signaling is mediated by 
Lef/Tcf proteins.

PMID: 12860376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30828-34. Epub 2003 Jun 10.

A direct beta-catenin-independent interaction between androgen receptor and T
cell factor 4.

Amir AL(1), Barua M, McKnight NC, Cheng S, Yuan X, Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Hematology-Oncology Division, the Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

T cell factor (Tcf) proteins bind beta-catenin and are downstream effectors of
Wnt/beta-catenin signals. A recently demonstrated interaction between
beta-catenin and the androgen receptor (AR) ligand binding domain has suggested
that AR may be a Tcf-independent Wnt/beta-catenin effector. This study
demonstrates that there is a direct interaction between the AR DNA binding domain
(DBD) and Tcf4. Tcf4 bound specifically to a glutathione S-transferase-ARDBD
fusion protein and could be coimmunoprecipitated with beta-catenin and
transfected AR or endogenous AR in prostate cancer cells. Transfected Tcf4
repressed the transcriptional activity of full-length AR and a VP16-ARDBD fusion 
protein, and this repression was only partially reversed by transfected
beta-catenin. AR activation by cyproterone acetate, a partial agonist that did
not support beta-catenin binding to the AR, was also repressed by Tcf4, further
indicating that repression was not due to beta-catenin sequestration. Tcf4 could 
recruit beta-catenin to the AR DBD in vitro and to the cyproterone
acetate-liganded AR in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells showed that endogenous AR was bound to a Tcf4-responsive
element in the c-myc promoter. These findings indicate that AR and Tcf4 can
interact directly and that this interaction may occur on the promoters or
enhancers of particular genes. The direct AR-Tcf4 interaction, in conjunction AR-
and Tcf4-beta-catenin binding, provides a mechanism for cooperative and selective
gene regulation by AR and the Wnt/beta-catenin-Tcf pathway that may contribute to
normal and neoplastic prostate growth.

PMID: 12799378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2121-32.

The human T-cell factor-4 gene splicing isoforms, Wnt signal pathway, and
apoptosis in renal cell carcinoma.

Shiina H(1), Igawa M, Breault J, Ribeiro-Filho L, Pookot D, Urakami S, Terashima 
M, Deguchi M, Yamanaka M, Shirai M, Kaneuchi M, Kane CJ, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Biochemistry, Shimane Medical University, Izumo
693-0085, Japan.

beta-Catenin and transcriptional factor TCF-4 (human T-cell factor-4) genes
comprise the Wnt signal. The Wnt signal pathway plays an important role in
malignant transformation. We hypothesize that the beta-catenin and TCF-4 gene and
Wnt signal are important in the progression of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). To
test this hypothesis, we investigated TCF-4 splicing isoforms, beta-catenin, and 
Wnt signal pathway (cyclin D1, c-myc, c-jun, and MMP7) in three RCC cell lines
(A498, Caki-1, and Caki-2), 38 primary RCCs, and 29 normal kidney samples. We
also analyzed the relationship between TCF-4 gene splicing isoforms,
proliferation (proliferating cell nuclear antigen labeling index), and apoptosis 
[antiapoptotic factors (Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L)), proapoptotic factors (Bak and Bax), 
and caspase-3] in RCC samples. In 38 RCC samples, four splicing isoforms of the
TCF-4 gene were present in the region between exon 12 and exon 17. Thirty (79%)
of 38 RCCs and all (100%) of the normal kidney samples showed mixed isoforms with
both long and short reading frames in the COOH-terminal region, whereas the
remaining 8 RCC samples showed only the long-form reading frame. Two
COOH-terminal-binding protein sites were present only in the long-form reading
frame. The eight RCCs that demonstrated only the long reading frame isoform
showed early disease progression and poor prognosis. In these 8 RCC samples,
down-regulation of cyclin D1, c-myc, c-jun, and MMP7 expression was observed at
the mRNA level. In addition, a marked reduction of caspase-3 expression was also 
found at both the mRNA and the protein level. However, the beta-catenin gene was 
not overexpressed at the mRNA level and protein level, and mutation and deletion 
were not observed in exon 3. In these three renal cell lines, there was no
significant difference in TCF-4 mRNA expression before and after
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, and there appeared to be no splicing isoforms
in the region between exon 1 and exon 11. These findings suggest that alteration 
in beta-catenin is an infrequent event in RCC. In samples in which beta-catenin
was not overexpressed, the target genes of Wnt signal were regulated through
TCF-4 splicing isoforms. The imbalance between TCF-4 gene splicing isoforms with 
long and short reading frames is associated with RCC progression through the
inhibition of the apoptotic pathway. We demonstrate for the first time that TCF-4
gene splicing isoforms and the Wnt signal pathway can induce progression of RCC
by the inhibition of apoptosis and not by the induction of cell proliferation.

PMID: 12796377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2003 May 15;63(10):2658-64.

Transactivation of vimentin by beta-catenin in human breast cancer cells.

Gilles C(1), Polette M, Mestdagt M, Nawrocki-Raby B, Ruggeri P, Birembaut P,
Foidart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental Biology, University of Liège, CHU
Sart-Tilman, B23, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. cgilles@ulg.ac.be

The cytoplasmic and nuclear redistribution of beta-catenin and the de novo
expression of vimentin are frequently involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition associated with increased invasive/migratory properties of epithelial 
cells. Because beta-catenin can act as a coactivator of transcription through its
binding to the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor 1 transcription
factor family, we have explored the possibility that beta-catenin/TCF could
directly transactivate vimentin. We first compared vimentin expression in
relation with the localization of beta-catenin in eight breast cancer cell lines 
displaying various degrees of invasiveness and in a model of cell migration using
human mammary MCF10A cells. We could thus show a cytoplasmic and/or nuclear
distribution of beta-catenin in invasive/migratory cells expressing vimentin, but
not in noninvasive/stationary vimentin-negative cell lines. In addition, the
human vimentin promoter was found to be up-regulated by beta-catenin and TCF-4
cotransfection. Varying with the cellular background, a diminution of this
up-regulation was observed when the putative beta-catenin/TCF binding site of the
vimentin promoter was mutated. Our results therefore demonstrate that the
vimentin promoter is a target of the beta-catenin/TCF pathway and strongly
suggest an implication of this regulation in epithelial cell migration/invasion.

PMID: 12750294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2047-59.

Sumoylation is involved in beta-catenin-dependent activation of Tcf-4.

Yamamoto H(1), Ihara M, Matsuura Y, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Sumoylation is involved in mediating protein-protein interactions, subcellular
compartmentalization and protein stability. Our analysis of various Wnt signaling
molecules revealed that one of them, Tcf-4, is sumoylated at the endogenous
level. At least one sumoylation site, Lys297, of Tcf-4 was identified. The
sumoylation of Tcf-4 was enhanced by PIASy, a SUMO E3 enzyme, and inhibited by
Axam, a desumoylation enzyme. Although PIASy did not affect the interaction of
Tcf-4 with beta-catenin or DNA, Tcf-4, SUMO-1 and PIASy were co-localized in the 
nucleus and present in a complex in the PML body. PIASy enhanced
beta-catenin-dependent transcriptional activity of Tcf-4, whereas Axam inhibited 
it. Reduction of the protein level of Axam by RNA interference led to an increase
in sumoylation of Tcf-4 and activation of Tcf-4. Furthermore, beta-catenin and
PIASy activated Tcf-4(K297R), in which Lys297 was changed to arginine, less than 
wild-type Tcf-4. These results suggest that sumoylation of Tcf-4 is involved in
beta-catenin-dependent and Tcf-4-mediated gene expression in the Wnt signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC156076
PMID: 12727872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26511-6. Epub 2003 Apr 30.

Synergistic cooperation between the beta-catenin signaling pathway and
steroidogenic factor 1 in the activation of the Mullerian inhibiting substance
type II receptor.

Hossain A(1), Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030.

Mullerian inhibiting substance type II receptor (MISRII) is a member of the
transforming growth factor-beta superfamily. Mutations in mullerian inhibiting
substance (MIS) or MISRII cause male sexual abnormalities, persistent mullerian
duct syndrome, and pseudohermaphroditism. The spatial and temporal regulation of 
MIS and MISRII is important for its biological action. Male Wnt7a mutant mice do 
not undergo regression of mullerian ducts. Here we showed that the canonical Wnt 
signaling pathway regulated MISRII. The promoter MISRII was activated by
beta-catenin expression, and this activation was dependent on TCF4-binding sites.
The nuclear receptor superfamily member steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1)
synergistically activated the MISRII promoter with beta-catenin. APC, a negative 
regulator of Wnt signaling, decreased SF1-mediated activation of the MISRII
promoter in the colon carcinoma cell line SW480. We also showed a direct physical
interaction between beta-catenin and SF1 by co-immunoprecipitation. Thus, our
findings suggest that MISRII is a developmental target of Wnt7a signaling for
mullerian duct regression during sexual differentiation.

PMID: 12724325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2369-80.

HMG box transcription factor TCF-4's interaction with CtBP1 controls the
expression of the Wnt target Axin2/Conductin in human embryonic kidney cells.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Members of the Tcf/Lef family of the HMG box transcription factors are nuclear
effectors of the Wnt signal transduction pathway. Upon Wnt signaling, TCF/LEF
proteins interact with beta-catenin and activate transcription of target genes,
while, in the absence of the Wnt signal, TCFs function as transcriptional
repressors. All vertebrate Tcf/Lef transcription factors associate with
TLE/Groucho-related co-repressors, and here we provide evidence for an
interaction between the C-terminus of the TCF-4 HMG box protein and the
C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) transcriptional co-repressor. Using
Wnt-1-stimulated human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that CtBP1 represses
the transcriptional activity of a Tcf/beta-catenin-dependent synthetic promoter
and, furthermore, decreases the expression of the endogenous Wnt target,
Axin2/Conductin. The CtBP1-mediated repression was alleviated by trichostatin A
treatment, indicating that the CtBP inhibitory mechanism is dependent on the
activity of histone deacetylases.

PMCID: PMC154232
PMID: 12711682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2003 Jun;5(2):145-54.

Anticipation and CAG*CTG repeat expansion in schizophrenia and bipolar affective 
disorder.

Fortune MT(1), Kennedy JL, Vincent JB.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Clarke
Division, 250 College Street, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada.

The genetic contribution to the etiologies of schizophrenia and bipolar affective
disorder (BPAD) has been considered for many decades, with twin, family, and
adoption studies indicating consistently that the familial clustering of affected
individuals is accounted for mainly by genetic factors. Despite the strong
evidence for a genetic component, very little is understood about the underlying 
genetic and molecular mechanisms for schizophrenia and BPAD. In the early 1990s, 
after the discovery of "dynamic mutation" or "unstable DNA" as a molecular basis 
for the genetic anticipation observed in Huntington's disease, myotonic
dystrophy, and many others, and the recently rediscovered, albeit still
controversial, evidence for genetic anticipation in major psychoses, the genetic 
epidemiology of schizophrenia and BPAD was re-evaluated to demonstrate strong
endorsement for the unstable DNA model. Many of the non-Mendelian genetic
features of schizophrenia and BPAD could be explained by the behaviour of
unstable DNA, and several molecular genetic approaches became available for
testing the unstable DNA hypothesis. However, despite promising findings in the
mid-1990s, no trinucleotide repeat expansion has yet been identified as a cause
of idiopathic schizophrenia or BPAD.

PMID: 12685994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):21092-8. Epub 2003 Mar 25.

Hot spots in Tcf4 for the interaction with beta-catenin.

Fasolini M(1), Wu X, Flocco M, Trosset JY, Oppermann U, Knapp S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacia Corporation Discovery Research Oncology, Department of Chemistry,
Viale Pasteur 10, 20014 Nerviano, Italy.

The interaction of beta-catenin with T-cell factor (Tcf) 4 plays a central role
in the Wnt signaling pathway and has been discussed as a possible site of
intervention for the development of anti-cancer drugs. In this study, we
performed Ala-scanning mutagenesis of all Tcf4 residues in the Tcf-beta-catenin
interface and studied the binding energetics of these mutants using isothermal
titration calorimetry. Binding of Tcf4 was found to be highly cooperative. Single
site mutations of most Tcf4 residues resulted in a significant reduction in
binding enthalpies but in similar binding constants as compared with wild type
Tcf4. Interestingly, this was also true for residues that are disordered in the
reported crystal structures. The mutation D16A caused the largest reduction in
binding constant (50-fold) accompanied by a large unfavorable enthalpy change
(DeltaDeltaHobs) of +8 kcal/mol at 25 degrees C. In contrast, the mutation of the
Tcf residues Glu24 and Glu28, which have been proposed as an interaction hot spot
due to their location in a field of strong positive electrostatic potential on
the beta-catenin surface (charge button), resulted only in a significant
reduction of binding enthalpies, which were largely compensated for by
unfavorable entropic contributions to the binding. Other mutations that
significantly reduced Tcf binding constants were D11A and alanine mutations of
the hydrophobic residues Leu41, Val44, and Leu48. The measured thermodynamic data
are discussed with the available structural information of Tcf-beta-catenin
crystal structures and allow us to propose possible sites for development of Tcf 
antagonists.

PMID: 12657632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Gen Virol. 2003 Apr;84(Pt 4):959-64.

The BZLF1 promoter of Epstein-Barr virus is controlled by E box-/HI-motif-binding
factors during virus latency.

Thomas C(1), Dankesreiter A, Wolf H, Schwarzmann F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Landshuter Strae 22, D-93047 Regensburg, Germany.

The BZLF1 open reading frame of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encodes an important
transactivator of replication. During latency, transcription of this gene is
switched off. HI motifs have been shown to cause negative regulation of the
promoter. Using yeast one-hybrid assays, we isolated the E box-binding protein,
E2-2, interacting with these motifs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that E2-2 binds to HI alpha, HI beta and HI gamma, which contain E
box consensus binding sites. Deletion of the HI-associated E boxes and
overexpression of E2-2 in transfection assays revealed that these elements act as
repressors in lymphoid cells. In contrast, in epithelial cells they contribute to
the increased responsiveness of the promoter to transactivation by the BZLF1
protein. The data presented are in accord with an alternative and exclusive
binding of different cell type- and differentiation-specific factors, such as
E2-2, to the HI-associated E boxes in lymphoid and epithelial cells. This implies
a role in cell type-specific virus replication.

PMID: 12655097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):20259-67. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

The cohesin SMC3 is a target the for beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation pathway.

Ghiselli G(1), Coffee N, Munnery CE, Koratkar R, Siracusa LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA. giancarlo.ghiselli@mail.tju.edu

The structural maintenance of chromosome protein SMC3 is a component of the
cohesin complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion and segregation in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is also present extracellularly in the form of a
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan known as bamacan. We have found previously that 
SMC3 expression is elevated in a large fraction of human colon carcinomas. The
additional finding that the protein is significantly increased in the intestinal 
polyps of ApcMin/+ mice has led us to hypothesize that SMC3 expression is linked 
to activation of the APC/beta-catenin/TCF4 pathway. The immunohistochemical
analysis of colon adenocarcinomas from clinical specimens revealed that
beta-catenin and SMC3 antigens co-localize with maximal stain intensity within
the transformed areas. Cloning and sequencing of 1578 bp of the human SMC3
promoter unveiled the presence of seven putative consensus sequences for
beta-catenin/TCF4 binding, two of which are conserved in the mouse Smc3 promoter.
Transient transfection experiments in HCT116 and SW480 human colon carcinoma
cells using deletion and mutated promoter constructs in luciferase reporter
vectors confirmed that the putative sites, the first located at -48 bp and the
second located at -701 bp, are susceptible to beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation. 
Co-transfection with a beta-catenin expression vector enhanced the promoter
activity whereas E-cadherin had the opposite effect. Binding of beta-catenin/TCF4
complexes from SW480 nuclear extracts to these sequences was confirmed by
electrophoretic shift and supershift mobility assays. Altogether these results
are consistent with the idea that the beta-catenin/TCF4 transactivation pathway
contributes to SMC3 overexpression in intestinal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12651860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Nov-Dec;1(6):640-5.

Developmental expression of Wnt signaling factors in mouse brain.

Coyle-Rink J(1), Del Valle L, Sweet T, Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway has been implicated in a variety of biological events
inducing neurogenesis. In this study, we aim to investigate the expression
pattern of various components of the Wnt pathway including b-catenin and its
partners LEF-1/TCF-4, GSK-3beta and their nuclear target genes such as c-myc and 
cyclin D1 during mouse brain development. We performed a series of Western blot
and immunohistochemistry of brain cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum which
revealed differential accumulation of these proteins in different types of brain 
cells including neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes at different
developmental stages. Intense cytoplasmic immunolabeling of beta-catenin in 5 day
old neurons throughout the cortex and brainstem significantly decreased as the
brain developed, whereas the level of GSK-3beta, the protein that phosphorylates 
beta-catenin and causes its destabilization, increased during brain maturation.
On the other hand, high level accumulation of LEF-1 and TCF-4 in neurons and
astrocytes at the early stage of brain development diminished at the later
stages. Interestingly, while the majority of LEF-1 and TCF-4 immunoreactivity was
detected in the cytoplasm of neurons, it was evident that both proteins
accumulated in the nuclei of astrocytes. Examination of cyclin D1, a protein that
controls the cell cycle and proliferation, exhibited an intense staining in the
nuclei of astrocytes throughout brain parenchyma during development.
Interestingly, cyclin D was found in the cytoplasm of neurons from cortex,
brainstem, and cerebellum during brain development. These data provide compelling
evidence for the differential expression of the Wnt signaling pathway during
brain development, and suggest that these signaling pathways may function
differently in various brain regions and cell types.

PMID: 12642687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2003 Mar;29(2):107-17.

APC, beta-Catenin and hTCF-4; an unholy trinity in the genesis of colorectal
cancer.

Bright-Thomas RM(1), Hargest R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Royal Free and University College Medical School,
University College London. Rachel@bright-thomas.com

Mutations in APC have been identified in up to 80% of 'classic' sporadic
colorectal cancers. Although the APC gene was first sequenced over a decade ago, 
new functions are still being described and its importance in the genesis of
colorectal cancer continues to increase. The current focus of attention is on the
APC/beta-Catenin/TCF signal transduction pathway as the main effector mechanism, 
and recent work has also implicated this pathway in the aetiology of the minority
of CRCs that develop through mismatch repair. At the same time, new evidence on
the interactions of APC with the cytoskeleton and the demonstration of a nuclear 
export function in the protein have shown that it has multiple additional roles
in colorectal carcinogenesis. Thus this is an area that benefits from further
review of the ever expanding literature.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12633551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003 Mar;18(3):280-7.

Wnt signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of mutation and expression of
beta-catenin, T-cell factor-4 and glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta genes.

Cui J(1), Zhou X, Liu Y, Tang Z, Romeih M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Medical Center of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
cuij@msu.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common killer cancer in 
the world. Recently, abnormal activation of the Wnt pathway has been found to be 
involved in the carcinogenesis of several human cancers including HCC. The goal
of the present study was to investigate the mechanism of inappropriate activation
of the Wnt pathway in hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: We analyzed the alterations of three key components of the Wnt pathway: 
beta-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta and T-cell factor (Tcf)-4 in
34 HCC and paracancerous normal liver by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), direct sequencing,
and quantitative real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: We found that 61.8% (21/34) of all HCC examined showed an abnormal
beta-catenin protein accumulation in the cytoplasm or nuclei. The RT-PCR-SSCP and
direct sequencing showed that beta-catenin exon 3 mutations existed in 44.1%
(15/34) of the HCC. No mutations of GSK-3beta or Tcf-4 were detected in HCC.
Moreover, messenger RNA of beta-catenin and Tcf-4, but not GSK-3beta, was found
to be overexpressed in HCC. On analyzing the relationship between alterations of 
beta-catenin or Tcf-4 and C-myc or Cyclin D1 expression, we found that mutations 
of beta-catenin, as well as overexpression of beta-catenin or the Tcf-4 gene were
independently correlated with C-myc gene overexpression in HCC.
CONCLUSION: Our present findings strongly suggest that mutations of beta-catenin,
as well as overexpression of beta-catenin and the Tcf-4 gene, independently
activate the Wnt pathway in HCC, with the target gene most likely to be C-myc.

PMID: 12603528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 15;63(4):801-6.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 makes cells resistant to transforming growth factor
beta-induced repression of c-myc.

Sasaki T(1), Suzuki H, Yagi K, Furuhashi M, Yao R, Susa S, Noda T, Arai Y,
Miyazono K, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

The activation of lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated
transcription by sustained expression of beta-catenin and the loss of
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling are essential steps in
carcinogenesis, particularly for cancers of the colon, breast, and liver. The
oncogene c-myc is a common target of both of these signaling pathways and a key
regulator of cell cycle progression. Here we have identified a novel
LEF/TCF-responsive element in the promoter of the human c-myc gene. beta-Catenin 
activated the transcriptional activity of the c-myc promoter by binding to this
element in various cell lines. When TCF-4 was bound to this element, TGF-beta
dissociated beta-catenin and repressed the transcriptional activity of the c-myc 
promoter. However, TGF-beta could not dissociate beta-catenin and could not
repress c-myc transcription when LEF-1 was bound to the element instead of TCF-4.
These findings suggest that enhanced expression of LEF-1, which occurs frequently
in colon cancer, may make cells refractory to the down-regulation of c-myc and
the subsequent growth arrest induced by TGF-beta.

PMID: 12591729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):16169-75. Epub 2003 Feb 11.

A new beta-catenin-dependent activation domain in T cell factor.

Atcha FA(1), Munguia JE, Li TW, Hovanes K, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department, School of Medicine, University
of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4025, USA.

Transcription of the lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF1) gene is aberrantly
activated in sporadic colon cancer, whereas this gene is not expressed in the
normal adult colon. We have shown previously that promoter 1 of the LEF1 gene is 
activated by T cell factor (TCF)-beta-catenin complexes in transient transfection
assays, suggesting that LEF1 is a target of the Wnt pathway in colon cancer. To
further explore the link between LEF1 expression and the Wnt pathway, we studied 
two response elements in the promoter. Surprisingly we found that the LEF1
promoter is selectively activated by specific isoforms of the LEF/TCF
transcription factor family that contain an alternative C-terminal "E" tail.
These isoforms, TCF-1E and TCF-4E, activate the promoter in a
beta-catenin-dependent manner. We show that a complete E-tail domain is necessary
for full activity and delimits residues within two highly conserved peptide
motifs within the tail that are required (KKCRARFG; WCXXCRRKKKC). These peptide
motifs are not only conserved among the TCF family members but are also found in 
two newly identified DNA-binding proteins named papillomavirus binding factor and
GLUT4 enhancer factor. This study thus identifies a new and unique set of motifs 
used by the Wnt pathway for target gene regulation.

PMID: 12582159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 1;63(3):728-34.

Regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 expression by the Wnt and ras pathways.

Araki Y(1), Okamura S, Hussain SP, Nagashima M, He P, Shiseki M, Miura K, Harris 
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and K-ras occur in the
majority of human colorectal cancers. Loss of functional APC protein activates
the Wnt signal transduction pathway, allowing the nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin, which then binds to T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4), causing increased
transcriptional activation of downstream target genes. We investigated the
hypothesis that the activation of the WNT pathway regulates cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2). COX-2 was down-regulated after the induction of full-length APC in the
HT29-APC cell line. We identified a Tcf-4-binding element (TBE) in the COX-2
promoter that specifically bound to Tcf-4 in an electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. COX-2 promoter luciferase activity is down-regulated by APC in a promoter 
reporter construct containing the, TBE but not with mutant TBE. Mutant
beta-catenin expression up-regulated the COX-2 promoter activity and the
endogenous COX-2 mRNA expression in HuH7, hepatocellular carcinoma cell line,
which is partially abrogated by cotransfection with a dominant-negative Tcf-4
expression vector. Although beta-catenin alone did not increase COX-2 protein to 
detectable levels in HuH7 cells, coexpression of both mutant beta-catenin and
mutant K-ras increased COX-2 protein expression, which is consistent with the
previous reports that K-ras can stabilize COX-2 mRNA. Taken together, our data
support the hypothesis that COX-2 is down-regulated by APC and up-regulated by
nuclear beta-catenin accumulation, and additionally implicate the Wnt signal
transduction pathway in colon and liver carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12566320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gastroenterology. 2003 Feb;124(2):392-400.

Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin induces c-Myc expression and cellular
proliferation.

Wu S(1), Morin PJ, Maouyo D, Sears CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis that secrete a
zinc-dependent metalloprotease toxin termed the B. fragilis toxin (BFT) have been
associated with acute diarrheal disease. BFT rapidly cleaves the extracellular
domain of E-cadherin, leading to the complete degradation of the E-cadherin
protein. E-cadherin is the primary intercellular adhesion protein of the zonula
adherens, and its cytoplasmic domain associates with the nuclear signaling
protein beta-catenin. The goal of this study was to examine if BFT triggers
beta-catenin nuclear signaling in intestinal epithelial cells.
METHODS: Cell biologic and biochemical techniques were combined to address
beta-catenin nuclear signaling stimulated by BFT.
RESULTS: Loss of membrane-associated E-cadherin after BFT treatment of human
colonic epithelial cells (HT29/C1 clone) triggers beta-catenin nuclear
localization within 3 hours. Subsequently, c-myc transcription and translation
are induced and persistent cellular proliferation ensues, mediated in part by
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-dependent transcriptional activation. Cellular
proliferation is stimulated by as little as 5 x 10(-10) mol/L BFT.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, BFT is the first bacterial toxin reported to
activate T-cell factor-dependent beta-catenin nuclear signaling in intestinal
epithelial cells. These results suggest that genetic evolution of this common
colonic commensal has rendered an organism with the potential to contribute to
oncogenic transformation in the colon.

PMID: 12557145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 18;278(16):14066-73. Epub 2003 Jan 28.

Casein kinase I epsilon enhances the binding of Dvl-1 to Frat-1 and is essential 
for Wnt-3a-induced accumulation of beta-catenin.

Hino S(1), Michiue T, Asashima M, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Japan.

We demonstrate that Dvl-1, casein kinase I epsilon (CKI epsilon), and Frat-1
activate the Wnt signaling pathway cooperatively. The amino acid region 228-250
of Dvl-1 was necessary for its binding to Frat-1, and the interaction of Dvl-1
with Frat-1 was enhanced by CKI epsilon. Coexpression of Dvl-1 and Frat-1 caused 
accumulation of beta-catenin synergistically in L cells. Both proteins also
activated the transcriptional activity of T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) synergistically
in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, but coexpression of Dvl-1-(Delta 228-250),
which lacks the amino acid region 228-250 from Dvl-1, and Frat-1 did not. Dvl-1, 
but not Dvl-1-(Delta 228-250), acted synergistically with CKI epsilon to activate
Tcf-4. Depletion of CKI epsilon by double-stranded RNA interference in HeLa S3
cells led to the inhibition of Wnt-3a-induced phosphorylation of Dvl and the
binding of Dvl-1 to Frat-1. Furthermore, depletion of CKI epsilon reduced the
Wnt-3a-induced accumulation of beta-catenin, although it did not affect the basal
level of beta-catenin. These results indicate that CKI epsilon-dependent
phosphorylation of Dvl enhances the formation of a complex of Dvl-1 with Frat-1
and that this complex leads to the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 12556519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1379-89.

Regulation of lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T-cell factor by mitogen-activated
protein kinase-related Nemo-like kinase-dependent phosphorylation in
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Ishitani T(1), Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway regulates many developmental processes by 
modulating gene expression. Wnt signaling induces the stabilization of cytosolic 
beta-catenin, which then associates with lymphoid enhancer factor and T-cell
factor (LEF-1/TCF) to form a transcription complex that activates Wnt target
genes. Previously, we have shown that a specific mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase pathway involving the MAP kinase kinase kinase TAK1 and MAP kinase-related
Nemo-like kinase (NLK) suppresses Wnt signaling. In this study, we investigated
the relationships among NLK, beta-catenin, and LEF-1/TCF. We found that NLK
interacts directly with LEF-1/TCF and indirectly with beta-catenin via LEF-1/TCF 
to form a complex. NLK phosphorylates LEF-1/TCF on two serine/threonine residues 
located in its central region. Mutation of both residues to alanine enhanced
LEF-1 transcriptional activity and rendered it resistant to inhibition by NLK.
Phosphorylation of TCF-4 by NLK inhibited DNA binding by the beta-catenin-TCF-4
complex. However, this inhibition was abrogated when a mutant form of TCF-4 was
used in which both threonines were replaced with valines. These results suggest
that NLK phosphorylation on these sites contributes to the down-regulation of
LEF-1/TCF transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC141159
PMID: 12556497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leuk Res. 2003 Apr;27(4):359-61.

Frameshift mutations in caspase-5 and other target genes in leukemia and lymphoma
cell lines having microsatellite instability.

Takeuchi S(1), Takeuchi N, Fermin AC, Taguchi H, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Okohcho, Nankoku
783-8505, Japan. takeuti@kochi-ms.ac.jp

Microsatellite instability (MSI) was examined in 49 lymphoid leukemia/lymphoma
cell lines. Frameshift mutations within eight MSI target genes were analyzed in
the 12 cell lines and nine childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) samples
with MSI. Six cell lines (50%) showed mutations within the coding repeats of the 
BLM, caspase-5, TCF-4, and PTEN genes. No mutations were identified in the nine
childhood ALL samples with MSI. This is the first report that describes mutations
of these genes in hematological malignancies. Mutations, presumably caused by an 
abnormality of the DNA repair genes, may be selected for during the establishment
of cell lines.

PMID: 12531228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 2002 Dec 5;21(55):8453-69.

Ligand-dependent inhibition of beta-catenin/TCF signaling by androgen receptor.

Chesire DR(1), Isaacs WB.

Author information: 
(1)Brady Urological Institute Research Laboratories, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21287, USA.

Beta-catenin signaling may contribute to prostate cancer (CaP) progression.
Although beta-catenin is known to upregulate T cell factor (TCF) target gene
expression in CaP cells, recent evidence demonstrates its capacity to enhance
ligand-dependent androgen receptor (AR) function. Thus, we wished to further
understand the interaction between these two pathways. We find in both CaP cells 
(CWR22-Rv1, LAPC-4, DU145) and non-CaP cells (HEK-293, TSU, SW480, HCT-116) that 
beta-catenin/TCF-related transcription (CRT), as measured by activation of a
synthetic promoter and that of cyclin D1, is inhibited by androgen treatment.
This inhibition is AR-dependent, as it only occurs in cells expressing AR
endogenously or transiently, and is abrogated by AR antagonists. Additional
analyses convey that the ligand-dependent nature of CRT suppression depends on
transactivation-competent AR in the nucleus, but not on indirect effects stemming
from AR target gene expression. Given the recent work identifying an
AR/beta-catenin interaction, and from our finding that liganded AR does not
prompt gross changes in the constitutive nuclear localization of TCF4 or mutant
beta-catenin, we hypothesized that transcription factor (i.e. AR and TCF)
competition for beta-catenin recruitment may explain, in part, androgen-induced
suppression of CRT. To address this idea, we expressed an AR mutant lacking its
DNA-binding domain (DBD). This receptor could not orchestrate ligand-dependent
CRT repression, thereby providing support for those recent data implicating the
AR DBD/LBD as necessary for beta-catenin interaction. Further supporting this
hypothesis, TCF/LEF over-expression counteracts androgen-induced suppression of
CRT, and requires beta-catenin binding activity to do so. Interestingly, TCF4
over-expression potently antagonizes AR function; however, this inhibition may
occur independently of beta-catenin/TCF4 interaction. These results from TCF4
over-expression analyses, taken together, provide further evidence that
AR-mediated suppression of CRT is a consequence of limiting amounts of
beta-catenin, and not AR target gene expression. Our analyses point to a
reciprocal balance between AR and CRT function that may shape critical processes 
during normal prostate development and tumor progression.

PMID: 12466965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Med. 2002 Dec;8(12):1360-1.

Crowd control in the crypt.

Booth C, Brady G, Potten CS.

PMID: 12457179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):3776-85. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Identification of a promoter-specific transcriptional activation domain at the C 
terminus of the Wnt effector protein T-cell factor 4.

Hecht A(1), Stemmler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.
hecht@mm11.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Wnt growth factors control numerous cell fate decisions in development by
altering specific gene expression patterns through the activity of heterodimeric 
transcriptional activators. These consist of beta-catenin and one of the four
members of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding proteins. How can the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway control various sets of target genes in distinct
cellular settings with such a limited number of nuclear effectors? Here we asked 
whether different TCF proteins could perform specific, nonredundant functions at 
natural beta-catenin/TCF-regulated promoters. We found that TCF4E but not LEF1
supported beta-catenin-dependent activation of the Cdx1 promoter, whereas LEF1
specifically activated the Siamois promoter. Deletion of a C-terminal domain of
TCF4E prevented Cdx1 promoter induction. A chimeric protein consisting of LEF1
and the C terminus of TCF4E was fully functional. Therefore, the TCF4E C terminus
harbors a promoter-specific transactivation domain. This domain influences the
DNA binding properties of TCF4 and additionally mediates an interaction with the 
transcriptional coactivator p300. Apparently, the C terminus of TCF4E cooperates 
with beta-catenin and p300 to form a specialized transcription factor complex
that specifically supports the activation of the Cdx1 promoter.

PMID: 12446687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):251-63.

Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning in the intestinal epithelium by
controlling the expression of EphB/ephrinB.

Batlle E(1), Henderson JT, Beghtel H, van den Born MM, Sancho E, Huls G, Meeldijk
J, Robertson J, van de Wetering M, Pawson T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, University
Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In the small intestine, the progeny of stem cells migrate in precise patterns.
Absorptive, enteroendocrine, and goblet cells migrate toward the villus while
Paneth cells occupy the bottom of the crypts. We show here that beta-catenin and 
TCF inversely control the expression of the EphB2/EphB3 receptors and their
ligand ephrin-B1 in colorectal cancer and along the crypt-villus axis. Disruption
of EphB2 and EphB3 genes reveals that their gene products restrict cell
intermingling and allocate cell populations within the intestinal epithelium. In 
EphB2/EphB3 null mice, the proliferative and differentiated populations
intermingle. In adult EphB3(-/-) mice, Paneth cells do not follow their downward 
migratory path, but scatter along crypt and villus. We conclude that in the
intestinal epithelium beta-catenin and TCF couple proliferation and
differentiation to the sorting of cell populations through the EphB/ephrin-B
system.

PMID: 12408869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):241-50.

The beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex imposes a crypt progenitor phenotype on colorectal
cancer cells.

van de Wetering M(1), Sancho E, Verweij C, de Lau W, Oving I, Hurlstone A, van
der Horn K, Batlle E, Coudreuse D, Haramis AP, Tjon-Pon-Fong M, Moerer P, van den
Born M, Soete G, Pals S, Eilers M, Medema R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, University
Medical Center, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The transactivation of TCF target genes induced by Wnt pathway mutations
constitutes the primary transforming event in colorectal cancer (CRC). We show
that disruption of beta-catenin/TCF-4 activity in CRC cells induces a rapid G1
arrest and blocks a genetic program that is physiologically active in the
proliferative compartment of colon crypts. Coincidently, an intestinal
differentiation program is induced. The TCF-4 target gene c-MYC plays a central
role in this switch by direct repression of the p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter.
Following disruption of beta-catenin/TCF-4 activity, the decreased expression of 
c-MYC releases p21(CIP1/WAF1) transcription, which in turn mediates G1 arrest and
differentiation. Thus, the beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex constitutes the master
switch that controls proliferation versus differentiation in healthy and
malignant intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 12408868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Res. 2002 Oct 15;62(20):5651-6.

Isolation of a novel human gene, APCDD1, as a direct target of the
beta-Catenin/T-cell factor 4 complex with probable involvement in colorectal
carcinogenesis.

Takahashi M(1), Fujita M, Furukawa Y, Hamamoto R, Shimokawa T, Miwa N, Ogawa M,
Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify the molecular mechanisms of human carcinogenesis associated with
abnormal beta-catenin/T-cell factor (Tcf) signaling, we have been using cDNA
microarrays to search for genes whose expression is significantly altered after
introduction of wild-type APC into SW480 colon cancer cells. These experiments
identified a novel human gene, termed APCDD1, that was down-regulated in the
cancer cells by exogenous wild-type APC; its expression was also reduced in
response to transduction of AXIN1. Moreover, we documented elevated expression of
APCDD1 in 18 of 27 primary colon cancer tissues compared with corresponding
noncancerous mucosae. A reporter gene assay using the 5'-flanking region of
APCDD1 indicated that transfection of beta-catenin together with wild-type Tcf4
into HeLa cells increased the reporter activity through two putative Tcf/lymphoid
enhancer factor-binding motifs upstream of the transcription start site,
indicating that APCDD1 is one of the direct targets of this transcription
complex. Exogenous APCDD1 promoted growth of colon cancer cells both in vitro and
in vivo, whereas transfection with antisense S-oligodeoxynucleotides decreased
cell/tumor growth. These data suggest that APCDD1 is directly regulated by the
beta-catenin/Tcf complex and that its elevated expression is likely to contribute
to colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12384519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Immunol. 2002 Nov;3(11):1102-8. Epub 2002 Oct 15.

Wnt glycoproteins regulate the expression of FoxN1, the gene defective in nude
mice.

Balciunaite G(1), Keller MP, Balciunaite E, Piali L, Zuklys S, Mathieu YD, Gill
J, Boyd R, Sussman DJ, Holländer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology, Department of Research and Clinical-biological Sciences,
and the Children's Hospital, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

T cell development and selection require the fully mature and diverse epithelial 
microenvironment of the thymus. Acquisition of these characteristics is dependent
on expression of the forkhead (also known as winged-helix) transcription factor
FoxN1, as a lack of functional FoxN1 results in aberrant epithelial morphogenesis
and an inability to attract lymphoid precursors to the thymus primordium.
However, the transcriptional control of Foxn1 expression has not been elucidated.
Here we report that secreted Wnt glycoproteins, expressed by thymic epithelial
cells and thymocytes, regulate epithelial Foxn1 expression in both autocrine and 
paracrine fashions. Wnt molecules therefore provide regulatory signals critical
for thymic function.

PMID: 12379851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. World J Gastroenterol. 2002 Oct;8(5):804-7.

Association of hTcf-4 gene expression and mutation with clinicopathological
characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jiang Y(1), Zhou XD, Liu YK, Wu X, Huang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhong Shan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

AIM: Hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) is a significant health problem in China. But 
the molecular mechanisms of HCC remains unclear. APC/beta-Catenin/Tcf signaling
pathway, also known as Wnt pathway, plays a critical role in the development and 
oncogenesis. As little is known about the alteration of human T-cell
transcription factor-4 (hTcf-4) gene in HCC, it is of interest to study the
expression and mutation of hTcf-4 gene in HCC and the relationship between hTcf-4
gene and progression of HCC.
METHODS: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method was used
to detect the expression of hTcf-4 mRNA in 32 HCC and para-cancerous tissues and 
5 normal liver tissues. PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP)
method was used to detect the mutation of hTcf-4 exons 1, 4, 9 and 15 in HCC. The
correlation of expression and mutation of the hTcf-4 gene with
clinicopathological characteristics of HCC was also analyzed.
RESULTS: RT-PCR showed that the expression rate of hTcf-4 mRNA in HCC,
para-cancerous tissues and normal liver tissues was 90.6 %, 71.9 % and 80 %,
respectively. The gene expression level in tumor was 0.71+/-0.13, much higher
than that in para-cancerous liver 0.29+/-0.05 and normal liver 0.26+/-0.05
(P<0.001), although there was no significant difference in gene expression level 
between para-cancerous tissues and normal liver (P>0.05). Furthermore, hTcf-4
gene expression was closely associated with tumor capsule status and intrahepatic
metastasis of HCC. On SSCP, 2 of 32 cases of HCC (6.25 %) displayed
characteristic mutational mobility shifts in exon 15 of the hTcf-4 gene. No
abnormal shifting bands were observed in para-cancerous tissues.
CONCLUSION: The high expression level of hTcf-4 in HCC, especially in tumors with
metastasis, suggests that the over-expression of hTcf-4 gene may be closely
associated with development and progression of HCC, but the mutation of this gene
seemed to play less important role in this respect.

PMCID: PMC4656565
PMID: 12378619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):11159-65.

Evidence for regulation of long terminal repeat transcription by Wnt
transcription factor TCF-4 in human astrocytic cells.

Wortman B(1), Darbinian N, Sawaya BE, Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in neural cell development and 
function. The key components of this pathway, beta-catenin and its partner
TCF-4/LEF-1, exert their effects on transcription by entering the nuclei, where
they associate with the TCF-4/LEF-1 DNA motif positioned in the promoters of
several important genes. Here we examined the role of TCF-4 upon transcription of
the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) promoter in human astrocytic
cells. Our results showed that expression of TCF-4 in human astrocytic cells
(U-87MG cells) decreased the basal and Tat-mediated transcription of the HIV-1
long terminal repeat (LTR). Results from promoter deletion studies revealed that 
the promoter sequence of the LTR with no classical binding motif for TCF-4/LEF-1,
which spans positions -80 to +80 of the LTR, remained responsive to
down-regulation by TCF-4. Noticeably, removal of the sequences between positions 
-80 and -68 decreased the negative effect of TCF-4 on viral gene transcription. A
mutant variant of TCF-4 with no binding site for beta-catenin was able to
down-regulate LTR transcription, suggesting that beta-catenin may not be directly
involved in the observed regulatory events. Results from the glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assay as well as the combined immunoprecipitation and
Western blot analysis of protein extract from U-87MG cells revealed an
interaction of Tat with TCF-4. Subcellular examination of TCF-4 and Tat in cells 
expressing either protein alone showed a predominantly nuclear accumulation of
these proteins. However, in cells which coexpressed both TCF-4 and Tat,
significant levels of these proteins were found in the cytoplasm. All together,
these observations provide evidence for the cooperative interaction of TCF-4, the
important transcription factor of the Wnt pathway, with Tat; this interaction may
determine the level of viral gene transcription in human astrocytic cells.

PMCID: PMC136655
PMID: 12368361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4807-19.

A sonic hedgehog-dependent signaling relay regulates growth of diencephalic and
mesencephalic primordia in the early mouse embryo.

Ishibashi M(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
16 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a key signal in the specification of ventral cell
identities along the length of the developing vertebrate neural tube. In the
presumptive hindbrain and spinal cord, dorsal development is largely Shh
independent. By contrast, we show that Shh is required for cyclin D1 expression
and the subsequent growth of both ventral and dorsal regions of the diencephalon 
and midbrain in early somite-stage mouse embryos. We propose that a Shh-dependent
signaling relay regulates proliferation and survival of dorsal cell populations
in the diencephalon and midbrain. We present evidence that Fgf15 shows
Shh-dependent expression in the diencephalon and may participate in this
interaction, at least in part, by regulating the ability of dorsal neural
precursors to respond to dorsally secreted Wnt mitogens.

PMID: 12361972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Cell Biol. 2002 Sep 16;158(6):1067-78. Epub 2002 Sep 16.

A yeast model system for functional analysis of beta-catenin signaling.

Lee MS(1), D'Amour KA, Papkoff J.

Author information: 
(1)Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge Genomics Center, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We have developed a novel Saccharomyces cerevisiae model system to dissect the
molecular events of beta-catenin (beta-cat) signaling. Coexpression of mammalian 
beta-cat with TCF4 or LEF1 results in nuclear accumulation of these proteins and 
a functional complex that activates reporter gene transcription from constructs
containing leukocyte enhancer factor (LEF)/T cell factor (TCF) response elements.
Reporter transcription is constitutive, requires expression of both beta-cat and 
TCF4 or LEF1, and is not supported by mutated LEF/TCF binding elements or by TCF4
or LEF1 mutants. A cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin or a functional fragment of
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein (APC-25) complexes with beta-cat,
reduces beta-cat binding to TCF4, and leads to increased cytoplasmic localization
of beta-cat and a reduction in reporter activation. Systematic mutation of
putative nuclear export signal sequences in APC-25 decreases APC-25 binding to
beta-cat and restores reporter gene transcription. Additional beta-cat signaling 
components, Axin and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, form a multisubunit complex 
similar to that found in mammalian cells. Coexpression of the F-box protein
beta-transducin repeat-containing protein reduces the stability of beta-cat and
decreases reporter activation. Thus, we have reconstituted a functional beta-cat 
signal transduction pathway in yeast and show that beta-cat signaling can be
regulated at multiple levels, including protein subcellular localization, protein
complex formation, and protein stability.

PMCID: PMC2173206
PMID: 12235124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mech Dev. 2002 Sep;117(1-2):269-73.

Expression and splice variant analysis of the zebrafish tcf4 transcription
factor.

Young RM(1), Reyes AE, Allende ML.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Departamento de Biología,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

Wnt signalling has been implicated in antero-posterior patterning of the
vertebrate embryonic body axis and in a number of other developmental processes. 
One of the downstream effectors of Wnt signalling is the beta-catenin protein
which complexes with members of the Lef/tcf transcription factor family. In the
zebrafish, specification of the head has been shown to be dependent on the Tcf3
protein which acts as a repressor of the posteriorizing activity of Wnt (Nature
407 (2000) 913). Here, we report the cloning and expression pattern of the
zebrafish tcf4 gene. In embryos, we find that the tcf4 gene is highly regulated
at the level of RNA splicing such that the variant proteins that are produced
contain or lack domains proposed to be essential in repression or activation of
transcription. Expression of tcf4 mRNA is first detected in a graded fashion in
the anterior brain and subsequently becomes restricted to the dorsal diencephalon
and anterior midbrain. There is also transient expression in the anterior
rhombomeres of the hindbrain and in the developing gut.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12204269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):42386-93. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Transcriptional activation of interleukin-8 by beta-catenin-Tcf4.

Lévy L(1), Neuveut C, Renard CA, Charneau P, Branchereau S, Gauthier F, Van Nhieu
JT, Cherqui D, Petit-Bertron AF, Mathieu D, Buendia MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique (Inserm U163), Département de
Médecine Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

Nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and its association with Tcf/Lef factors
are key steps in transduction of the Wnt signal, which is aberrantly activated in
a variety of human cancers. In a search for new beta-catenin-Tcf target genes, we
analyzed beta-catenin-induced alterations of gene expression in primary human
hepatocytes, after transduction of either dominant stable beta-catenin or its
truncated, transactivation-deficient counterpart by means of a lentiviral vector.
cDNA microarray analysis revealed a limited set of up-regulated genes, including 
known Wnt targets such as matrilysin and keratin-1. In this screen, we identified
the CXC chemokine interleukin 8 (IL-8) as a direct target of beta-catenin-Tcf4.
IL-8 is constitutively expressed in various cancers, and it has been implicated
in tumor progression through its mitogenic, motogenic, and angiogenic activities.
The IL-8 promoter contains a unique consensus Tcf/Lef site that is critical for
IL-8 activation by beta-catenin. We show here that the p300 coactivator was
required for efficient transactivation of beta-catenin on this promoter. Ectopic 
expression of beta-catenin in hepatoma cells promoted IL-8 secretion, which
stimulated endothelial cell migration. These data define IL-8 as a Wnt target and
suggest that IL-8 induction by beta-catenin might be implicated in developmental 
and tumorigenic processes.

PMID: 12200448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 29;21(38):5861-7.

Identification of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase-1 as a target of the
beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex in human colorectal cancers.

Takahashi M(1), Tsunoda T, Seiki M, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Japan.

Genetic alterations of APC and CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) have been identified in a
number of human cancers including tumors arising in the colon and liver.
Mutations in these genes lead to abnormal accumulation of beta-catenin and
constitutive activation of target genes in the Wnt signaling pathway. To clarify 
the precise role of accumulated beta-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, we
searched for genes involved in the beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway by cDNA
microarray. MT1-MMP (membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase) was among 84 genes
that were down-regulated after beta-catenin had been depleted by transduction of 
wild-type APC in SW480 cells. Expression of MT1-MMP was elevated in 22 of 24
colon carcinomas we examined. Reporter assays and an electromobility-shift assay 
revealed a DNA fragment between -1169 bp and -1163 bp in the 5' flanking region
of this gene to be a target of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. Our results
indicate that MT1-MMP is a direct down-stream target in the Wnt signaling
pathway, and that one of the ways accumulated beta-catenin contributes to
colorectal carcinogenesis is by transactivating this gene.

PMID: 12185585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Sep;283(3):C811-21.

Regulation of endothelial barrier function and growth by VE-cadherin,
plakoglobin, and beta-catenin.

Venkiteswaran K(1), Xiao K, Summers S, Calkins CC, Vincent PA, Pumiglia K,
Kowalczyk AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

VE-cadherin is an endothelial-specific cadherin that plays a central role in
vascular barrier function and angiogenesis. The cytoplasmic domain of VE-cadherin
is linked to the cytoskeleton through interactions with the armadillo family
proteins beta-catenin and plakoglobin. Growing evidence indicates that
beta-catenin and plakoglobin play important roles in epithelial growth and
morphogenesis. To test the role of these proteins in vascular cells, a
replication-deficient retroviral system was used to express intercellular
junction proteins and mutants in the human dermal microvascular endothelial cell 
line (HMEC-1). A mutant VE-cadherin lacking an adhesive extracellular domain
disrupted endothelial barrier function and inhibited endothelial growth. In
contrast, expression of exogenous plakoglobin or metabolically stable mutants of 
beta-catenin stimulated HMEC-1 cell growth, which suggests that the beta-catenin 
signaling pathway was active in HMEC-1 cells. This possibility was supported by
the finding that a dominant-negative mutant of the transcription factor TCF-4,
designed to inhibit beta-catenin signaling, also inhibited HMEC-1 cell growth.
These observations suggest that intercellular junction proteins function as
components of an adhesion and signaling system that regulates vascular barrier
function and growth.

PMID: 12176738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 23;296(3):584-8.

Inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf activity by white tea, green tea, and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG): minor contribution of H(2)O(2) at
physiologically relevant EGCG concentrations.

Dashwood WM(1), Orner GA, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-6512,
USA.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the major polyphenol present in white tea
and green tea. Recently, it was reported that the addition of EGCG and other tea 
polyphenols to cell culture media, minus cells, generated significant levels of
H(2)O(2), with the corollary that this might represent an "artifact" in cell
culture studies which seek to examine the chemopreventive mechanisms of tea. We
show here that in cell growth media with and without serum, and in growth media
containing human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells plus serum, physiologically 
relevant concentrations of EGCG (< or =25 microM) generated H(2)O(2) with a peak 
concentration of the order of 10-12 microM. However, addition of 20 microM
H(2)O(2) directly to HEK293 cells transiently transfected with wild-type or
mutant beta-catenin constructs and TCF-4 had no significant effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity or beta-catenin expression levels. In
contrast, 2-25 microM EGCG inhibited beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity in a
concentration-dependent fashion and there was a concomitant reduction in
beta-catenin protein levels in the cell lysates without changes in TCF-4
expression. The inhibition of reporter activity was recapitulated by white tea
and green tea, each tested at a 25 microM EGCG equivalent concentration in the
assay, and this was unaffected by the addition of exogenous catalase. The results
indicate that physiologically relevant concentrations of tea and EGCG inhibit
beta-catenin/TCF-4 reporter activity in HEK293 cells due to reduced expression of
beta-catenin and that this is unlikely to be an artifact of H(2)O(2) generation
under the assay conditions used here. These data are consistent with the findings
from in vivo studies, showing the suppression of intestinal polyps by tea, via an
apparent down-regulation of beta-catenin and Wnt target genes.

PMID: 12176021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;87(7):3433-40.

Aberrant localization of beta-catenin correlates with overexpression of its
target gene in human papillary thyroid cancer.

Ishigaki K(1), Namba H, Nakashima M, Nakayama T, Mitsutake N, Hayashi T, Maeda S,
Ichinose M, Kanematsu T, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University School of Medicine, 1 -12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Alterations of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway are known to occur in
mutations of the component genes such as APC, Axin, and beta-catenin, and play a 
pathogenetic role in tumorigenesis. Activated Wnt signaling stabilizes
beta-catenin, which associates with T cell factor, resulting in transactivation
of the downstream target genes including c-myc and cyclin D1. To investigate the 
involvement of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in thyroid tumorigenesis, we
analyzed its activation and localization in 5 human thyroid cancer cell lines and
132 thyroid tumor tissue samples. Dislocalization of beta-catenin was observed in
all cell lines. Constitutive activation of T cell factor in two of four thyroid
cancer cell lines was observed using reporter gene assay. Furthermore, high
expression levels of c-Myc and cyclin D1 were observed in cell lines that showed 
cytoplasmic or nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. In 132 paraffin-embedded
thyroid carcinoma tissue samples, cytoplasmic beta-catenin was
immunohistochemically observed in 52 out of 78 (67%) papillary thyroid cancers,
but only in 3 of 34 (9%) follicular adenomas and 5 of 20 (25%) follicular
cancers. Cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin significantly correlated with
overexpression of cyclin D1 in papillary carcinomas. Our results suggest that
aberrant activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is strongly involved in thyroid
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12107263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Cell. 2002 Mar;1(2):145-55.

ITF-2, a downstream target of the Wnt/TCF pathway, is activated in human cancers 
with beta-catenin defects and promotes neoplastic transformation.

Kolligs FT(1), Nieman MT, Winer I, Hu G, Van Mater D, Feng Y, Smith IM, Wu R,
Zhai Y, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics and the Cancer
Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

In many cancers, inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) or Axin
tumor suppressor proteins or activating mutations in beta-catenin lead to
elevated beta-catenin levels, enhanced binding of beta-catenin to T cell factor
(TCF) proteins, and increased expression of TCF-regulated genes. We found that
the gene for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor ITF-2
(immunoglobulin transcription factor-2) was activated in rat E1A-immortalized
RK3E cells following neoplastic transformation by beta-catenin or ligand-induced 
activation of a beta-catenin-estrogen receptor fusion protein. Human cancers with
beta-catenin regulatory defects had elevated ITF-2 expression, and ITF-2 was
repressed by restoring wild-type APC function or inhibiting TCF activity. Of
note, ITF-2 promoted neoplastic transformation of RK3E cells. We propose that
ITF-2 is a TCF-regulated gene, which functions in concert with other TCF target
genes to promote growth and/or survival of cancer cells with defects in
beta-catenin regulation.

PMID: 12086873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30887-91. Epub 2002 Jun 12.

Activation of the beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf pathway is obligate for formation of
primitive endoderm by mouse F9 totipotent teratocarcinoma cells in response to
retinoic acid.

Liu T(1), Lee YN, Malbon CC, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Diabetes & Metabolic Diseases Research Center,
State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651,
USA.

The morphogen retinoic acid promotes the formation of primitive endoderm in mouse
F9 teratocarcinoma cells as does the stimulation of the Frizzled-1 pathway. We
investigated whether the beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcriptional pathway
activated by Frizzled-1 plays a role in the retinoic acid-induced pathway to
primitive endoderm formation. An analysis of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription
reveals increased transcription at 1 and 4 h post-treatment with retinoic acid.
The stimulation of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription as well as the formation of
primitive endoderm was accompanied by the stabilization of beta-catenin as
observed in activation of the Frizzled-1 pathway. Transient transfection of F9
cells with an expression vector harboring a dominant-negative mutant of Tcf4
resulted in the attenuation of both the increase in Lef-Tcf-sensitive
transcription and formation of primitive endoderm in response to the morphogen.
Clones stably transfected to express the dominant-negative Tcf4 displayed a block
in retinoic acid-induced activation of Lef-Tcf-sensitive transcription and
primitive endoderm formation. These data reveal the obligate role of the
beta-catenin/Lef-Tcf transcriptional pathway in the action of the morphogen
retinoic acid.

PMID: 12063257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Res. 2002 Jun 1;62(11):3009-13.

T-cell factor-4 frameshift mutations occur frequently in human microsatellite
instability-high colorectal carcinomas but do not contribute to carcinogenesis.

Ruckert S(1), Hiendlmeyer E, Brueckl WM, Oswald U, Beyser K, Dietmaier W, Haynl
A, Koch C, Rüschoff J, Brabletz T, Kirchner T, Jung A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, der Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstrasse 8-10, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability accumulate errors in short 
repetitive DNA repeats, especially mono and dinucleotide repeats. One such
error-prone A(9) monorepeat is found in exon 17 of the TCF-4 gene. TCF-4 and
beta-catenin form a transcription complex, which is important for both
maintenance of normal epithelium and development of colorectal tumors. To
elucidate the relevance of frameshift mutations in the TCF-4 in colorectal
carcinogenesis, a variety of investigations in human tumors and cell lines was
performed. It was found that mutations in the TCF-4 A(9) repeat do not contribute
to tumorigenesis and seem to be passenger mutations.

PMID: 12036905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 8;518(1-3):83-7.

Stimulation of Cdx1 by oncogenic beta-catenin/Tcf4 in colon cancer cells;
opposite effect of the CDX2 homeoprotein.

Domon-Dell C(1), Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 3 avenue
Molière, 67200, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is a regulator of intestinal epithelial cell proliferation
and differentiation. Using a transfection approach, we showed here that the
oncogenic activation of the beta-catenin pathway stimulates the endogenous
expression of the Cdx1 mRNA as well as the activity of the Cdx1 promoter in
cancer cells of the human colon. Reciprocally, the paralogue homeobox gene Cdx2
exerts an inhibitory effect on the basal and on the beta-catenin-stimulated
activity of the Cdx1 promoter. The inhibitory effect of CDX2 requires the intact 
homeodomain. It is not dependent on canonical CDX binding sites in the Cdx1
promoter nor on the cis-elements specifically targeted by the beta-catenin/Tcf
complex. We conclude that the oncogenically activated beta-catenin and CDX2 have 
opposite and independent effects on the Cdx1 homeobox gene.

PMID: 11997022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26031-5. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

Synergistic coactivator function by coactivator-associated arginine
methyltransferase (CARM) 1 and beta-catenin with two different classes of
DNA-binding transcriptional activators.

Koh SS(1), Li H, Lee YH, Widelitz RB, Chuong CM, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90089, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) binds to and activates transcription of specific genes
in response to its cognate steroid hormone, dihydrotestosterone. Transcriptional 
activation by the DNA-bound AR is accomplished with the help of a variety of
coactivator proteins. For example, the p160 coactivators bind directly to AR and 
recruit additional coactivators such as the histone acetyltransferase p300 and
the histone methyltransferase CARM1. The current study tested whether CARM1 can
cooperate with other types of coactivator proteins. Recently it was shown that
beta-catenin can also bind directly to and serve as a coactivator for AR. Here it
is shown that CARM1 binds to beta-catenin and can function in synergy with
beta-catenin and p300 as coactivators for AR. The methyltransferase activity of
CARM1 is important for its synergistic coactivator function with beta-catenin.
The synergistic coactivator function of beta-catenin and CARM1 is not restricted 
to steroid receptors because these two coactivators can also act synergistically 
with another type of DNA binding transcriptional activator, LEF-1/TCF-4.

PMCID: PMC4386649
PMID: 11983685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2002;7(1):92-5.

Functional MDR1 polymorphisms (G2677T and C3435T) and TCF4 mutations in
colorectal tumors with high microsatellite instability.

Potocnik U(1), Ravnik-Glavac M, Glavac D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The multidrug resistance 1 (MDRI) gene and transcription factor 4(TCF4) gene are 
suggested to be involved in the WNT signalling pathway, the most important
pathway altered in colorectal cancer. Mutations in both genes have been
identified and associated with colorectal tumors exhibiting high microsatellite
instability (MSI-H). In this study, we report on the distribution of functional
polymorphisms in the MDR] gene and somatic frameshift mutations in the TCF4 gene 
coding mononucleotide repetition in 62 MSI-H colorectal tumors. Somatic
frameshift mutations in(of) the TCF4 gene were identified in 24/62 (39%) of the
studied MSI-H tumors. The estimated allele frequencies of functional
polymorphisms in(of) exon 21 (2677 G>T, Ala893Ser) and exon 26(3435 C>T, Ilel
142I1e) of the MDR] gene were 0.42 and 0.46 in the controls and 0.54 (p=0.035)
and 0.60 (p=0.017) in the MSI-H tumors. However, the allele frequency of both
functional MDR] polymorphisms did not significantly differ between MSI-H tumors
with TCF4 mutations and those without. These results support the involvement of
the MDRI gene in the tumorgenesis of MSI-H tumors and also suggest that
functional polymorphisms in the MDRI gene and mutations in the TCF4 gene are
likely to occur independently in MSI-H tumors.

PMID: 11980438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Death Differ. 2002 May;9(5):513-26.

Ligand activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma induces
apoptosis of leukemia cells by down-regulating the c-myc gene expression via
blockade of the Tcf-4 activity.

Yamakawa-Karakida N(1), Sugita K, Inukai T, Goi K, Nakamura M, Uno K, Sato H,
Kagami K, Barker N, Nakazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamanashi Medical University, Yamanashi, Japan.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma), a member of
the nuclear receptor superfamily, is expressed at highest levels in adipose
tissue and functions as a central regulator in the process of adipocyte
differentiation. In the present study, we showed that human leukemic cell lines, 
not only myeloid but also lymphoid, express PPAR gamma and its activation by
natural ligand (15-deoxy-Delta(12,14) - prostaglandin J(2)) and synthetic ligand 
(troglitazone) profoundly inhibited their proliferation by induction of apoptosis
preferentially in the serum-free culture. We pursued its mechanism using the
representative cell lines, and found that induction of apoptosis was accompanied 
by caspase-3 activation and specifically blocked by its inhibitor. While status
of several apoptosis-related molecules remained unchanged, the c-Myc expression
was markedly down-regulated within 24 h after troglitazone treatment. The c-myc
mRNA levels were dramatically reduced at 1 h and became undetectable at 12 h
after troglitazone treatment, which proved to be accompanied by complete blockade
of the Tcf-4 activity in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We succeeded
in establishing HL-60 cell lines growing well in the presence of troglitazone in 
the long-term serum-free culture. They showed neither induction of apoptosis nor 
down-regulation of the c-Myc expression via blockade of the Tcf-4 activity after 
troglitazone treatment. This is the first identification of the linkage between
PPAR gamma-mediated apoptosis and down-regulation of the c-myc gene expression.

PMID: 11973610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 18;21(17):2679-94.

In vitro evidence for complex modes of nuclear beta-catenin signaling during
prostate growth and tumorigenesis.

Chesire DR(1), Ewing CM, Gage WR, Isaacs WB.

Author information: 
(1)Brady Urological Institute Research Laboratories, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21287, USA.

Understanding the molecular etiology of prostate cancer (CaP) progression is
paramount for broadening current diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Current
interest in the role of wnt pathway signaling in prostate tumorigenesis was
generated with the finding of beta-catenin mutation and corresponding nuclear
localization in primary lesions. The recent finding of beta-catenin-induced
enhancement of androgen receptor (AR) function potentially ties beta-catenin to
key regulatory steps of prostate cell growth, differentiation, and
transformation. By immunohistological analysis of metastatic tumors, we detected 
nuclear beta-catenin in 20% of lethal CaP cases, suggesting a more common role
for beta-catenin in advanced disease than would be predicted by its mutation
rate. Interestingly, beta-catenin nuclear localization was found to occur
concomitantly with androgen-induced regrowth of normal rat prostate. These in
vivo observations likely implicate beta-catenin involvement in both normal and
neoplastic prostate physiology, thus prompting our interest in further
characterizing modes of beta-catenin signaling in prostate cells. Extending our
previous findings, we demonstrate that transient beta-catenin over-expression
stimulates T cell factor (TCF) signaling in most CaP cell lines. Further, this
activity is not subject to cross-regulation by phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3-K)/Akt signaling, a stimulatory pathway often upregulated in CaP upon PTEN
inactivation. Consistent with a previous report, we observed that transient
beta-catenin over-expression enhances AR-mediated transcription off two natural
target gene promoters. However, we were unable to recapitulate
beta-catenin-induced stimulation of ectopically expressed AR in AR-negative
cells, suggesting that other AR-associated factors are required for this
activity. Although LNCaP cells are capable of this mode of AR co-stimulation,
stable expression of mutant beta-catenin did not alter their proliferative
response to androgen. In total, our characterization of beta-catenin signaling in
CaP reveals the complex nature of its activity in prostate tissue, indicating
that beta-catenin potentially contributes to multiple stimulatory inputs required
for disease progression.

PMID: 11965541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2087-98.

A mitogen gradient of dorsal midline Wnts organizes growth in the CNS.

Megason SG(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Cell cycle progression and exit must be precisely patterned during development to
generate tissues of the correct size, shape and symmetry. Here we present
evidence that dorsal-ventral growth of the developing spinal cord is regulated by
a Wnt mitogen gradient. Wnt signaling through the beta-catenin/TCF pathway
positively regulates cell cycle progression and negatively regulates cell cycle
exit of spinal neural precursors in part through transcriptional regulation of
cyclin D1 and cyclin D2. Wnts expressed at the dorsal midline of the spinal cord,
Wnt1 and Wnt3a, have mitogenic activity while more broadly expressed Wnts do not.
We present several lines of evidence suggesting that dorsal midline Wnts form a
dorsal to ventral concentration gradient. A growth gradient that correlates with 
the predicted gradient of mitogenic Wnts emerges as the neural tube grows with
the proliferation rate highest dorsally and the differentiation rate highest
ventrally. These data are rationalized in a 'mitogen gradient model' that
explains how proliferation and differentiation can be patterned across a growing 
field of cells. Computer modeling demonstrates this model is a robust and
self-regulating mechanism for patterning cell cycle regulation in a growing
tissue. Supplemental data available on-line

PMID: 11959819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21657-65. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Activation of AXIN2 expression by beta-catenin-T cell factor. A feedback
repressor pathway regulating Wnt signaling.

Leung JY(1), Kolligs FT, Wu R, Zhai Y, Kuick R, Hanash S, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

The Wnt pathway regulates cell fate, proliferation, and apoptosis, and defects in
the pathway play a key role in many cancers. Although Wnts act to stabilize
beta-catenin levels in the cytosol and nucleus, a multiprotein complex containing
adenomatous polyposis coli, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, and Axin1 or its
homolog Axin2/Axil/conductin promotes beta-catenin phosphorylation and subsequent
proteasomal degradation. We found that the rat Axil gene was strongly induced
upon neoplastic transformation of RK3E cells by mutant beta-catenin or
gamma-catenin or after ligand-induced activation of a beta-catenin-estrogen
receptor fusion protein. Expression of Wnt1 in murine breast epithelial cells
activated the conductin gene, and human cancers with defective beta-catenin
regulation had elevated AXIN2 gene and protein expression. Expression of
AXIN2/Axil was strongly repressed in cancer cells by restoration of wild type
adenomatous polyposis coli function or expression of a dominant negative form of 
T cell factor (TCF)-4. TCF binding sites in the AXIN2 promoter played a key role 
in the ability of beta-catenin to activate AXIN2 transcription. In contrast to
AXIN2/Axil, expression of human or rat Axin1 homologs was nominally affected by
beta-catenin-TCF. Because Axin2 can inhibit beta-catenin abundance and function, 
the data implicate AXIN2 in a negative feedback pathway regulating Wnt signaling.
Additionally, although Axin1 and Axin2 have been thought to have comparable
functions, the observation that Wnt pathway activation elevates AXIN2 but not
AXIN1 expression suggests that there may be potentially significant functional
differences between the two proteins.

PMID: 11940574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem J. 2002 Apr 15;363(Pt 2):253-62.

Promoter characterization of the novel human matrix metalloproteinase-26 gene:
regulation by the T-cell factor-4 implies specific expression of the gene in
cancer cells of epithelial origin.

Marchenko GN(1), Marchenko ND, Leng J, Strongin AY.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
U.S.A.

A novel matrix metalloproteinase-26 (MMP-26) is known to be specifically
expressed in epithelial carcinomas. To facilitate studies of MMP-26
transcriptional regulation, we have cloned and characterized a 1 kb 5'-flanking
region of the human MMP-26 gene. Altogether, our findings indicate that the
MMP-26 promoter has distinctive structural and functional features among MMP
genes. An unusual polyadenylation site proximal to the
transcription-factor-binding sites protects transcription of the MMP-26 gene from
the upstream promoters and represents a part of the stringent transcriptional
regulation of the gene. The MMP-26 gene has a consensus TATA-box and one
transcriptional start site located 60 and 35 nucleotides upstream of the
translational start site, respectively. The MMP-26 promoter was able to drive
luciferase expression in human A549 lung carcinoma, HT1080 fibrosarcoma and
HEK293 embryonic kidney cells. The basal transcription efficiency of the MMP-26
promoter is relatively low, thereby explaining the minute expression of the gene 
in most cells and tissues. When compared with other MMP genes, the MMP-26
promoter contains binding sites for a few transcription factors. Sequential
deletion and mutation analysis, and electrophoretic mobility-shift assay have
identified the T-cell factor-4 (Tcf-4) motif and the activator protein-1 site as 
the major regulatory elements of the MMP-26 promoter. Since previous studies have
established that the Tcf-4 transcription factor is subjected exclusively to
regulation through the beta-catenin/E(epithelial)-cadherin pathway, this implies 
the specific expression of MMP-26 in cancer cells of epithelial origin.

PMCID: PMC1222473
PMID: 11931652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Dec;20(4):553-9.

Frequent alterations of the beta-catenin and TCF-4 genes, but not of the APC
gene, in colon cancers with high-frequency microsatellite instability.

Fukushima H(1), Yamamoto H, Itoh F, Horiuchi S, Min Y, Iku S, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Dept. of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, Japan.

High-frequency microsatellite instability (MSI-H) due to defective DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) is a characteristic of the majority of tumors from kindreds with
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and a subset of sporadic
cancers. To better understand the molecular characteristics of colon cancers with
MSI-H, we analyzed these cancers for alterations of genes, such as APC,
beta-catenin, and TCF-4 genes, involved in the Wnt signaling pathway. Following
the National Cancer Institute (NCI) criteria, 385 unselected colon cancers were
classified as follows: 50 (13%) MSI-H tumors, 36 (9%) low-frequency MSI (MSI-L)
tumors, and 299 (78%) microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors. The frequency of APC
mutations was significantly lower in MSI-H tumors (9 out of 50) than in MSI-L (12
out of 20) and MSS (66 out of 100) tumors (P = 0.0005 and P < 0.0001,
respectively). In contrast, the frequency of exon 3 mutations in the beta-catenin
gene was higher in MSI-H tumors (10 out of 50) than in MSI-L tumors (0 out of 30;
P = 0.0110) and MSS tumors (3 out of 100; P = 0.0010). Frameshift mutations in a 
(A)9 tract of the TCF-4 gene were detected in 44% (22 out of 50) of MSI-H tumors,
but not in any of the 20 MSI-L tumors or 40 MSS tumors. In total, 78% of MSI-H
tumors and 84% of the remaining tumors had at least one alteration in APC,
beta-catenin, or the TCF-4 genes. Although further analysis is needed to
functionally characterize the consequences of each of these alterations on
beta-catenin/TCF target gene expression, our results suggest that the activation 
of the Wnt signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in colon tumorigenesis,
irrespective of MSI status.

PMID: 11876551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:301-22. Epub 2001 Oct 4.

E protein function in lymphocyte development.

Quong MW(1), Romanow WJ, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
MC 0366, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA. quong@biomail.ucsd.edu

Lymphocytes arise from hematopoietic stem cells through the coordinated action of
transcription factors. The E proteins (E12, E47, HEB and E2-2) have emerged as
key regulators of both B and T lymphocyte differentiation. This review summarizes
the current data and examines the various functions of E proteins and their
antagonists, Id2 and Id3, throughout lymphoid maturation. Beyond an established
role in B and T lineage commitment, E proteins continue to be essential at
subsequent stages of development. E protein activity regulates the expression of 
surrogate and antigen receptor genes, promotes Ig and TCR rearrangements, and
coordinates cell survival and proliferation with developmental progression in
response to TCR signaling. Finally, this review also discusses the role of E47 as
a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 11861605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Circ Res. 2002 Feb 22;90(3):340-7.

A role for the beta-catenin/T-cell factor signaling cascade in vascular
remodeling.

Wang X(1), Xiao Y, Mou Y, Zhao Y, Blankesteijn WM, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Ga, 
USA.

Beta-catenin and T cell factor (Tcf) are distal components of the highly
conserved Wnt pathway that govern cell fate and proliferation in lower organisms.
Thus, we hypothesized that the regulation of beta-catenin and Tcf played a
critical role in vascular remodeling. The first objective was to define
beta-catenin expression in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) after balloon
injury. Indeed, beta-catenin mRNA and protein were significantly elevated 7 days 
after balloon injury in the rat carotid artery. We hypothesized that beta-catenin
accumulation in response to vascular injury inhibited VSMC apoptosis. In line
with our hypothesis, transfection of a degradation-resistant beta-catenin
transgene into rat VSMCs significantly inhibited apoptosis. Accumulation of
beta-catenin also resulted in a 10-fold increase in the activation of Tcf. To
test if Tcf was necessary to confer beta-catenin-induced survival, loss of
function studies were carried out with a dominant negative Tcf-4 transgene
lacking the beta-catenin binding domain, Tcf4(N31). Indeed, loss of Tcf-4
activity abolished beta-catenin-induced survival. We further postulated that
beta-catenin and Tcf promoted cell cycle progression by activating cyclin D1, a
target gene of Tcf-4. Beta-catenin activated cyclin D1, and this activation was
partially blocked with loss of Tcf-4. In parallel, blockade of Tcf-4 resulted in 
inhibition of [3H]thymidine incorporation and partial blockade of the G1-S phase 
transition. In conclusion, beta-catenin and Tcf-4 play a dual role in vascular
remodeling by inhibiting VSMC apoptosis and promoting proliferation.

PMID: 11861424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mamm Genome. 2001 Nov;12(11):843-51.

Identification of members of the Wnt signaling pathway in the embryonic pituitary
gland.

Douglas KR(1), Brinkmeier ML, Kennell JA, Eswara P, Harrison TA, Patrianakos AI, 
Sprecher BS, Potok MA, Lyons RH Jr, MacDougald OA, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, 4301
MSRBIII, 1500 W. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

Prop1 is one of several transcription factors important for the development of
the pituitary gland. Downstream targets of PROP1 and other critical pituitary
transcription factors remain largely unknown. We have generated a partial
expression profile of the developing pituitary gland containing over 350
transcripts, using cDNA subtractive hybridization between Prop1(df/df) and
wild-type embryonic pituitary gland primordia. Numerous classes of genes
including transcription factors, membrane associated molecules, and cell cycle
regulators were identified in this study. Of the transcripts, 34% do not have
sequence similarity to known genes, but are similar to ESTs, and 4% represent
novel sequences. Pituitary gland expression of a number of clones was verified
using in situ hybridization. Several members of the Wnt signaling pathway were
identified in the developing pituitary gland. The frizzled2 receptor, Apc,
beta-catenin, groucho, and a novel isoform of TCF4 (officially named Tcf7l2) were
identified in developing pituitary libraries. Three N-terminal alternatively
spliced Tcf7l2 isoforms are reported here, each of which lacks a DNA-binding
domain. Functional studies indicate that these isoforms can act as endogenous
inhibitors of Wnt signaling in some contexts. This is the first report of Tcf7l2 
and Fzd2 expression in the developing pituitary. These molecules may be important
in mediating Wnt signaling during pituitary ontogeny. We expect other transcripts
from these libraries to be involved in pituitary gland development.

PMID: 11845287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2000 Jun;38(6):460-1.

[Expression of T cell factor 4 in renal cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin G(1), Zang T, Zhang Z, Xing D, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Hospital, Beijing Medical University, Beijing
100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate of the transduction of Wnt/Frizzled pathway in nuclei
and the function of TCF4 (T Cell Factor) in renal cell carcinoma.
METHODS: TCF4 mRNA are tested through RT-PCR and Northern Blot in renal cancer
tissue and renal cancer cell strain (GRC-I).
RESULTS: It has been certificated that TCF4 are expressed in renal cell
carcinoma, at the same time, there are some different splice of TCF4 in renal
cancer. A new 300bp mutant gene are found.
CONCLUSION: TCF4, an important molecular of Wnt/Frizzled pathway, takes part in
the formation and progression of renal cell carcinoma, different splice of TCF4
is one of the mechanism.

PMID: 11832085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2002 Jan 1;62(1):277-82.

Wnt-1 but not epidermal growth factor induces beta-catenin/T-cell
factor-dependent transcription in esophageal cancer cells.

Mizushima T(1), Nakagawa H, Kamberov YG, Wilder EL, Klein PS, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

beta-Catenin plays an important role in signal transduction pathways that
regulate cellular differentiation and proliferation. The increased concentration 
of this protein in the cytoplasm favors its binding to the T-cell factor (TCF)
family of DNA-binding proteins, and it subsequently translocates to the nucleus, 
where it induces transcription of specific genes. We explored mechanisms that
lead to activation of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) independent of adenomatous polyposis coli and
beta-catenin mutation. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay demonstrated that
TCF4 and beta-catenin form a complex and have DNA binding activity. However,
there was no constitutive activation of beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription.
Coculture experiments demonstrated that Wnt-1, but not Wnt-5A and Wnt-7A,
activated the TCF reporter gene. Additionally, when cultured with
Wnt-1-conditioned media, ESCC cell lines showed an accumulation of beta-catenin
in the cytoplasm. Although both Wnt and epidermal growth factor inactivate
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, activation of epidermal growth factor receptor
did not stabilize beta-catenin. A comparison of extracellular stimuli suggests
that specific Wnt family members stabilize beta-catenin with resulting activation
of TCF-dependent transcription in ESCC.

PMID: 11782388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Cancer. 2002 Jan 1;97(1):42-51.

Cell type- and promoter-dependent modulation of the Wnt signaling pathway by
sodium butyrate.

Bordonaro M(1), Lazarova DL, Augenlicht LH, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Section, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
michaelbordonaro@yahoo.com

The Wnt signaling pathway modulates the transcription of genes linked to
proliferation, differentiation and tumor progression. beta-Catenin-Tcf
(BCT)-dependent Wnt signaling is influenced by the short-chain fatty acid sodium 
butyrate, which induces growth arrest and/or maturation of colonic carcinoma
cells. We have compared the effects of sodium butyrate on BCT-dependent signaling
in 2 colon carcinoma cell lines that differ in their physiologic response to
butyrate, with SW620 cells responding to butyrate by undergoing terminal
differentiation and apoptosis, and HCT-116 cells undergoing reversible growth
arrest, but no significant apoptotic cell death. Furthermore, these colon
carcinoma cell lines differ in their mechanism of Wnt pathway activation, with
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutant SW620 cells having high levels of BCT
complexes and APC wild-type HCT-116 cells having mutant beta-catenin, low levels 
of BCT complexes and correspondingly higher levels of free Tcf. We have
demonstrated that in SW620 cells, butyrate downregulates BCT-dependent expression
of the Tcf-TK, matrilysin and cyclin D1 promoters, whereas in HCT-116 cells,
butyrate upregulates expression of these promoters. Cotransfection with
expression vectors that interfere with the Wnt pathway suggests that butyrate
enhances BCT complex-DNA binding. Butyrate reduces the expression of Tcf4 in
HCT-116 cells, consistent with the induction by butyrate of Tcf-repressible
promoters in these cells. These findings indicate that sodium butyrate modulates 
the Wnt pathway in SW620 and HCT-116 cells in a different manner and that these
differences have consequences for promoter activity that may influence the
physiologic response to butyrate.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11774242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 15;15(24):3342-54.

Chromatin-specific regulation of LEF-1-beta-catenin transcription activation and 
inhibition in vitro.

Tutter AV(1), Fryer CJ, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Transcriptional activation of Wnt/Wg-responsive genes requires the stabilization 
and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, a dedicated coactivator of LEF/TCF
enhancer-binding proteins. Here we report that recombinant beta-catenin strongly 
enhances binding and transactivation by LEF-1 on chromatin templates in vitro.
Interestingly, different LEF-1 isoforms vary in their ability to bind nucleosomal
templates in the absence of beta-catenin, owing to N-terminal residues that
repress binding to chromatin, but not nonchromatin, templates. Transcriptional
activation in vitro requires both the armadillo (ARM) repeats and the C terminus 
of beta-catenin, whereas the phosphorylated N terminus is inhibitory to
transcription. A fragment spanning the C terminus (CT) and ARM repeats 11 and 12 
(CT-ARM), but not the CT alone, functions as a dominant negative inhibitor of
LEF-1-beta-cat activity in vitro and can block ATP-dependent binding of the
complex to chromatin. LEF-1-beta-cat transactivation in vitro was also repressed 
by inhibitor of beta-catenin and Tcf-4 (ICAT), a physiological inhibitor of
Wnt/Wg signaling that interacts with ARM repeats 11 and 12, and by the
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory compound, sulindac. None of these transcription
inhibitors (CT-ARM, ICAT, or sulindac) could disrupt the LEF-1-beta-cat complex
after it was stably bound to chromatin. We conclude that the CT-ARM region of
beta-catenin functions as a chromatin-specific activation domain, and that
several inhibitors of the Wnt/Wg pathway directly modulate LEF-1-beta-cat
activity on chromatin.

PMCID: PMC312851
PMID: 11751639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8664-7.

Evidence that APC regulates survivin expression: a possible mechanism
contributing to the stem cell origin of colon cancer.

Zhang T(1), Otevrel T, Gao Z, Gao Z, Ehrlich SM, Fields JZ, Boman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic and Preventive Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res 2002 Dec 15;62(24):7379.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):776-7; author reply 777-9.

Because colorectal cancers (CRCs) frequently display APC mutation, inhibition of 
apoptosis, and increased expression of the antiapoptotic protein survivin, we
hypothesized that APC mutation inhibits apoptosis by allowing constitutive
survivin expression. Using HT-29 CRC cell lines having inducible wild-type APC
(wt-APC) or transfected dominant-negative TCF-4, we show that wt-APC
down-regulates survivin expression via APC/beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling. Using
normal colonic epithelium, we found survivin by immunostaining/reverse
transcription-PCR to be preferentially expressed in the lower crypt (which
inversely correlates with wt-APC's expression pattern). Thus, wt-APC, by
progressively decreasing survivin and increasing apoptosis from crypt bottom to
top, may limit the population size of stem cells and other proliferative cells in
the lower crypt; mutant APC may allow expansion of these populations, thereby
initiating tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11751382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Jan;33(1):73-81.

Frequent alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway in colorectal cancer with
microsatellite instability.

Shimizu Y(1), Ikeda S, Fujimori M, Kodama S, Nakahara M, Okajima M, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Hiroshima University Faculty of Medicine, 1-2-3 
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

It is generally accepted that both dysfunction of the Wnt signaling pathway,
including mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and beta-catenin
genes, and genetic instability play important roles in colorectal carcinogenesis.
However, alteration of the components in the Wnt signaling pathway in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) has not been elucidated. In
order to assess the status of the Wnt signaling components in CRC with MSI,
mutational analyses of the beta-catenin, APC, Axin 1, and T cell factor 4 (TCF4) 
genes were performed. Three of 33 samples had mutations in exon 3 of the
beta-catenin gene and two in the APC gene. Eight mutations in seven samples were 
detected by single-strand conformation polymorphism and subsequent direct
sequence analysis of the entire coding region of the Axin 1 gene. Furthermore,
TCF4, which is one of the transcriptional factors in the Wnt signaling pathway
and has a mononucleotide repeat sequence (a nine- adenine repeat, (A)9) in its
C-terminal region, was mutated in 13 of the 33 samples. Thus, alteration in the
Wnt signaling pathway is frequently observed in CRC with MSI, including
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, as well as in familial adenomatous
polyposis and sporadic CRC without MSI.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6786-93.

Regulation and possible function of beta-catenin in human monocytes.

Thiele A(1), Wasner M, Müller C, Engeland K, Hauschildt S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Department of Immunobiology, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

In this study, we demonstrate that adherence factors, serum constituents, LPS,
and zymosan are capable of inducing a cellular accumulation of beta-catenin in
human monocytes. Whereas adherence-dependent accumulation of beta-catenin can be 
blocked by wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
accumulation induced by the remaining stimuli cannot be prevented by inhibition
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, implying the involvement of beta-catenin in
other not yet described signal transduction pathways. A role of beta-catenin in
adherence-dependent processes by interacting with classical cadherins can be
excluded as we could not detect cadherins in monocytes. To test whether it is
possible that beta-catenin interacts with LEF/TCF (lymphoid enhancer factor/T
cell factor) transcription factors, we studied the expression of this protein
family. TCF-4 was identified as the LEF/TCF transcription factor present in human
monocytes. However, neither cellular induction of beta-catenin nor cotransfection
experiments with beta-catenin conducted in the monocytic cell line THP-1 resulted
in the activation of a LEF/TCF-dependent promoter, suggesting the requirement of 
additional signals. Concurrent with this suggestion, we found that LPS and
zymosan, two physiological inducers of beta-catenin, caused an increase in the
expression of genes that are positively regulated by beta-catenin.

PMID: 11739494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6469-77. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Enhancer-specific modulation of E protein activity.

Markus M(1), Du Z, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Homodimeric complexes of members of the E protein family of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are important for tissue-specific
activation of genes in B lymphocytes (Bain, G., Gruenwald, S., and Murre, C.
(1993) Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 3522-3529; Shen, C. P., and Kadesch, T. (1995) Mol.
Cell Biol. 15, 4518-4524; Jacobs, Y., et al. (1994) Mol. Cell Biol. 14,
4087-4096; Wilson, R. B., et al. (1991) Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 6185-6191). These
homodimers, however, have little activity on myogenic enhancers (Weintraub, H.,
Genetta, T., and Kadesch, T. (1994) Genes Dev. 8, 2203-2211). We report here the 
identification of a novel cis-acting transcriptional repression domain in the E
protein family of bHLH transcription factors. This domain, the Rep domain, is
present in each of the known vertebrate E proteins. Extensive mapping analysis
demonstrates that this domain is an acidic region of 30 amino acids with a
predicted loop structure. Fusion studies indicate that the Rep domain can repress
both of the E protein transactivation domains (AD1 and AD2). Physiologically, the
Rep domain plays a key role in maintaining E protein homodimers in an inactive
state on myogenic enhancers. In addition, we demonstrate that Rep domain mediated
repression of AD1 is a necessary for the function of MyoD-E protein heterodimeric
complexes. These studies demonstrate that the Rep domain is important for
modulating the transcriptional activity of E proteins and provide key insights
into both the selectivity and mechanism of action of E protein containing bHLH
protein complexes.

PMID: 11724804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 15;61(22):8089-93.

Expression of the invasion factor laminin gamma2 in colorectal carcinomas is
regulated by beta-catenin.

Hlubek F(1), Jung A, Kotzor N, Kirchner T, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstrasse
8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The migration-inducing gamma2 chain of laminin-5, one of the best known invasion 
markers, is strongly overexpressed in disseminating and infiltrating tumor cells 
at the invasive front of colorectal carcinomas. The same tumor cells show nuclear
accumulation of the oncoprotein beta-catenin, which together with T-cell
factor-DNA-binding proteins, functions as transcriptional activator of genes
involved in tumor progression. Here we show that beta-catenin activates the human
laminin-5 gamma2 gene through two T-cell factor-binding elements in a synergistic
manner together with hepatocyte growth factor and conclude that laminin-5 gamma2 
is another important target gene of nuclear beta-catenin during tumor
progression.

PMID: 11719433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Dec;8(12):1053-7.

Structure of a human Tcf4-beta-catenin complex.

Poy F(1), Lepourcelet M, Shivdasani RA, Eck MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The multifunctional protein beta-catenin is important for cell adhesion, because 
it binds cadherins, and the Wnt signal transduction pathway, where it interacts
with the Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein and TCF/Lef family
transcription factors. Mutations in APC or in beta-catenin are estimated to
trigger formation of over 90% of all colon cancers. In colonic epithelia, these
mutations produce elevated levels of Tcf4-beta-catenin, which stimulates a
transcriptional response that initiates polyp formation and eventually malignant 
growth. Thus, disruption of the Tcf4-beta-catenin interaction may be an
attractive goal for therapeutic intervention. Here we describe the crystal
structure of a human Tcf4-beta-catenin complex and compare it with recent
structures of beta-catenin in complex with Xenopus Tcf3 (XTcf3) and mammalian
E-cadherin. The structure reveals anticipated similarities with the closely
related XTcf3 complex but unexpectedly lacks one component observed in the XTcf3 
structure.

PMID: 11713476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Dec;8(12):1048-52.

Tcf4 can specifically recognize beta-catenin using alternative conformations.

Graham TA(1), Ferkey DM, Mao F, Kimelman D, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

Accumulation of the Wnt pathway effector beta-catenin is a hallmark of a number
of cancers, including colon cancer. As beta-catenin accumulates in the cell, it
forms a complex with Tcf family transcription factors and activates the
transcription of several critical genes involved in cell proliferation. Because
Tcf4 is the predominant Tcf factor present in colon cancer cells, drugs that
specifically disrupt the beta-catenin-Tcf4 complex could be useful in treating
colon cancers. Earlier structural and biochemical studies demonstrated that the
central region of the beta-catenin binding domain of Tcf is essential for
anchoring Tcf to beta-catenin via two conserved lysines in beta-catenin (called
the charged 'buttons'). Here we report the crystal structure of a
beta-catenin-Tcf4 complex at 2.0 A resolution. Our structural and mutagenesis
studies show that Tcf4 docks specifically to beta-catenin using several distinct 
conformations in its essential central region. These conformations allow
different glutamate residues in the central region of Tcf4 to form a salt bridge 
with the same critical charged button, Lys 312 of beta-catenin. We propose that
this interaction may be the first event in beta-catenin-Tcf4 recognition.

PMID: 11713475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 1;61(21):7722-6.

Up-regulation of the ectodermal-neural cortex 1 (ENC1) gene, a downstream target 
of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor complex, in colorectal carcinomas.

Fujita M(1), Furukawa Y, Tsunoda T, Tanaka T, Ogawa M, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

To clarify the molecular mechanisms of human carcinogenesis associated with
abnormal Wnt/wingless signaling, we searched for genes the expression of which
was significantly altered by introduction of wild-type AXIN1 into LoVo colon
cancer cells. By means of a cDNA microarray, we compared expression profiles of
LoVo cells infected with either adenoviruses expressing wild-type AXIN1 (Ad-Axin)
or those expressing a control gene (Ad-LacZ). Among the genes showing altered
expression, the ectodermal-neural cortex 1 (ENC1) gene was down-regulated in
response to Ad-Axin. The promoter activity of ENC1 was elevated approximately
3-fold by transfection of an activated form of beta-catenin together with
wild-type T-cell factor (Tcf)4 in HeLa cells. Semiquantitative reverse
transcription-PCR experiments revealed that expression of ENC1 was increased in
more than two-thirds of 24 primary colon cancer tissues that we examined compared
with corresponding noncancerous mucosae. Introduction of exogenous ENC1 increased
the growth rate of HCT116 colon cancer cells in serum-depleted medium. In other
experiments, overexpression of ENC1 in HT-29 colon cancer cells suppressed the
usual increase of two differentiation markers, in response to treatment with
sodium butyrate, a differentiation-inducible agent. These data suggest that ENC1 
is regulated by the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway and that its altered expression may 
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by suppressing differentiation of colonic
cells.

PMID: 11691783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Oncology. 2001;61(2):156-61.

Genetic alterations in the human Tcf-4 gene in Japanese patients with sporadic
gastrointestinal cancers with microsatellite instability.

Saeki H(1), Tanaka S, Tokunaga E, Kawaguchi H, Ikeda Y, Maehara Y, Sugimachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. hsaeki@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Disruption of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway has been proposed as an important 
step in the development of cancer. The Tcf-4 transcription factor gene was
reported to be one of the targets of microsatellite instability (MSI) in
colorectal cancers in with MSI. We carried out a sequencing analysis of the Tcf-4
gene in 41 Japanese patients with gastrointestinal tumors with MSI as well as in 
cancer cell lines. Three of 21 (14.3%) colorectal tumors with MSI contained a
mutant Tcf-4 gene encoding 1-bp deletion in an (A)9 repeat, leading to carboxyl
terminal truncation of Tcf-4 protein. No Tcf-4 mutations were detected in 20
gastric tumors with MSI, or in gastric cancer cell lines. Additionally, we found 
a novel transcript of the Tcf-4 gene which contained a segment of 73 bp in front 
of the (A)9 repeat of the Tcf-4 coding sequence. Sequencing analysis revealed
that the inserted fragment was 60% homologous to that of exon IXA of the Tcf-1
gene. It is of interest that this insertion resulted in truncation of Tcf-4,
similar to the 1-bp deletion in the (A)9 repeat. Therefore, in part of the
Japanese colorectal tumors with MSI, frameshift mutations in Tcf-4 may be of
functional significance. Functional alterations in the Tcf-4 signaling network in
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis require further investigations.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11528255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;6(5):565-9.

Association and linkage studies between bipolar affective disorder and the
polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci ERDA1, SEF2-1B, MAB21L and KCNN3.

Meira-Lima IV(1), Zhao J, Sham P, Pereira AC, Krieger JE, Vallada H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience (LIM 27), Institute of Psychiatry, University of
São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

Several reports have suggested the presence of anticipation in bipolar affective 
disorder (BPAD). In addition, independent studies using the RED (repeat expansion
detection) have shown association between BPAD and longer CAG/CTG repeats.
Therefore loci with large CAG/CTG repeats are plausible candidates in the
inheritance of BPAD. The present study assesses the length of the repeats in four
loci: the ERDA-1 locus which is known to account for most of the long CAG repeats
detected by RED, the SEF2-1b locus which is placed in a region where positive
linkage results have been reported and the loci MAB21L and KCNN3 as functional
candidate genes. A Brazilian case-control sample with 115 unrelated BPAD patients
and 196 healthy control subjects and 14 multiply affected bipolar families was
investigated. With the case-control design the distribution of alleles between
the two groups did not approach statistical significance. The extended
transmission disequilibrium test (ETDT) performed in our families did not show
evidence for linkage disequilibrium. Parametric and non-parametric linkage
analysis also did not provide support for linkage between any of the four loci
and BPAD. Our data do not support the hypothesis that variation at the
polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci ERDA-1, SEF2-1b, MAB21L or KCNN3 influence
susceptibility to BPAD in our sample.

PMID: 11526470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Cell Biol. 2001 Sep 3;154(5):983-93. Epub 2001 Aug 27.

Physiological regulation of [beta]-catenin stability by Tcf3 and CK1epsilon.

Lee E(1), Salic A, Kirschner MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The wnt pathway regulates the steady state level of beta-catenin, a
transcriptional coactivator for the Tcf3/Lef1 family of DNA binding proteins. We 
demonstrate that Tcf3 can inhibit beta-catenin turnover via its competition with 
axin and adenomatous polyposis for beta-catenin binding. A mutant of beta-catenin
that cannot bind Tcf3 is degraded faster than the wild-type protein in Xenopus
embryos and extracts. A fragment of beta-catenin and a peptide encoding the NH2
terminus of Tcf4 that block the interaction between beta-catenin and Tcf3
stimulate beta-catenin degradation, indicating this interaction normally plays an
important role in regulating beta-catenin turnover. Tcf3 is a substrate for both 
glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3 and casein kinase (CK) 1epsilon, and
phosphorylation of Tcf3 by CKIepsilon stimulates its binding to beta-catenin, an 
effect reversed by GSK3. Tcf3 synergizes with CK1epsilon to inhibit beta-catenin 
degradation, whereas CKI-7, an inhibitor of CK1epsilon, reduces the inhibitory
effect of Tcf3. Finally, we provide evidence that CK1epsilon stimulates the
binding of dishevelled (dsh) to GSk3 binding protein (GBP) in extracts. Along
with evidence that a significant amount of Tcf protein is nonnuclear, these
findings suggest that CK1epsilon can modulate wnt signaling in vivo by regulating
both the beta-catenin-Tcf3 and the GBP-dsh interfaces.

PMCID: PMC2196183
PMID: 11524435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41675-82. Epub 2001 Aug 24.

Differential modulation of transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors by
direct protein-protein interactions with the T cell factor family of
transcription factors.

El-Tanani M(1), Fernig DG, Barraclough R, Green C, Rudland P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Molecular Medicine Group, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United
Kingdom.

Two major signaling pathways, those triggered by estrogen (E(2)) and by the Wnt
family, interact in the breast to cause growth and differentiation. The estrogen 
receptors ER(alpha) and ER(beta) are activated by binding E(2) and act as
ligand-dependent transcription factors. The effector for the Wnt family is the
Tcf family of transcription factors. Both sets of transcription factors recognize
discrete but different nucleotide sequences in the promoters of their target
genes. By using transient transfections of reporter constructs for the
osteopontin and thymidine kinase promoters in rat mammary cells, we show that
Tcf-4 antagonizes and Tcf-1 stimulates the effects of activated ER/E(2). For
mutants of the former promoter, the stimulatory effects of ER(alpha)/E(2) can be 
made to be dependent on Tcf-1, and for the latter promoter the effects of the T
cell factors (TCFs) are dependent on ER/E(2). Direct interaction between ERs and 
Tcfs either at the Tcf/ER(alpha)-binding site on the DNA or in the absence of DNA
is established by gel retardation assays or by coimmunoprecipitation/biosensor
methods, respectively. These results show that the two sets of transcription
factors can interact directly, the interaction between ERs and Tcf-4 being
antagonistic and that between ERs and Tcf-1 being synergistic on the activity of 
the promoters employed. Since Tcf-4 is the major Tcf family member in the breast,
it is suggested that the antagonistic interaction is normally dominant in vivo in
this tissue.

PMID: 11522780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):38563-9. Epub 2001 Aug 14.

Presenilin 1 regulates beta-catenin-mediated transcription in a glycogen synthase
kinase-3-independent fashion.

Palacino JJ(1), Murphy MP, Murayama O, Iwasaki K, Fujiwara M, Takashima A, Golde 
TE, Wolozin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience Program, Loyola University Medical
Center, Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA.

Presenilin 1 (PS1) is linked with Alzheimer's disease but exhibits functional
roles regulating growth and development. For instance, PS1 binds to beta-catenin 
and modulates beta-catenin signaling. In the current study, we observed that
knockout of PS1 inhibited beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 35%, as shown by
a luciferase reporter driven by the hTcf-4 promoter. Overexpressing wild-type PS1
increased beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 37.5%, and overexpressing PS1
with mutations associated with Alzheimer's disease decreased
beta-catenin-mediated transcription by 66%. To examine whether regulation of
beta-catenin by PS1 requires phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
(GSK 3beta), we examined whether inhibiting GSK 3beta activity overcomes the
inhibition of beta-catenin transcription induced by mutant PS1 constructs. Cells 
expressing wild-type or mutant PS1 were treated with LiCl, which inhibits GSK
3beta, or transfected with beta-catenin constructs that lack the GSK 3beta
phosphorylation sites. Neither treatment overcame PS1-mediated inhibition of
beta-catenin signaling, suggesting that regulation of beta-catenin by PS1 was not
affected by the activity of GSK 3beta. To investigate how PS1 might regulate
beta-catenin signaling, we determined whether PS1 interacts with other elements
of the beta-catenin signaling cascade, such as the Tcf-4 transcription factor.
Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed binding of PS1 and hTcf-4, and examining
nuclear isolates indicated that nuclear hTcf-4 was decreased in cells expressing 
mutant PS1. These data show that PS1 interacts with multiple components of the
beta-catenin signaling cascade and suggest that PS1 regulates beta-catenin in a
manner independent of GSK 3beta activity.

PMID: 11504726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. EMBO J. 2001 Aug 15;20(16):4500-11.

Negative regulation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway by the transcriptional
repressor HBP1.

Sampson EM(1), Haque ZK, Ku MC, Tevosian SG, Albanese C, Pestell RG, Paulson KE, 
Yee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

In certain cancers, constitutive Wnt signaling results from mutation in one or
more pathway components. The result is the accumulation and nuclear localization 
of beta-catenin, which interacts with the lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF)/T-cell
factor (TCF) family of HMG-box transcription factors, which activate important
growth regulatory genes, including cyclin D1 and c-myc. As exemplified by APC and
axin, the negative regulation of beta-catenin is important for tumor suppression.
Another potential mode of negative regulation is transcriptional repression of
cyclin D1 and other Wnt target genes. In mammals, the transcriptional repressors 
in the Wnt pathway are not well defined. We have previously identified HBP1 as an
HMG-box repressor and a cell cycle inhibitor. Here, we show that HBP1 is a
repressor of the cyclin D1 gene and inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway. The
inhibition of Wnt signaling and growth requires a common domain of HBP1. The
apparent mechanism is an inhibition of TCF/LEF DNA binding through a physical
interaction with HBP1. These data suggest that the suppression of Wnt signaling
by HBP1 may be a mechanism to prevent inappropriate proliferation.

PMCID: PMC125566
PMID: 11500377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5857-68.

Oncogenic mutants of RON and MET receptor tyrosine kinases cause activation of
the beta-catenin pathway.

Danilkovitch-Miagkova A(1), Miagkov A, Skeel A, Nakaigawa N, Zbar B, Leonard EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
danilkovitch@mail.ncifcrf.gov

beta-Catenin is an oncogenic protein involved in regulation of cell-cell adhesion
and gene expression. Accumulation of cellular beta-catenin occurs in many types
of human cancers. Four mechanisms are known to cause increases in beta-catenin:
mutations of beta-catenin, adenomatous polyposis coli, or axin genes and
activation of Wnt signaling. We report a new cause of beta-catenin accumulation
involving oncogenic mutants of RON and MET receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs).
Cells transfected with oncogenic RON or MET were characterized by beta-catenin
tyrosine phosphorylation and accumulation; constitutive activation of a Tcf
transcriptional factor; and increased levels of beta-catenin/Tcf target oncogene 
proteins c-myc and cyclin D1. Interference with the beta-catenin pathway reduced 
the transforming potential of mutated RON and MET. Activation of beta-catenin by 
oncogenic RON and MET constitutes a new pathway, which might lead to cell
transformation by these and other mutant growth factor RTKs.

PMCID: PMC87305
PMID: 11486025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jul 23;154(2):369-87.

Vitamin D(3) promotes the differentiation of colon carcinoma cells by the
induction of E-cadherin and the inhibition of beta-catenin signaling.

Pálmer HG(1), González-Sancho JM, Espada J, Berciano MT, Puig I, Baulida J,
Quintanilla M, Cano A, de Herreros AG, Lafarga M, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols, " Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, E-28029 Madrid,
Spain.

The beta-catenin signaling pathway is deregulated in nearly all colon cancers.
Nonhypercalcemic vitamin D3 (1alpha,25-dehydroxyvitamin D(3)) analogues are
candidate drugs to treat this neoplasia. We show that these compounds promote the
differentiation of human colon carcinoma SW480 cells expressing vitamin D
receptors (VDRs) (SW480-ADH) but not that of a malignant subline (SW480-R) or
metastasic derivative (SW620) cells lacking VDR. 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) induced the
expression of E-cadherin and other adhesion proteins (occludin, Zonula occludens 
[ZO]-1, ZO-2, vinculin) and promoted the translocation of beta-catenin,
plakoglobin, and ZO-1 from the nucleus to the plasma membrane. Ligand-activated
VDR competed with T cell transcription factor (TCF)-4 for beta-catenin binding.
Accordingly, 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) repressed beta-catenin-TCF-4 transcriptional
activity. Moreover, VDR activity was enhanced by ectopic beta-catenin and reduced
by TCF-4. Also, 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) inhibited expression of
beta-catenin-TCF-4-responsive genes, c-myc, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor delta, Tcf-1, and CD44, whereas it induced expression of ZO-1. Our
results show that 1alpha,25(OH)2D(3) induces E-cadherin and modulates
beta-catenin-TCF-4 target genes in a manner opposite to that of beta-catenin,
promoting the differentiation of colon carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2150773
PMID: 11470825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 15;61(14):5619-29.

Metastasis-inducing dna regulates the expression of the osteopontin gene by
binding the transcription factor Tcf-4.

El-Tanani M(1), Barraclough R, Wilkinson MC, Rudland PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Life Sciences Building, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

Small 1,000-bp fragments of genomic DNA obtained from human malignant breast
cancer cell lines when transfected into a benign rat mammary cell line enhance
transcription of the osteopontin gene and thereby cause the cells to metastasize 
in syngeneic rats. To identify the molecular events underlying this process,
transient cotransfections of an osteopontin promoter-reporter construct and
fragments of one metastasis-inducing DNA (Met-DNA) have identified the active
components in the Met-DNA as the binding sites for the T-cell factor (Tcf) family
of transcription factors. Incubation of cell extracts with active DNA fragments
containing the sequence CAAAG caused retardation of their mobilities on
polyacrylamide gels, and Western blotting identified Tcf-4, beta-catenin, and
E-cadherin in the relevant DNA complexes in vitro. Transfection of an expression 
vector for Tcf-4 inhibited the stimulated activity of the osteopontin
promoter-reporter construct caused by transiently transfected active fragments of
Met-DNA or permanently transfected Met-DNA. This stimulated activity of the
osteopontin promoter-reporter construct is accompanied by an increase in
endogenous osteopontin mRNA but not in fos or actin mRNAs in the transfected
cells. Permanent transfection of the benign rat mammary cell line with a 20-bp
fragment from the Met-DNA containing the Tcf recognition sequence CAAAG caused an
enhanced permanent production of endogenous osteopontin protein in vitro and
induced the cells to metastasize in syngeneic rats in vivo. The corresponding
fragment without the CAAAG sequence was without either effect. Therefore, the
regulatory effect of the C9-Met-DNA is exerted, at least in part, by a CAAAG
sequence that can sequester the endogenous inhibitory Tcf-4 and thereby promote
transcription of osteopontin, the direct effector of metastasis in this system.

PMID: 11454716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Jul 1;128(1):43-5.

Beta-catenin activation through mutation is rare in rectal cancer.

Nilbert M(1), Rambech E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
mef.nilbert@onk.lu.se

Increased transcriptional activation through beta-catenin stabilization plays a
central role in colorectal tumorigenesis. Alterations of phosphorylation sites
within the CTNNB1 gene, which codes for beta-catenin has been reported to occur
in about one-half of colorectal tumors without APC-gene mutations. We assessed
the importance of mutations in the regulatory domain, located within exon 3 of
CTNNB1, in 103 rectal carcinomas and correlated these data with presence of
microsatellite instability, somatic frame-shift alterations of the TCF-4 gene,
and APC-gene mutations in the tumors. No mutation was detected in exon 3 of the
CTNNB1 gene and our results thus demonstrate that beta-catenin activation through
mutation rarely contributes to the development of sporadic and microsatellite
instability stable rectal cancer.

PMID: 11454429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Anticancer Res. 2001 Mar-Apr;21(2A):911-5.

Enhanced expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and nuclear beta-catenin are related to
mutations in the APC gene in human colorectal cancer.

Dimberg J(1), Hugander A, Sirsjö A, Söderkvist P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Surgery, Division of Cell Biology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Linköping, Sweden. jan.dimberg@hhj.hj.se

Mutational inactivation of the human tumour suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) results in constitutive activation of beta-catenin/T cell factor-4
(Tcf-4) mediated transcription of target genes. Up-regulation of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) protein is frequently found in human colorectal cancer (CRC). We analysed
38 CRC for mutations in APC and beta-catenin and found an association between APC
mutations and elevated COX-2 levels. Furthermore, APC mutations were
predominantly observed in tumour tissues from the rectum compared to tumours of
colonic origin. Western blot analysis revealed that nuclear beta-catenin levels
were generally higher in tumours with APC mutations compared to tumours with wild
type APC. However, there was also a higher level of nuclear beta-catenin in
tumour compared to normal tissue, but nuclear Tcf-4 protein was constitutively
expressed in tumour and normal tissue and showed no differences. An identified
putative Tcf-4 binding element in the COX-2 promoter may partly explain the
enhanced level of COX-2 and support the idea that COX-2 may be a downstream
target of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway.

PMID: 11396184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gene. 2001 May 16;269(1-2):167-75.

Regulation of human P2X1 promoter activity by beta helix-loop-helix factors in
smooth muscle cells.

Dhulipala PD(1), Lianos EA, Kotlikoff MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

We isolated and characterized genomic clones of the human P2X1 receptor (hP2X1)
gene in an effort to understand its tissue specific expression. The hP2X1 gene
contains 12 exons spanning 20 kb, with exon sizes ranging from 59 to 143 bp. A
385 bp upstream fragment promoted hP2X1 gene expression in smooth muscle (A7R5
and primary trachealis) and fibroblast (NIH3T3) cell lines, and mutation of a
consensus E box sequence (CACCTG) within this fragment (-340 to -345) did not
alter basal promoter activity. However, co-transfected bHLH factors regulated
activity of the 385 bp minimal P2X1 promoter in a tissue-specific manner. E12
expression inhibited and ITF2b augmented activity in A7R5 cells, but had no
effect in NIH3T3 cells. ITF2a, Myo-D, and Id1 proteins had no effect on either
cell line, but co-expression of ITF2a blocked E12 inhibition in A7R5 cells, while
ITF2b failed to reverse the inhibition. Northern analysis of A7R5 RNA identified 
high levels of E12 and ITF2b transcripts, and gel shift assays using A7R5 and
NIH3T3 nuclear extracts indicated the formation of a protein-DNA complex with an 
oligonucleotide corresponding to -330 and -348, which was abolished by base
substitutions within the E box motif. Our results identify a critical E box
response element in the hP2X1 promoter that binds bHLH factors and demonstrate
smooth muscle specific transcriptional regulation by E proteins.

PMID: 11376948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):327-33.

p73beta, a variant of p73, enhances Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in Saos-2 cells.

Ueda Y(1), Hijikata M, Takagi S, Takada R, Takada S, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507,
Japan.

The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and p53 are very common targets for genetic
alterations in colorectal cancer, and relationships between them have been
reported. Here, we describe the relation between Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
the p53-related gene p73. p73, but not p53, activated a promoter containing the
Tcf-binding sequence in Saos-2 cells, and the degree of activation was positively
correlated with that on a p53-responsive promoter. Moreover, p73beta enhanced
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling synergistically with Wnt-3a or exogenously expressed
beta-catenin, unlike p53, and the enhancement was not caused by the accumulation 
of beta-catenin. These results show that the effects of p73 on Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling differ from those of p53.

PMID: 11327702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Neoplasia. 2001 Jan-Feb;3(1):4-9.

Isolation of a novel human gene, MARKL1, homologous to MARK3 and its involvement 
in hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

Kato T(1), Satoh S, Okabe H, Kitahara O, Ono K, Kihara C, Tanaka T, Tsunoda T,
Yamaoka Y, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Activation of the Wnt-signaling pathway is known to play a crucial role in
carcinogenesis of various human organs including the colon, liver, prostate, and 
endometrium. To investigate the mechanisms underlying hepatocellular
carcinogenesis, we attempted to identify genes regulated by beta-catenin/Tcf
complex in a human hepatoma cell line, HepG2, in which an activated form of
beta-catenin is expressed. By means of cDNA microarray, we isolated a novel human
gene, termed MARKL1 (MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase-like 1), whose
expression was downregulated in response to decreased Tcf/LEF1 activity. The
transcript expressed in liver consisted of 3529 nucleotides that contained an
open reading frame of 2256 nucleotides, encoding 752 amino acids homologous to
human MARK3 (MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 3). Expression levels of 
MARKL1 were markedly elevated in eight of nine HCCs in which nuclear accumulation
of beta-catenin were observed, which may suggest that MARKL1 plays some role in
hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1505019
PMID: 11326310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):645-53.

The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs aspirin and indomethacin attenuate
beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling.

Dihlmann S(1), Siermann A, von Knebel Doeberitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Diagnostics and Therapy, Department of Surgery,
University of Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Increasing epidemiological and experimental evidence implicates non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as anti-tumorigenic agents. The precise
mechanisms whereby NSAIDs exert their anti-neoplastic effects remain poorly
understood. Studies from hereditary and sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
suggest that NSAIDs may interfere with initiating steps of carcinogenesis, i.e.
disturbances within the beta-catenin signaling pathway. We therefore investigated
beta-catenin/TCF signaling in response to aspirin or indomethacin, respectively, 
in four CRC cell lines (SW948, SW480, HCT116, LoVo). Both, aspirin and
indomethacin inhibited transcription of a beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter
gene in a dose dependent manner. In addition, the beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional target cyclin D1 was downregulated by both drugs. Endogenous
beta-catenin levels remained unaffected by either drug. Moreover, indirect
immunofluorescence studies revealed no significant changes of subcellular
beta-catenin localization in either cell line after NSAID treatment. Likewise,
binding of the beta-catenin/TCF complex to its specific DNA-binding sites was not
altered, as demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) of
nuclear extracts derived from NSAID treated cells. These results strongly suggest
that aspirin and indomethacin attenuate the transcription of
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive genes, by modulating TCF activity without disrupting 
beta-catenin/TCF complex formation.

PMID: 11313997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 29;20(14):1793-7.

Regulatory region of metastasis-inducing DNA is the binding site for T cell
factor-4.

El-Tanani MK(1), Barraclough R, Wilkinson MC, Rudland PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Polio Research Fund Laboratories, Molecular Medicine Group, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.

Small 1000 bp fragments of DNA derived from human malignant breast cancer cells
have been isolated which, when transfected into a benign rat mammary cell line
induce the production of osteopontin and thereby endow those cells with the
capability to metastasize in syngeneic rats. Using transient transfections of an 
osteopontin promoter-reporter construct, we have now identified the active moiety
in the metastasis-inducing DNA as the binding site for the T cell factor (Tcf)
family of transcription factors and located Tcf-4, beta-catenin and E-cadherin in
the relevant DNA complex in vitro. The regulatory effects of the
metastasis-inducing DNAs are therefore exerted, at least in part, by a CAAAG
sequence which can sequester Tcf-4, thereby promoting transcription of the direct
effector for metastasis in this system, osteopontin.

PMID: 11313926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 15;61(8):3465-71.

Down-regulation of beta-catenin TCF signaling is linked to colonic epithelial
cell differentiation.

Mariadason JM(1), Bordonaro M, Aslam F, Shi L, Kuraguchi M, Velcich A, Augenlicht
LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, 111 East 210th Street, 
Bronx, New York 10467, USA. john_mariadson@netzero.net

The beta-catenin TCF pathway is implicated in the regulation of colonic
epithelial cell proliferation, but its role in the regulation of cell
differentiation is unknown. The colon carcinoma cell line, Caco-2, spontaneously 
undergoes G(0)/G(1) cell cycle arrest and differentiates along the absorptive
cell lineage over 21 days in culture. In parallel, we show that beta-catenin-TCF 
activity and complex formation are significantly down-regulated. The
down-regulation of beta-catenin-TCF signaling was independent of APC, which we
characterized as having a nonsense mutation in codon 1367 in Caco-2 cells, but
was associated with a decrease in TCF-4 protein levels. Total beta-catenin levels
increased during Caco-2 cell differentiation, although this was attributable to
an increase in the membrane, E-cadherin-associated, fraction of beta-catenin.
Importantly, down-regulation of beta-catenin-TCF signaling in undifferentiated
Caco-2 cells by three different mechanisms, ectopic expression of E-cadherin,
wild-type APC, or dominant negative TCF-4, resulted in an increase in the
promoter activities of two genes that are well-established markers of cell
differentiation, alkaline phosphatase and intestinal fatty acid binding protein. 
These studies demonstrate, therefore, that in addition to its established role in
the regulation of cell proliferation, down-regulation of the beta-catenin-TCF
pathway is associated with the promotion of a more-differentiated phenotype in
colonic epithelial cells.

PMID: 11309309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 15;61(6):2751-8.

Restoration of epithelial cell polarity in a colorectal cancer cell line by
suppression of beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4-mediated gene transactivation.

Naishiro Y(1), Yamada T, Takaoka AS, Hayashi R, Hasegawa F, Imai K, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Beta-catenin acts as a transcriptional coactivator by forming a complex with
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) DNA-binding proteins. Aberrant
transactivation of a certain set of target genes by beta-catenin and TCF4
complexes has been implicated in familial and sporadic colorectal tumorigenesis. 
A colorectal cancer cell line, DLD-1, becomes irregularly multilayered, when
maintained confluent for 2-3 weeks, and forms numerous dome-like polypoid foci
piled-up over the surface of cell sheets. By the use of a strict
tetracycline-regulation system, we found that the continuous suppression of
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene transactivation by dominant-negative TCF4B
(deltaN30) reduced these piled-up foci and restored a simple monolayer of
polarized columnar cells resembling normal intestinal epithelium. The restoration
of epithelial cell polarity was evident in two ways: (a) the formation of
microvilli over the apical surface; and (b) the distribution of a tight junction 
protein, ZO-1, to the lateral plasma membrane. Retroviral expression of
stabilized beta-catenin (deltaN89) induced the formation of similar piled-up foci
in untransformed IEC6 intestinal epithelial cells. Sulindac, a nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug effective against colorectal tumorigenesis in familial
adenomatous polyposis syndrome, suppressed the formation of foci. The loss of
epithelial cell polarity may be a critical cellular event driving
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated intestinal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11289158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 9;306(5):1179-89.

Thermodynamics of the high-affinity interaction of TCF4 with beta-catenin.

Knapp S(1), Zamai M, Volpi D, Nardese V, Avanzi N, Breton J, Plyte S, Flocco M,
Marconi M, Isacchi A, Caiolfa VR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Chemistry, Pharmacia Corporation, Discovery Research 
Oncology, Nerviano, Italy. stefan.knapp@eu.pnu.com

The formation of a complex between beta-catenin and members of the TCF/LEF family
of high-mobility group proteins is a key regulatory event in the wnt-signaling
pathway, essential for embryonal development as well as the growth of normal and 
malignant colon epithelium. We have characterized the binding of TCF4 to human
beta-catenin by steady-state intrinsic fluorescence quenching experiments,
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC).
Binding studies in solution and in heterogeneous phase showed that TCF4 binds
reversibly to beta-catenin with an affinity (KB) of 3(+/-1) 10(8) M(-1).
Site-directed mutagenesis, together with calorimetric measurements, revealed that
residue D16 in TCF4 plays a crucial role in high-affinity binding. Mutation of
this residue to alanine resulted in a decrease of KB by two orders of magnitude
as well as a significant reduction in binding enthalpy. Binding of TCF4 to
beta-catenin gave rise to a large negative enthalpy change at 25 degrees C (-29.7
kcal/mol). Binding enthalpies were strongly temperature dependent, which resulted
in the determination of a large heat capacity change upon binding of -1.5
kcal/(mol K). The molecular events that take place upon complex formation are
discussed using the measured thermodynamic data together with the crystal
structure of the beta-catenin arm repeat region/TCF complex.

PMID: 11237626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 1;61(3):854-8.

A mammalian two-hybrid system for adenomatous polyposis coli-mutated colon cancer
therapeutics.

Wakita K(1), Tetsu O, McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, School of 
Medicine, 94143-0128, USA.

Colon cancer cells frequently lose expression of the tumor suppressor adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC). As result, beta-catenin accumulates and activates
transcription of Tcf-responsive genes. Here we describe a novel mammalian
two-hybrid system that selectively kills APC-mutated cells. This system consists 
of GAL4/beta-catenin, VP16/Tcf4, and a gene that is transcribed when GAL4 and
VP16 associate. In APC-mutated human colon cancer cells, such as SW480,
GAL4/beta-catenin accumulates, and in the presence of VP16/Tcf4, induces high
levels of expression of the reporter gene. Expression of wild-type APC reduced
GAL4/beta-catenin and intact beta-catenin levels and inhibited reporter gene
expression. In colon cancer cells such as SW48 that have wild-type APC,
GAL4/beta-catenin was degraded, and expression levels of the output gene were
low. Replacement of the reporter gene with a suicide gene resulted in selective
killing of SW480 cells. This system may be applicable for broader use of gene
therapy by targeting diseases that involve protein degradation.

PMID: 11221869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):2857-65.

Replicating adenoviruses that target tumors with constitutive activation of the
wnt signaling pathway.

Brunori M(1), Malerba M, Kashiwazaki H, Iggo R.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), 1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland.

Despite important advances in understanding the molecular basis of cancer, few
treatments have been devised which rationally target known causal oncogenic
defects. Selectively replicating viruses have a major advantage over
nonreplicating viruses to target these defects because the therapeutic effect of 
the injected virus is augmented by virus produced within the tumor. To permit
rational targeting of colon tumors, we have developed replicating adenoviruses
that express the viral E1B and E2 genes from promoters controlled by the Tcf4
transcription factor. Tcf4 is constitutively activated by mutations in the
adenomatous polyposis coli and beta-catenin genes in virtually all colon tumors
and is constitutively repressed by Groucho and CtBP in normal tissue. The Tcf-E2 
and Tcf-E1B promoters are active in many, but not all, cell lines with activation
of the wnt pathway. Viruses with Tcf regulation of E2 expression replicate
normally in SW480 colon cancer cells but show a 50- to 100-fold decrease in
replication in H1299 lung cancer cells and WI38 normal fibroblasts. Activation of
wnt signaling by transduction of a stable beta-catenin mutant into normal
fibroblasts renders the cells permissive for virus replication. Insertion of Tcf4
sites in the E1B promoter has only small effects on replication in vitro but
significantly reduces the inflammatory response in a rodent lung model in vivo.
Replicating adenoviruses with Tcf regulation of both E1B and E2 transcription are
potentially useful for the treatment of liver metastases from colorectal tumors, 
but additional changes will be required to produce a virus that can be used to
treat all colon tumors.

PMCID: PMC115912
PMID: 11222711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(3):902-15.

Gas6 induces growth, beta-catenin stabilization, and T-cell factor
transcriptional activation in contact-inhibited C57 mammary cells.

Goruppi S(1), Chiaruttini C, Ruaro ME, Varnum B, Schneider C.

Author information: 
(1)LNCIB (Laboratorio Nazionale Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie),
34012 Trieste, Italy.

Gas6 is a growth factor related to protein S that was identified as the ligand
for the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family. In this study, we show that
Gas6 induces a growth response in a cultured mammalian mammary cell line, C57MG. 
The presence of Gas6 in the medium induces growth after confluence and similarly 
causes cell cycle reentry of density-inhibited C57MG cells. We show that Axl RTK 
but not Rse is efficiently activated by Gas6 in density-inhibited C57MG cells. We
have analyzed the signaling required for the Gas6 proliferative effect and found 
a requirement for PI3K-, S6K-, and Ras-activated pathways. We also demonstrate
that Gas6 activates Akt and concomitantly inhibits GSK3 activity in a
wortmannin-dependent manner. Interestingly, Gas6 induces up-regulation of
cytosolic beta-catenin, while membrane-associated beta-catenin remains
unaffected. Stabilization of beta-catenin in C57MG cells is correlated with
activation of a T-cell factor (TCF)-responsive transcriptional element. We thus
provide evidence that Gas6 is mitogenic and induces beta-catenin proto-oncogene
stabilization and subsequent TCF/Lef transcriptional activation in a mammary
system. These results suggest that Gas6-Axl interaction, through stabilization of
beta-catenin, may have a role in mammary development and/or be involved in the
progression of mammary tumors.

PMCID: PMC86681
PMID: 11154277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jan 8;152(1):87-96.

Wnt-1 signaling inhibits apoptosis by activating beta-catenin/T cell
factor-mediated transcription.

Chen S(1), Guttridge DC, You Z, Zhang Z, Fribley A, Mayo MW, Kitajewski J, Wang
CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling and Apoptosis, Department of Biologic and
Materials Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, USA.

Wnt signaling plays a critical role in development and oncogenesis. Although
significant progress has been made in understanding the downstream signaling
cascade of Wnt signaling, little is known regarding Wnt signaling modification of
the cell death machinery. Given that numerous oncogenes transform cells by
providing cell survival function, we hypothesized that Wnt signaling may inhibit 
apoptosis. Here, we report that cells expressing Wnt-1 were resistant to cancer
therapy-mediated apoptosis. Wnt-1 signaling inhibited the cytochrome c release
and the subsequent caspase-9 activation induced by chemotherapeutic drugs,
including both vincristine and vinblastine. Furthermore, we found that
Wnt-1-mediated cell survival was dependent on the activation of beta-catenin/T
cell factor (Tcf) transcription. Inhibition of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription by 
expression of the dominant-negative mutant of Tcf-4 blocked Wnt-1-mediated cell
survival and rendered cells sensitive to apoptotic stimuli. These results provide
the first demonstration that Wnt-1 inhibits cancer therapy-mediated apoptosis and
suggests that Wnt-1 may exhibit its oncogenic potential through a mechanism of
anti-apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2193656
PMID: 11149923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Lab Invest. 2000 Dec;80(12):1915-23.

MSI-L gastric carcinomas share the hMLH1 methylation status of MSI-H carcinomas
but not their clinicopathological profile.

Pinto M(1), Oliveira C, Machado JC, Cirnes L, Tavares J, Carneiro F, Hamelin R,
Hofstra R, Seruca R, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Portugal.

Sporadic gastric carcinomas (SGC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) exhibit
mutations in target genes and display a particular clinicopathological profile.
In SGC the MSI phenotype has been associated with hMLH1 promoter
hypermethylation. Fifty-seven SGC, classified as high-frequency MSI (MSI-H),
low-frequency MSI (MSI-L), and microsatellite stable (MSS), were analyzed for
hMLH1 promoter methylation status and clinicopathological features. hMLH1
mutations and hMLH1 expression, as well as target gene mutations, were also
evaluated. Our aims were to characterize the molecular and clinicopathological
features of SGC, with and without hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation, and to compare
the molecular and clinicopathological features of MSI-L, MSI-H, and MSS tumors in
an attempt to clarify the place of MSI-L tumors in the mismatch repair (MMR)
pathway. Hypermethylation of hMLH1 promoter occurred in 27 of 57 SGC (47.3%) and 
was significantly associated with MSI status, target gene mutations, and
expansive pattern of growth of the tumors. Seventy-five percent of the MSI-H and 
50% of MSI-L carcinomas showed hypermethylation (Met+) of hMLH1 in contrast to 0%
in MSS carcinomas. No hMLH1 expression was observed in MSI-L/Met+ and MSI-H/Met+ 
cases. MSS and MSI-L tumors share the same clinicopathological profile regardless
of the methylation status of the latter and are distinct from MSI-H tumors. We
conclude that mutations in target genes, more than hypermethylation or absence of
expression of hMLH1, are the link between MSI status and most of the
clinicopathological features of SGC.

PMID: 11140703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8968-78. Epub 2000 Dec 20.

Identification of two regulatory elements within the high mobility group box
transcription factor XTCF-4.

Pukrop T(1), Gradl D, Henningfeld KA, Knochel W, Wedlich D, Kuhl M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Some members of the Wnt family of extracellular glycoproteins regulate target
gene expression by inducing stabilization and nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin, which functions as a transcriptional activator after binding to
transcription factors of the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)
family. Three different members of this family have been identified in Xenopus
laevis thus far that differ in their ability to influence mesodermal
differentiation and to activate expression of the Wnt target gene fibronectin.
Here we report on the isolation and characterization of additional variants of
XTCF-4. We show that the differential ability of these proteins and other members
of the TCF family to activate target genes is neither due to preferential
interaction with transcriptional cofactors of the groucho family or SMAD4 nor to 
different DNA binding affinities. Expression of these proteins in an epithelial
cell line reveals differences in their ability to form a ternary complex with DNA
and beta-catenin. Interestingly, formation of this ternary complex was not
sufficient to activate target gene expression as previously thought. Our
experiments identify two amino acid sequence motifs, LVPQ and SFLSS, in the
central domain of XTCF-4 that regulate the formation of the DNA-TCF-beta-catenin 
complex or activation of target genes, respectively. Biochemical studies reveal
that the phosphorylation state of these XTCF-4 variants correlates with their
ability to form a ternary complex with beta-catenin and DNA but not to activate
target gene expression. The described variants of XTFC-4 with their different
properties in complex formation provide strong evidence that in addition to the
regulation of beta-catenin stability the isoforms of TCF/LEF transcription
factors and their posttranslational modifications define the cellular response of
a Wnt/wingless signal.

PMID: 11124256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 23;19(50):5720-8.

A comparative evaluation of beta-catenin and plakoglobin signaling activity.

Williams BO(1), Barish GD, Klymkowsky MW, Varmus HE.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Division of Basic Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Vertebrates have two Armadillo-like proteins, beta-catenin and plakoglobin.
Mutant forms of beta-catenin with oncogenic activity are found in many human
tumors, but plakoglobin mutations are not commonly found. In fact, plakoglobin
has been proposed to suppress tumorigenesis. To assess differences between
beta-catenin and plakoglobin, we compared several of their biochemical
properties. After transient transfection of 293T cells with an expression vector 
encoding either of the two proteins, soluble wild type beta-catenin does not
significantly accumulate, whereas soluble wild type plakoglobin is readily
detected. As anticipated, beta-catenin is stabilized by the oncogenic mutation
S37A; however, the analogous mutation in plakoglobin (S28A) does not alter its
half-life. S37A-beta-catenin activates a TCF/LEF-dependent reporter 20-fold more 
potently than wild type beta-catenin, and approximately 5-fold more potently than
wild type or S28A plakoglobin. These differences may be attributable to an
enhanced affinity of S37A beta-catenin for LEF1 and TCF4, as observed here by
immunoprecipitation assays. We show that the carboxyl-terminal domain is largely 
responsible for the difference in signaling and that the Armadillo repeats
account for the remainder of the difference. The relatively weak signaling by
plakoglobin and the failure of the S28A mutation to enhance its stability, may
explain why plakoglobin mutations are infrequent in malignancies.

PMID: 11126358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nat Genet. 2000 Oct;26(2):146-7.

Mutations in AXIN2 cause colorectal cancer with defective mismatch repair by
activating beta-catenin/TCF signalling.

Liu W(1), Dong X, Mai M, Seelan RS, Taniguchi K, Krishnadath KK, Halling KC,
Cunningham JM, Boardman LA, Qian C, Christensen E, Schmidt SS, Roche PC, Smith
DI, Thibodeau SN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Medical School, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
liu.wanguo@mayo.edu

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2000 Dec;26(4):501.

PMID: 11017067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer Res. 2000 Sep 1;60(17):4761-6.

Transactivation of the multidrug resistance 1 gene by T-cell factor
4/beta-catenin complex in early colorectal carcinogenesis.

Yamada T(1), Takaoka AS, Naishiro Y, Hayashi R, Maruyama K, Maesawa C, Ochiai A, 
Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The mutational inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC), results in the accumulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin protein and
the activation of T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional
factors. A colorectal carcinoma cell line, DLD-1, was engineered to suppress
transactivation by the TCF4/beta-catenin complex in a dominant-negative manner
under the strict control of the tetracycline regulatory system. A large-scale
comparison of the expression profiles, using two-color fluorescence hybridization
of cDNA microarray, led to the identification of MDR1 as a target gene of the
TCF4/beta-catenin complex. Luciferase reporter and gel retardation assays
revealed the TCF4/beta-catenin responsive elements in the promoter of the human
MDR1 gene. Corresponding to the accumulation of beta-catenin, expression of the
MDR1 gene product was steadily up-regulated in adenomas and adenocarcinomas of 10
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. In combination with cell
proliferative activities of c-myc and cyclin D1, MDR1 may initiate colorectal
tumorigenesis by suppressing cell death pathways programmed in intestinal
epithelial cells.

PMID: 10987283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Clin Invest. 2000 Aug;106(4):533-9.

Gastrin is a target of the beta-catenin/TCF-4 growth-signaling pathway in a model
of intestinal polyposis.

Koh TJ(1), Bulitta CJ, Fleming JV, Dockray GJ, Varro A, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene occur in 
most colorectal cancers and lead to activation of beta-catenin. Whereas several
downstream targets of beta-catenin have been identified (c-myc, cyclin D1,
PPARdelta), the precise functional significance of many of these targets has not 
been examined directly using genetic approaches. Previous studies have shown that
the gene encoding the hormone gastrin is activated during colon cancer
progression and the less-processed forms of gastrin are important colonic trophic
factors. We show here that the gastrin gene is a downstream target of the
beta-catenin/TCF-4 signaling pathway and that cotransfection of a constitutively 
active beta-catenin expression construct causes a threefold increase in gastrin
promoter activity. APC(min-/+) mice overexpressing one of the alternatively
processed forms of gastrin, glycine-extended gastrin, show a significant increase
in polyp number. Gastrin-deficient APC(min-/+) mice, conversely, showed a marked 
decrease in polyp number and a significantly decreased polyp proliferation rate. 
Activation of gastrin by beta-catenin may therefore represent an early event in
colorectal tumorigenesis and may contribute significantly toward neoplastic
progression. The identification of gastrin as a functionally relevant downstream 
target of the beta-catenin signaling pathway provides a new target for
therapeutic modalities in the treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC380254
PMID: 10953028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Science. 2000 Aug 11;289(5481):950-3.

Inhibition of adipogenesis by Wnt signaling.

Ross SE(1), Hemati N, Longo KA, Bennett CN, Lucas PC, Erickson RL, MacDougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Wnts are secreted signaling proteins that regulate developmental processes. Here 
we show that Wnt signaling, likely mediated by Wnt-10b, is a molecular switch
that governs adipogenesis. Wnt signaling maintains preadipocytes in an
undifferentiated state through inhibition of the adipogenic transcription factors
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma). When Wnt signaling in preadipocytes is
prevented by overexpression of Axin or dominant-negative TCF4, these cells
differentiate into adipocytes. Disruption of Wnt signaling also causes
transdifferentiation of myoblasts into adipocytes in vitro, highlighting the
importance of this pathway not only in adipocyte differentiation but also in
mesodermal cell fate determination.

PMID: 10937998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3805-13.

Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling regulates the expression of the homeobox gene Cdx1
in embryonic intestine.

Lickert H(1), Domon C, Huls G, Wehrle C, Duluc I, Clevers H, Meyer BI, Freund JN,
Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

During mammalian development, the Cdx1 homeobox gene exhibits an early period of 
expression when the embryonic body axis is established, and a later period where 
expression is restricted to the embryonic intestinal endoderm. Cdx1 expression is
maintained throughout adulthood in the proliferative cell compartment of the
continuously renewed intestinal epithelium, the crypts. In this study, we provide
evidence in vitro and in vivo that Cdx1 is a direct transcriptional target of the
Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling pathway. Upon Wnt stimulation, expression of Cdx1
can be induced in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as well as in undifferentiated 
rat embryonic endoderm. Tcf4-deficient mouse embryos show abrogation of Cdx1
protein in the small intestinal epithelium, making Tcf4 the likely candidate to
transduce Wnt signal in this part of gut. The promoter region of the Cdx1 gene
contains several Tcf-binding motifs, and these bind Tcf/Lef1/(beta)-catenin
complexes and mediate (beta)-catenin-dependent transactivation. The
transcriptional regulation of the homeobox gene Cdx1 in the intestinal epithelium
by Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling underlines the importance of this signaling
pathway in mammalian endoderm development.

PMID: 10934025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Res. 2000 Jul 15;60(14):3872-9.

The human T-cell transcription factor-4 gene: structure, extensive
characterization of alternative splicings, and mutational analysis in colorectal 
cancer cell lines.

Duval A(1), Rolland S, Tubacher E, Bui H, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U434, Centre d'Etude
du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France.

The human T cell transcription factor-4 (hTCF-4) interacts functionally with
beta-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway, which regulates many developmental
processes. Moreover, inappropriate reactivation of this pathway attributable to
APC or beta-catenin mutations has been described in colorectal cancers. Because
only the human TCF-4 cDNA sequence was known, we determined its genomic
structure. A total of 17 exons, of which 5 were alternative, were identified.
Moreover, four alternative splice sites were observed either experimentally or in
silico by a BLAST approach in expressed sequence tag databases. The alternative
use of three consecutive exons localized in the 3' part of the hTCF-4 gene
changes the reading frames used in the last exon, leading to the synthesis of a
number of hTCF-4 isoforms with short, medium, or long-size COOH-terminal ends. We
next screened the entire hTCF-4 gene for mutations in a series of 24 colorectal
cancer cell lines by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and/or direct
sequencing. Besides an already described deletion of an A in an (A)9 coding
repeat in four cases, we found DNA variants in eight cases for a total of 12
variants, of which 8 were coding. These include one frameshift mutation in the
beta-catenin binding domain (exon 1), and one missense mutation in exon 4. In the
remaining six cases, nonsense or frameshift mutations were localized in the 3'
part of the gene. These latter alterations have as a common consequence to
decrease the proportion of the long COOH-terminal hTCF-4 isoform, which contains 
two binding domains for c-terminal binding protein, a protein implicated in the
repression of the TCF family transcriptional activity. Thus, loss of the TCF-4
capacity to interact with COOH-terminal binding protein could be an important
event during colorectal carcinogenesis by modifying Wnt signaling.

PMID: 10919662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 20;275(42):32871-8.

A novel beta-catenin-binding protein inhibits beta-catenin-dependent Tcf
activation and axis formation.

Sakamoto I(1), Kishida S, Fukui A, Kishida M, Yamamoto H, Hino S, Michiue T,
Takada S, Asashima M, Kikuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 1-2-3
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, PRESTO, Japan.

beta-Catenin is efficiently phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in
the Axin complex in the cytoplasm, resulting in the down-regulation. In response 
to Wnt, beta-catenin is stabilized and translocated into the nucleus where it
stimulates gene expression through Tcf/Lef. Here we report a novel protein,
designated Duplin (for axis duplication inhibitor), which negatively regulates
the function of beta-catenin in the nucleus. Duplin was located in the nucleus.
Duplin bound directly to the Armadillo repeats of beta-catenin, thereby
inhibiting the binding of Tcf to beta-catenin. It did not affect the stability of
beta-catenin but inhibited Wnt- or beta-catenin-dependent Tcf activation.
Furthermore, expression of Duplin in Xenopus embryos inhibited the axis formation
and beta-catenin-dependent axis duplication, and prevented the beta-catenin's
ability to rescue ventralizing phenotypes induced by ultraviolet light
irradiation. Thus, Duplin is a nuclear protein that inhibits beta-catenin
signaling.

PMID: 10921920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Psychiatr Genet. 2000 Mar;10(1):33-7.

Repeat sizes at CAG/CTG loci CTG18.1, ERDA1 and TGC13-7a in schizophrenia.

Bowen T(1), Guy CA, Cardno AG, Vincent JB, Kennedy JL, Jones LA, Gray M, Sanders 
RD, McCarthy G, Murphy KC, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Cardiff, UK. bowent@cf.ac.uk

A number of studies using the repeat expansion detection (RED) technique have
suggested an association between unknown large CAG/CTG repeats and schizophrenia.
The polymorphic CAG/CTG repeat loci CTG18.1 and ERDA1 have been reported to
account for a high proportion (approximately 90%) of the large repeats detected
by RED and may therefore be responsible for the cited association. The recently
described locus TGC13-7a contains a highly polymorphic CTA/TAG and CAG/CTG
composite repeat, and is thus another authentic candidate. In the present
investigation, each locus was analysed for association with schizophrenia in a
sample of 206 patients and 219 group-matched controls. No evidence for
association of CTG18.1, ERDA1 and/or TGC13-7a with schizophrenia was found. The
combined data accounted for only 54% of the CAG/CTG arrays of > 40 repeats found 
in our previous RED analysis.

PMID: 10909126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jul 21;274(1):22-31.

HASH-1 and E2-2 are expressed in human neuroblastoma cells and form a functional 
complex.

Persson P(1), Jögi A, Grynfeld A, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, University Hospital
MAS, S-205 02, Sweden.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor mammalian achaete-scute
homolog-1 (MASH-1 in mouse and HASH-1 in human) is essential for proper
development of olfactory and most peripheral autonomic neurons, and for the
formation of distinct neuronal circuits within the central nervous system. We
have previously shown that HASH-1 is expressed in neuroblastoma tumors and cell
lines, and in this study we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to isolate
HASH-1 interacting proteins from a human neuroblastoma cDNA library. Two of the
isolated clones contained cDNA from the E2-2 gene (also known as ITF2/SEF2-1). We
show that E2-2 interacts with HASH-1 in both yeast and mammalian cells. The
HASH-1/E2-2 complex binds an E-box (CACCTG) in vitro, and transactivates an E-box
containing reporter construct in vivo. Furthermore, E2-2 seems to be one of the
major HASH-1 interacting proteins in extracts from neuroblastoma cells. In
conclusion, E2-2 forms a functional complex with HASH-1, and might therefore be
involved in the development of specific parts of the central and peripheral
nervous systems.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10903890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Dev. 2000 Jul 15;14(14):1741-9.

Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ICAT, a novel beta-catenin-interacting protein.

Tago K(1), Nakamura T, Nishita M, Hyodo J, Nagai S, Murata Y, Adachi S, Ohwada S,
Morishita Y, Shibuya H, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Wnt signaling has an important role in both embryonic development and
tumorigenesis. beta-Catenin, a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway,
interacts with the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors and activates
transcription of Wnt target genes. Here, we identify a novel
beta-catenin-interacting protein, ICAT, that was found to inhibit the interaction
of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and represses beta-catenin-TCF-4-mediated
transactivation. Furthermore, ICAT inhibited Xenopus axis formation by
interfering with Wnt signaling. These results suggest that ICAT negatively
regulates Wnt signaling via inhibition of the interaction between beta-catenin
and TCF and is integral in development and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC316784
PMID: 10898789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Psychiatry. 2000 Jul;5(4):439-42.

Allelic distribution of CTG18.1 in Caucasian populations: association studies in 
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and ataxia.

McInnis MG(1), Swift-Scanlanl T, Mahoney AT, Vincent J, Verheyen G, Lan TH, Oruc 
L, Riess O, Van Broeckhoven C, Chen H, Kennedy JL, MacKinnon DF, Margolis RL,
Simpson SG, McMahon FJ, Gershon E, Nurnberger J, Reich T, DePaulo JR, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

CTG18.1 is a highly polymorphic and unstable CTG repeat within an intron of the
SEF2-1 gene. We tested the CTG18.1 repeat length in affective disorder,
schizophrenia, and nonspecific ataxia; these diseases all have shown clinical
evidence for anticipation. There was no difference in the allele frequencies
comparing the controls and disease groups. The most common allele contains 11
CAGs (35%) followed by alleles with 14-17 CAGs (35%). There was no difference in 
the distribution of the alleles in the cases vs controls for ataxia (P = 0.11),
affective disorders (P = 0.21), or schizophrenia (P = 0.26). The frequency of
unstable CTG18.1 alleles was approximately 3% in a population of N. European
descent and is not related to the phenotypes tested.

PMID: 10889556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell. 2000 May;5(5):877-82.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling induces the expression and activity of betaTrCP
ubiquitin ligase receptor.

Spiegelman VS(1), Slaga TJ, Pagano M, Minamoto T, Ronai Z, Fuchs SY.

Author information: 
(1)AMC Cancer Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80214, USA.

Beta-transducing repeat-containing protein (betaTrCP) targets the ubiquitination 
and subsequent degradation of both beta-catenin and IkappaB, thereby playing an
important role in beta-catenin/Tcf and NF-kappaB-dependent signaling. Here
evidence is presented that beta-catenin/Tcf signaling elevates the expression of 
betaTrCP mRNA and protein in a Tcf-dependent manner, which does not require
betaTrCP transcription. Induction of betaTrCP expression by the beta-catenin/Tcf 
pathway results in an accelerated degradation of the wild-type beta-catenin,
suggesting that the negative feedback loop regulation may control the
beta-catenin/Tcf pathway. This signaling also upregulated NF-kappaB
transactivation without affecting the activity of IkappaB kinase, thereby
establishing that the maintenance of the betaTrCP level is important for
coordination between beta-catenin/Tcf and NF-kappaB signaling.

PMID: 10882123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 18;275(33):25095-101.

Analysis of the inhibition of MyoD activity by ITF-2B and full-length E12/E47.

Petropoulos H(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

MyoD heterodimerizes with E type factors (E12/E47 and ITF-2A/ITF-2B) and binds E 
box sequences within promoters of muscle-specific genes. In transient
transfection assays, MyoD activates transcription in the presence of ITF-2A but
not ITF-2B, which contains a 182-amino acid N-terminal extension. The first 83
amino acids of the inhibitory N terminus of ITF-2B show high sequence homology to
the N terminus of full-length E12/E47. Previous studies that showed activation of
MyoD by E12 used an artificially N-terminally truncated form. Here we show that
the full-length form of E12 inhibits MyoD function. A conserved alpha-helix
motif, capable of interacting with the transcriptional machinery, was not
essential for inhibition. Furthermore, the fusion of N-terminal ITF-2B sequences 
or non-inhibiting ITF-2A sequences to truncated E12 was sufficient in converting 
the activator into an inhibitor. Overexpression of ITF-2B did not inhibit C2C12
myogenesis or affect levels of endogenous muscle gene expression, consistent with
the finding that inhibitory E type proteins are present in muscle. Furthermore,
we found that MyoD co-transfected with either ITF-2B or ITF-2A converted
fibroblasts into myoblasts with the same frequency. Our findings suggest that the
ability of E type proteins to inhibit MyoD activity is dependent on the context
of the E box.

PMID: 10833525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;88(3-4):264-5.

Assignment of the TCF-4 gene (TCF7L2) to human chromosome band 10q25.3.

Duval A(1), Busson-Leconiat M, Berger R, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434, CEPH, Paris, France.

PMID: 10828605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2357-65.

Pax6 defines the di-mesencephalic boundary by repressing En1 and Pax2.

Matsunaga E(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Transcriptional factors and signaling molecules are responsible for
regionalization of the central nervous system. In the early stage of neural
development, Pax6 is expressed in the prosencephalon, while En1 and Pax2 are
expressed in the mesencephalon. Here, we misexpressed Pax6 in the mesencephalon
to elucidate the mechanism of the di-mesencephalic boundary formation.
Histological analysis, expression patterns of diencephalic marker genes, and
fiber trajectory of the posterior commissure indicated that Pax6 misexpression
caused a caudal shift of the di-mesencephalic boundary. Pax6 repressed En1, Pax2 
and other tectum (mesencephalon)-related genes such as En2, Pax5, Pax7, but
induced Tcf4, a diencephalon marker gene. To know how Pax6 represses En1 and
Pax2, we ectopically expressed a dominant-active or negative form of Pax6. The
dominant-active form of Pax6 showed a similar but more severe phenotype than
Pax6, while the dominant-negative form showed an opposite phenotype, suggesting
that Pax6 acts as a transcriptional activator. Thus Pax6 may repress
tectum-related genes by activating an intervening repressor. The results of
misexpression experiments, together with normal expression patterns of Pax6, En1 
and Pax2, suggest that repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 defines
the di-mesencephalic boundary.

PMID: 10804178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mech Dev. 2000 May;93(1-2):211-4.

The HMG-box transcription factor XTcf-4 demarcates the forebrain-midbrain
boundary.

König A(1), Gradl D, Kühl M, Wedlich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Germany.

A small subfamily of HMG-box transcription factors, the LEF/TCF group, serves as 
nuclear transducer of the Wnt-1/Wg signaling cascade. Upon Wnt-1/Wg signaling
their members interact with beta-catenin and regulate the expression of Xenopus
target genes siamois, twin, nodal related-3 or fibronectin. We have isolated a
new HMG-box transcription factor in Xenopus that will be addressed XTcf-4 based
on its homology to human and murine Tcf-4. Unlike XTcf-3, which is a maternal
gene, and XLef-1 that is expressed after mid blastula transition (Molenaar et
al., 1998. Mech. Dev. 75, 151-154), XTcf-4 expression starts at late neurula
stage and is restricted to the anterior most midbrain demarcating the
forebrain-midbrain boundary. The expression partially overlaps with a broad set
of Xenopus Wnt family members in distinct patterns. XTcf-4 transcripts were also 
found partially co-localized with those of Xaxin, an intracellular antagonist of 
Wnt-1/Wg signaling.

PMID: 10781959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3640-54.

Overlapping expression of early B-cell factor and basic helix-loop-helix proteins
as a mechanism to dictate B-lineage-specific activity of the lambda5 promoter.

Sigvardsson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, CMB, Lund University, S-223 62 Lund, Sweden.
mikael.sigvardsson@immuno.lu.se

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are a large group of
proteins suggested to control key events in the development of B lymphocytes as
well as of other cellular lineages. To examine how bHLH proteins activate a
B-lineage-specific promoter, I investigated the ability of E47, E12, Heb, E2-2,
and MyoD to activate the lambda5 surrogate light chain promoter. Comparison of
the functional capacity of the E2A-encoded E47 and E12 proteins indicated that
even though both were able to activate the lambda5 promoter and act in synergy
with early B-cell factor (EBF), E47 displayed a higher functional activity than
E12. An ability to act in synergy with EBF was also observed for Heb, E2-2, and
MyoD, suggesting that these factors were functionally redundant in this regard.
Mapping of functional domains in EBF and E47 revealed that the dimerization and
DNA binding domains mediated the synergistic activity. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay analysis using the 5' part of the lambda5 promoter revealed formation
of template-dependent heteromeric complexes between EBF and E47, suggesting that 
the synergistic mechanism involves cooperative binding to DNA. These findings
propose a unique molecular function for E47 and provide overlapping expression
with EBF as a molecular mechanism to direct B-cell-specific target gene
activation by bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC85657
PMID: 10779354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1671-6.

The beta-catenin binding domain of adenomatous polyposis coli is sufficient for
tumor suppression.

Shih IM(1), Yu J, He TC, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is a critical event in 
the development of human colorectal cancers. At the biochemical level, several
functions have been assigned to the multidomain APC protein, but the cellular
effects of APC expression and how they relate to its biochemical functions are
less well defined. To address these issues, we generated a recombinant adenovirus
(Ad-CBR) that constitutively expresses the central third of APC, which includes
all of the known beta-catenin binding repeats. When expressed in colon cancer
cells, Ad-CBR blocked the nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and inhibited
beta-catenin/Tcf-4-mediated transactivation. Accordingly, expression of
endogenous targets of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway was down-regulated.
Ad-CBR infection of colorectal cancer cell lines with mutant APC but wild-type
beta-catenin resulted in substantial growth arrest followed by apoptosis. These
effects were attenuated in lines with wild-type APC but with mutated
beta-catenin. These findings suggest that the beta-catenin-binding domain in the 
central third of APC is sufficient for its tumor suppressor activity.

PMID: 10749138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):245-50.

AXIN1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in cancer
cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1.

Satoh S(1), Daigo Y, Furukawa Y, Kato T, Miwa N, Nishiwaki T, Kawasoe T, Ishiguro
H, Fujita M, Tokino T, Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Murata M, Shimano T, Yamaoka Y,
Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The Wnt signaling pathway is essential for development and organogenesis. Wnt
signaling stabilizes beta-catenin, which accumulates in the cytoplasm, binds to
1-cell factor (TCF; also known as lymphocyte enhancer-binding factor, LEF) and
then upregulates downstream genes. Mutations in CTNNB1 (encoding beta-catenin) or
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) have been reported in human neoplasms including 
colon cancers and hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Because HCC5 tend to show
accumulation of beta-catenin more often than mutations in CTNNB1, we looked for
mutations in AXIN1, encoding a key factor for Wnt signaling, in 6 HCC cell lines 
and 100 primary HCC5. Among the 4 cell lines and 87 HCC5 in which we did not
detect CTNNB1 mutations, we identified AXIN1 mutations in 3 cell lines and 6
mutations in 5 of the primary HCCs. In cell lines containing mutations in either 
gene, we observed increased DNA binding of TCF associated with beta-catenin in
nuclei. Adenovirus mediated gene transfer of wild-type AXINI induced apoptosis in
hepatocellular and colorectal cancer cells that had accumulated beta-catenin as a
consequence of either APC, CTNNB1 or AXIN1 mutation, suggesting that axin may be 
an effective therapeutic molecule for suppressing growth of hepatocellular and
colorectal cancers.

PMID: 10700176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):206-8.

Axin and hepatocellular carcinomas.

Clevers H.

PMID: 10700164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Mar 15;255(2):207-20.

Analysis of beta-catenin aggregation and localization using GFP fusion proteins: 
nuclear import of alpha-catenin by the beta-catenin/Tcf complex.

Giannini AL(1), Vivanco MM, Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, 
WC1E 6BT.

beta-Catenin plays essential roles in cell adhesion, by associating with
cadherins, and as a signaling molecule, by interacting with the Tcf/LEF-1 family 
of transcription factors. In order to study the protein-protein interactions of
beta-catenin in living cells, we fused it to green fluorescent protein (GFP).
GFP-beta-catenin was incorporated into cell junctions but also accumulated in the
nucleus, where it formed rod-like structures. The carboxyl-terminal armadillo
repeats of GFP-beta-catenin were sufficient for nuclear localization, but
formation of rods required the armadillo repeats and sequences in both the amino-
and the carboxyl-terminal domains. Rod formation was prevented by coexpression of
N-cadherin, APC, and Tcf-4, which bind to the armadillo repeats of beta-catenin, 
but not by coexpression of alpha-catenin, although alpha-catenin expression did
prevent accumulation of beta-catenin in the nucleus. Interestingly, when
alpha-catenin, beta-catenin, and Tcf-4 were coexpressed they colocalized in the
nucleus, and this correlated with a decrease in beta-catenin/Tcf-dependent
transcriptional activity. These results indicate that binding of beta-catenin to 
Tcf-4 overrides the function of alpha-catenin to sequester beta-catenin in the
cytoplasm and suggest that alpha-catenin can regulate beta-catenin signaling in
the nucleus.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10694436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 18;18(48):6806-9.

Variable mutation frequencies in coding repeats of TCF-4 and other target genes
in colon, gastric and endometrial carcinoma showing microsatellite instability.

Duval A(1), Iacopetta B, Ranzani GN, Lothe RA, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434-CEPH, Paris, France.

Frameshift mutations in genes containing mononucleotide repeats are often
observed in cancers exhibiting a high frequency of microsatellite instability
(MSI-H). Several tumor types, including colorectal, gastric, and endometrial
carcinomas, display this phenotype in a significant proportion of cases. We
recently showed in a large series of MSI-H colorectal tumors that approximately
40% of them exhibited frameshift mutations in an (A)9 tract within the coding
region of the TCF-4 gene, a crucial member of the APC/beta-catenin/TCF pathway.
In the present study, we have examined MSI-H cancers from other primary tumor
sites for mutations in this new target gene. Two of 22 (9%) MSI-H primary gastric
cancers and none of 23 MSI-H endometrial primary tumors and cell lines were found
to have a 1 bp deletion in the TCF-4 repeat. In the same series of tumors we also
looked for frameshift mutations in other coding repeats localized within the TGF 
beta-RII, BAX, IGFIIR, hMSH3 and hMSH6 genes. Our results suggest that the TCF-4 
gene, in a similar manner to some of these latter genes, is differentially
altered in MSI-H tumors from different primary sites.

PMID: 10597289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem J. 1999 Dec 1;344 Pt 2:565-70.

Adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC)-independent regulation of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 mediated transcription in intestinal cells.

Baulida J(1), Batlle E, García De Herreros A.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cel.lular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Carrer Dr. Aiguader 80, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

Alterations in the transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin-Tcf complex have 
been associated with the earlier stages of colonic transformation. We show here
that the activation of protein kinase C by the phorbol ester PMA in several
intestinal cell lines increases the levels of beta-catenin detected in the
nucleus and augments the transcriptional activity mediated by beta-catenin. The
response to PMA was not related to modifications in the cytosolic levels of
beta-catenin and was observed not only in cells with wild-type adenomatous
polyposis coli protein (APC) but also in APC-deficient cells. Binding assays in
vitro revealed that PMA facilitates the interaction of the beta-catenin with the 
nuclear structure. Our results therefore show that beta-catenin-mediated
transcription can be regulated independently of the presence of APC.

PMCID: PMC1220676
PMID: 10567241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell. 1999 Oct 29;99(3):335-45.

PPARdelta is an APC-regulated target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

He TC(1), Chan TA, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

PPARB was identified as a target of APC through the analysis of global gene
expression profiles in human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. PPARdelta expression 
was elevated in CRCs and repressed by APC in CRC cells. This repression was
mediated by beta-catenin/Tcf-4-responsive elements in the PPARdelta promotor. The
ability of PPARs to bind eicosanoids suggested that PPARdelta might be a target
of chemopreventive non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Reporters
containing PPARdelta-responsive elements were repressed by the NSAID sulindac.
Furthermore, sulindac was able to disrupt the ability of PPARdelta to bind its
recognition sequences. These findings suggest that NSAIDs inhibit tumorigenesis
through inhibition of PPARdelta, the gene for which is normally regulated by APC.

PMCID: PMC3779681
PMID: 10555149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 29;1424(2-3):M23-37.

TCF transcription factors: molecular switches in carcinogenesis.

Roose J(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genetics, University Medical
Center Utrecht, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Although originally cloned as lymphoid transcription factors, members of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family are now well recognized as key activators/repressors
in many developmental processes. Transcriptionally inert Tcf factors become
potent transactivators upon interaction with the Wnt signaling product
beta-catenin or its Drosophila counterpart Armadillo. In contrast, Tcf proteins
mediate repression when bound to members of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors, CBP and CtBP. Recently, Tcf factors have been reported as tumor
inducers, aberrantly activating their target genes as a result of elevated
beta-catenin levels in many types of cancer. These abnormal beta-catenin levels
are usually caused by stabilizing mutations in beta-catenin itself or truncating 
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. In this 
review, we will give a chronological overview of the Tcf factors and the
phenotypes of Tcf mutant mice, as well as Tcf-binding partners. We will discuss
Tcf signaling upon interaction with different partners, resulting in activator
and repressor roles of Tcf factors in the light of carcinogenic events.

PMID: 10528152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Pathol. 1999 Oct;155(4):1033-8.

beta-catenin regulates the expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-7 in human 
colorectal cancer.

Brabletz T(1), Jung A, Dag S, Hlubek F, Kirchner T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
thomas.brabletz@patho.med.uni-erlangen.de

Most colorectal cancers have loss of function mutations in the adenomatosis
polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. This leads to accumulation of
beta-catenin, which together with the DNA binding protein TCF-4 functions as a
transcriptional activator. Recently defined target genes are c-myc and cyclin D1,
linking the APC gene defect to the capacity for autonomous proliferation of colon
tumors. Here we report the identification of the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-7
as another target gene of beta-catenin/TCF-4. MMP-7 is overexpressed in 80% of
human colorectal cancers and known to be an important factor for early tumor
growth, with a potential function also for later progression steps, like invasion
and metastasis. Our results explain the high percentage of MMP-7 overexpression
in colon tumors. Moreover they indicate that defects in the APC tumor suppressor 
gene may also have an influence on later steps of colon tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC1867011
PMID: 10514384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Science. 1999 Sep 17;285(5435):1923-6.

Synergy between tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1.

Roose J(1), Huls G, van Beest M, Moerer P, van der Horn K, Goldschmeding R,
Logtenberg T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Mutations in APC or beta-catenin inappropriately activate the transcription
factor Tcf4, thereby transforming intestinal epithelial cells. Here it is shown
that one of the target genes of Tcf4 in epithelial cells is Tcf1. The most
abundant Tcf1 isoforms lack a beta-catenin interaction domain. Tcf1(-/-) mice
develop adenomas in the gut and mammary glands. Introduction of a mutant APC
allele into these mice substantially increases the number of these adenomas. Tcf1
may act as a feedback repressor of beta-catenin-Tcf4 target genes and thus may
cooperate with APC to suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

PMID: 10489374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 1;59(17):4213-5.

Frequent frameshift mutations of the TCF-4 gene in colorectal cancers with
microsatellite instability.

Duval A(1), Gayet J, Zhou XP, Iacopetta B, Thomas G, Hamelin R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434-Centre d'Etude de Polymorphisme Humane, Paris, France.

About 15% of sporadic colorectal cancers show microsatellite instability (MSI)
due to the inactivation of mismatch repair genes and are termed MSI-H tumors. In 
these tumors, frameshift mutations in coding repeats have been found within the
TGFbeta-RII, BAX, and IGFRII genes that are probably involved in their
progression. In the present work, we report frequent mutations in TCF-4, another 
target gene for instability. TCF-4 codes for a transcription factor that is a
crucial member of the adenomatous polyposis coil (APC)/beta-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF) pathway. Fifty percent (4 of 8) of human MSI-H colorectal cell lines and
39% (19 of 49) of MSI-H colorectal primary tumors were found to have a 1-bp
deletion in an (A)9 repeat within the coding region of this gene. In contrast, a 
frameshift mutation was found in only 1 of 56 non-MSI colorectal tumors and in
none of 16 non-MSI colorectal cancer cell lines. These results suggest that TCF-4
frameshift mutations are selected for and play a role in colorectal MSI-H
tumorigenesis. Depending on different reading frames due to alternatively spliced
TCF-4 mRNA, the (A)9 repeat normally codes for several isoforms that could serve 
as modulators of TCF-4 transcriptional activity. The deletion of one nucleotide
in this repeat could change TCF-4 transactivating properties by modifying the
respective proportions of the different isoforms.

PMID: 10485457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Neurobiol Dis. 1999 Aug;6(4):302-7.

CTG18.1 and ERDA-1 CAG/CTG repeat size in bipolar disorder.

Guy CA(1), Bowen T, Jones I, McCandless F, Owen MJ, Craddock N, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Health Park, Cardiff, CF4 4XN, United Kingdom.

Several groups have reported association between large CAG/CTG repeat sequences
in the genome and bipolar disorder using the Repeat Expansion Detection (RED)
method. Unfortunately, the RED method cannot identify the specific repeat(s)
responsible for these findings but it has recently been proposed that around 90% 
of the large CAG/CTG repeats detected by RED can be explained by repeat size at
either CTG18.1, which maps to 18q21.1, or ERDA-1 (also known as Dir 1), which
maps to 17q21.3. These data suggest that the previous associations between
bipolar disorder and large CAG/CTG repeats might be explained at least in part by
a specific association between bipolar disorder and either or both of these loci.
However, using a case control study design, we find no evidence for such
associations. Thus we conclude that in our sample, the previous RED associations 
are not a result of large CAG/CTG repeats at CTG18.1 or ERDA-1.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mech Dev. 1999 Aug;86(1-2):147-50.

Maternal and embryonic expression of zebrafish lef1.

Dorsky RI(1), Snyder A, Cretekos CJ, Grunwald DJ, Geisler R, Haffter P, Moon RT, 
Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI and Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. rdorsky@u.washington.edu

Transcription factors of the TCF/LEF family interact with the Wnt signaling
pathway to control transcription of downstream genes (Clevers, H., van de
Wetering, M., 1997. TCF/LEF factor earn their wings. Trends Genet. 13, 485-489). 
We were interested in cloning family members which were expressed in zebrafish
neural crest, because Wnt signaling modulates specification of neural crest fate 
(Dorsky, R.I., Moon, R.T., Raible, D.W., 1998. Control of neural crest cell fate 
by the Wnt signalling pathway. Nature 396, 370-373). We cloned a zebrafish
homolog of lef1 and localized its chromosomal position by radiation hybrid
mapping. lef1 is expressed in the neural crest as well as the tailbud and
developing mesoderm, and is maternally expressed in zebrafish, unlike mouse and
Xenopus homologs. In addition, we cloned two tcf3 genes and a homolog of tcf4,
neither of which were strongly expressed in premigratory neural crest.

PMID: 10446273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell. 1999 Jul;4(1):63-73.

A conserved motif present in a class of helix-loop-helix proteins activates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA complex.

Massari ME(1), Grant PA, Pray-Grant MG, Berger SL, Workman JL, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

The class I helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins, which include E2A, HEB, and E2-2,
have been shown to be required for lineage-specific gene expression during T and 
B lymphocyte development. Additionally, the E2A proteins function to regulate
V(D)J recombination, possibly by allowing access of variable region segments to
the recombination machinery. The mechanisms by which E2A regulates transcription 
and recombination, however, are largely unknown. Here, we identify a novel motif,
LDFS, present in the vertebrate class I HLH proteins as well as in a yeast HLH
protein that is essential for transactivation. We provide both genetic and
biochemical evidence that the highly conserved LDFS motif stimulates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA histone acetyltransferase
complex.

PMID: 10445028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nature. 1999 Jun 24;399(6738):798-802.

The TAK1-NLK-MAPK-related pathway antagonizes signalling between beta-catenin and
transcription factor TCF.

Ishitani T(1), Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Nagai S, Nishita M, Meneghini M, Barker N,
Waterman M, Bowerman B, Clevers H, Shibuya H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, Japan.

The Wnt signalling pathway regulates many developmental processes through a
complex of beta-catenin and the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) 
family of high-mobility-group transcription factors. Wnt stabilizes cytosolic
beta-catenin, which then binds to TCF and activates gene transcription. This
signalling cascade is conserved in vertebrates, Drosophila and Caenorhabditis
elegans. In C. elegans, the proteins MOM-4 and LIT-1 regulate Wnt signalling to
polarize responding cells during embryogenesis. MOM-4 and LIT-1 are homologous to
TAK1 (a kinase activated by transforming growth factor-beta) mitogen-activated
protein-kinase-kinase kinase (MAP3K) and MAP kinase (MAPK)-related NEMO-like
kinase (NLK), respectively, in mammalian cells. These results raise the
possibility that TAK1 and NLK are also involved in Wnt signalling in mammalian
cells. Here we show that TAK1 activation stimulates NLK activity and
downregulates transcriptional activation mediated by beta-catenin and TCF.
Injection of NLK suppresses the induction of axis duplication by microinjected
beta-catenin in Xenopus embryos. NLK phosphorylates TCF/LEF factors and inhibits 
the interaction of the beta-catenin-TCF complex with DNA. Thus, the
TAK1-NLK-MAPK-like pathway negatively regulates the Wnt signalling pathway.

PMID: 10391247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int Immunol. 1999 Mar;11(3):317-23.

Tcf-1-mediated transcription in T lymphocytes: differential role for glycogen
synthase kinase-3 in fibroblasts and T cells.

Staal FJ(1), Burgering BM, van de Wetering M, Clevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Beta-catenin is the vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila segment polarity gene
Armadillo and plays roles in both cell-cell adhesion and transduction of the Wnt 
signaling cascade. Recently, members of the Lef/Tcf transcription factor family
have been identified as protein partners of beta-catenin, explaining how
beta-catenin alters gene expression. Here we report that in T cells, Tcf-1 also
becomes transcriptionally active through interaction with beta-catenin,
suggesting that the Wnt signal transduction pathway is operational in T
lymphocytes as well. However, although Wnt signals are known to inhibit the
activity of the negative regulatory protein kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3beta
(GSK-3beta), resulting in increased levels of beta-catenin, we find no evidence
for involvement of GSK-3beta in Tcf-mediated transcription in T cells. That is, a
dominant negative GSK-3beta does not specifically activate Tcf transcription and 
stimuli (lithium or phytohemagglutinin) that inhibit GSK-3beta activity also do
not activate Tcf reporter genes. Thus, inhibition of GSK-3beta is insufficient to
activate Tcf-dependent transcription in T lymphocytes. In contrast, in C57MG
fibroblast cells, lithium inactivates GSK-3beta and induces Tcf-controlled
transcription. This is the first demonstration that lithium can alter gene
expression of Tcf-responsive genes, and points to a difference in regulation of
Wnt signaling between fibroblasts and lymphocytes.

PMID: 10221643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nature. 1999 Apr 1;398(6726):422-6.

Beta-catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells.

Tetsu O(1), McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, Cancer Research
Institute, 94143-0128, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumour-suppressor gene occur in
most human colon cancers. Loss of functional APC protein results in the
accumulation of beta-catenin. Mutant forms of beta-catenin have been discovered
in colon cancers that retain wild-type APC genes, and also in melanomas,
medulloblastomas, prostate cancer and gastric and hepatocellular carcinomas. The 
accumulation of beta-catenin activates genes that are responsive to transcription
factors of the TCF/LEF family, with which beta-catenin interacts. Here we show
that beta-catenin activates transcription from the cyclin D1 promoter, and that
sequences within the promoter that are related to consensus TCF/LEF-binding sites
are necessary for activation. The oncoprotein p21ras further activates
transcription of the cyclin D1 gene, through sites within the promoter that bind 
the transcriptional regulators Ets or CREB. Cells expressing mutant beta-catenin 
produce high levels of cyclin D1 messenger RNA and protein constitutively.
Furthermore, expression of a dominant-negative form of TCF in colon-cancer cells 
strongly inhibits expression of cyclin D1 without affecting expression of cyclin 
D2, cyclin E, or cyclin-dependent kinases 2, 4 or 6. This dominant-negative TCF
causes cells to arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle; this phenotype can be
rescued by expression of cyclin D1 under the cytomegalovirus promoter. Abnormal
levels of beta-catenin may therefore contribute to neoplastic transformation by
causing accumulation of cyclin D1.

PMID: 10201372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):584-90.

Identification of Tcf4 residues involved in high-affinity beta-catenin binding.

Omer CA(1), Miller PJ, Diehl RE, Kral AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Sumneytown Pike,
West Point, Pennsylvania, 19486, USA. chuck_omer@merck.com

The N-termini of members of the T-cell factor (Tcf) and lymphocyte-enhancement
factor (Lef) protein families bind to beta-catenin, forming bipartite
transcription factors which regulate expression of genes involved in organismal
development and the growth of normal and malignant colon epithelium. Elevated
levels of Tcf4:beta-catenin are found in colon tumor cells with mutations in the 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The elevated levels of Tcf4:beta-catenin
result in increased transcription of genes, including c-myc, important for the
growth of these tumor cells. Here we analyze the interaction between beta-catenin
and Tcf4 and show that the N-terminal 53 amino acids of Tcf4 bind with high
affinity to beta-catenin. We show that this high-affinity interaction involves
multiple contact points including Tcf4 Asp-16, which is essential for
beta-catenin binding. In addition to Tcf/Lef family members, beta-catenin binds
to APC and cadherins. We found that the binding of beta-catenin to Tcf4, APC, or 
E-cadherin was mutually exclusive. These results are discussed with regard to how
beta-catenin interacts with its binding partners and to the potential for
identifying specific, small molecule inhibitors of these interactions.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Am J Pathol. 1999 Feb;154(2):515-23.

Expression of CD44 in Apc and Tcf mutant mice implies regulation by the WNT
pathway.

Wielenga VJ(1), Smits R, Korinek V, Smit L, Kielman M, Fodde R, Clevers H, Pals
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Overexpression of cell surface glycoproteins of the CD44 family is an early event
in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. This suggests a link with
disruption of APC tumor suppressor protein-mediated regulation of
beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling, which is crucial in initiating tumorigenesis. To
explore this hypothesis, we analyzed CD44 expression in the intestinal mucosa of 
mice and humans with genetic defects in either APC or Tcf-4, leading to
constitutive activation or blockade of the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 pathway,
respectively. We show that CD44 expression in the non-neoplastic intestinal
mucosa of Apc mutant mice is confined to the crypt epithelium but that CD44 is
strongly overexpressed in adenomas as well as in invasive carcinomas. This
overexpression includes the standard part of the CD44 (CD44s) as well as variant 
exons (CD44v). Interestingly, deregulated CD44 expression is already present in
aberrant crypt foci with dysplasia (ACFs), the earliest detectable lesions of
colorectal neoplasia. Like ACFs of Apc-mutant mice, ACFs of familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP) patients also overexpress CD44. In sharp contrast, Tcf-4 mutant
mice show a complete absence of CD44 in the epithelium of the small intestine.
This loss of CD44 concurs with loss of stem cell characteristics, shared with
adenoma cells. Our results indicate that CD44 expression is part of a genetic
program controlled by the beta-catenin/Tcf-4 signaling pathway and suggest a role
for CD44 in the generation and turnover of epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1850011
PMID: 10027409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Pathol. 1999 Jan;154(1):29-35.

Restricted high level expression of Tcf-4 protein in intestinal and mammary gland
epithelium.

Barker N(1), Huls G, Korinek V, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
n.barker@lab.azu.nl

Tcf-4 is a member of the Tcf/Lef family of transcription factors that interact
functionally with beta-catenin to mediate Wnt signaling in vertebrates. We have
previously demonstrated that the tumor suppressor function of APC in the small
intestine is mediated via regulation of Tcf-4/beta-catenin transcriptional
activity. To gain further insight into the role of Tcf-4 in development and
carcinogenesis we have generated several mouse monoclonal antibodies, one of
which is specific for Tcf-4 and another of which recognizes both Tcf-3 and Tcf-4.
Immunohistochemistry performed with the Tcf 4- specific monoclonal antibody
revealed high levels of expression in normal intestinal and mammary epithelium
and carcinomas derived therefrom. Additional sites of Tcf-3 expression, as
revealed by staining with the Tcf-3/-4 antibody, occurred only within the stomach
epithelium, hair follicles, and keratinocytes of the skin. A temporal Tcf-4
expression gradient was observed along the crypt-villus axis of human small
intestinal epithelium: strong Tcf-4 expression was present within the crypts of
early (week 16) human fetal small intestine, with the villi showing barely
detectable Tcf-4 protein levels. Tcf-4 expression levels increased dramatically
on the villi of more highly developed (week 22) fetal small intestine. We
conclude that Tcf-4 exhibits a highly restricted expression pattern related to
the developmental stage of the intestinal epithelium. The high levels of Tcf-4
expression in mammary epithelium and mammary carcinomas may also indicate a role 
in the development of this tissue and breast carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1853446
PMID: 9916915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1566-72.

A possible role for the high mobility group box transcription factor Tcf-4 in
vertebrate gut epithelial cell differentiation.

Lee YJ(1), Swencki B, Shoichet S, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Wingless (Wg)/Wnt signaling pathway activates High Mobility Group (HMG)-box
transcription factors of the T-cell Factor (Tcf)/Lymphoid Enhancer Factor (LEF)
subfamily and mediates diverse functions in development, possibly including
endoderm and gut differentiation. Determinants of tissue specificity in the
response to Wg/Wnt signaling remain unknown. We have identified Tcf-4 as the
predominant Tcf/LEF factor in the developing mouse gut. During fetal development,
Tcf-4 mRNA expression is restricted to gut epithelium and specific regions of the
brain, the thalamus and roof of the midbrain. In adults, expression is
widespread, with highest levels observed in the liver, an endodermally derived
organ, and persists in the gastrointestinal tract. Murine Tcf-4 has multiple RNA 
splice variants with consequently significant heterogeneity in sequences 3' to
the HMG box. Microinjection of mRNA or plasmid DNA encoding Tcf-4 into Xenopus
embryos results in ectopic expression of molecular markers of endoderm and
differentiated gut epithelium in isolated animal cap explants. Taken together,
these findings point to a potentially important function for Tcf-4 in development
of the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 9880534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):9-18.

TCF-4 binds beta-catenin and is expressed in distinct regions of the embryonic
brain and limbs.

Cho EA(1), Dressler GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The Tcf family of transcription factors, in association with beta-catenin,
mediate Wnt signaling by transactivating downstream target genes. Given the
function of wnt genes in neural development and organogenesis, Tcf transcription 
factors must be integral to the development of many embryonic tissues. In fact,
the role of Tcf genes in axis formation in Xenopus and in segment polarity in
Drosophila is well established. In this report, we have identified two isoforms
of the mouse Tcf-4 gene. Tcf-4 expressing cells showed nuclear localization of
beta-catenin. Although Tcf-4 RNA was widely distributed throughout embryogenesis,
high levels of Tcf-4 expression were particularly evident in the developing CNS
and limb buds. In extended streak stage embryos (E7.5), Tcf4 expression was
detected in anterior endoderm. E8.5 embryos had Tcf-4 expression in rostral
neural plate and in alternating rhombomeres of the hindbrain. By E9.5 and
thereafter, expression in the hindbrain disappeared and strong expression was
detected in the diencephalon. Strikingly Tcf-4 expression in the forebrain was
undetected in Small eye mutant embryos indicating that Pax-6 is required for
Tcf-4 expression in the forebrain. In developing limbs, Tcf-4 is readily detected
starting at E10.5 and is limited to mesenchymal cells surrounding the areas of
chondrification. These data indicate a function for Tcf-4 in neural and limb
development, two tissues where Wnt signaling plays an essential role.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Oct;7(11):1779-86.

CAG repeat expansion in autosomal dominant familial spastic paraparesis: novel
expansion in a subset of patients.

Benson KF(1), Horwitz M, Wolff J, Friend K, Thompson E, White S, Richards RI,
Raskind WH, Bird TD.

Author information: 
(1)Markey Molecular Medicine Center, Division of Medical Genetics and 6Division
of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Box 357720, Seattle, WA
98195-7720, USA.

Autosomal dominant familial spastic paraplegia (FSP) is a genetically
heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder displaying anticipation for which three 
loci have been mapped to the chromosomal positions 14q11.2-q24.3 (SPG3), 2p21-p24
(SPG4) and 15q11.1 (SPG6). The repeat expansion detection (RED) method has been
used to demonstrate expanded CAG repeats in some FSP families that map to SPG4.
We analyzed 20 FSP families, including four for which there is evidence for
linkage to SPG4, and found that in most cases the repeat expansion detected by
RED is due to non-pathogenic expansions of the chromosome 18q21.1 SEF2-1 or
17q21.3 ERDA1 locus. Polymorphic expansions at SEF2-1 and ERDA1 appear frequent
and may confound RED studies in the search for genes causing disorders
demonstrating anticipation. In six FSP families, however, CAG repeat expansion
was detected in a subset of affected and at-risk individuals that did not result 
from expansion of the SEF2-1 and ERDA1 loci. Overall, 11 of 37 (30%) of the FSP
patients with a CAG/CTG repeat expansion are unaccounted for by the SEF2-1 and
ERDA1 loci, compared with two of 23 (9%) of the unaffected at-risk individuals
and none of 19 controls. In the majority of cases these novel expansions were
shorter than those previously reported.

PMID: 9736780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Science. 1998 Sep 4;281(5382):1509-12.

Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway.

He TC(1), Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Costa LT, Morin PJ,
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, 424 North
Bond Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 1998 Sep 4;281(5382):1438-9, 1441.

The adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) is a tumor suppressor gene that is
inactivated in most colorectal cancers. Mutations of APC cause aberrant
accumulation of beta-catenin, which then binds T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4), causing
increased transcriptional activation of unknown genes. Here, the c-MYC oncogene
is identified as a target gene in this signaling pathway. Expression of c-MYC was
shown to be repressed by wild-type APC and activated by beta-catenin, and these
effects were mediated through Tcf-4 binding sites in the c-MYC promoter. These
results provide a molecular framework for understanding the previously enigmatic 
overexpression of c-MYC in colorectal cancers.

PMID: 9727977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nat Genet. 1998 Aug;19(4):379-83.

Depletion of epithelial stem-cell compartments in the small intestine of mice
lacking Tcf-4.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Moerer P, van Donselaar E, Huls G, Peters PJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mutations of the genes encoding APC or beta-catenin in colon carcinoma induce the
constitutive formation of nuclear beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes, resulting in
activated transcription of Tcf target genes. To study the physiological role of
Tcf-4 (which is encoded by the Tcf7/2 gene), we disrupted Tcf7/2 by homologous
recombination. Tcf7/2-/- mice die shortly after birth. A single histopathological
abnormality was observed. An apparently normal transition of intestinal endoderm 
into epithelium occurred at approximately embryonic day (E) 14.5. However, no
proliferative compartments were maintained in the prospective crypt regions
between the villi. As a consequence, the neonatal epithelium was composed
entirely of differentiated, non-dividing villus cells. We conclude that the
genetic program controlled by Tcf-4 maintains the crypt stem cells of the small
intestine. The constitutive activity of Tcf-4 in APC-deficient human epithelial
cells may contribute to their malignant transformation by maintaining stem-cell
characteristics.

PMID: 9697701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):19269-76.

A splice variant of E2-2 basic helix-loop-helix protein represses the
brain-specific fibroblast growth factor 1 promoter through the binding to an
imperfect E-box.

Liu Y(1), Ray SK, Yang XQ, Luntz-Leybman V, Chiu IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

We previously demonstrated that a cis-element (-489 to -467) in the
brain-specific fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1 promoter (FGF-1.B) binds multiple
nuclear factors, and this binding enhances transcriptional activity of this
promoter. Here we report the isolation of three cDNA clones, VL1, VL2 and VL3,
from a human brain stem cDNA expression library using four tandem repeats of the 
26-base pair sequence (-492 to -467) as the probe. These cDNA clones represent
the variant of bHLH protein E2-2/SEF2-1 in having 12 additional nucleotides
encoding the amino acids RSRS. The glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion
proteins of VLl, VL2, and VL3 immunologically react with anti-E2-2 antibody and
anti-GST-VL2 antibody. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and methylation
interference assay revealed that the GST fusion proteins specifically bind to an 
imperfect E-box sequence (GACCTG) present in the 26-base pair sequence. Transient
expression of the full-length E2-2 without RSRS in U1240MG glioblastoma cells
resulted in repression of FGF-1.B promoter activity. We further showed a
significant repression of promoter activity (>40 fold) by E2-2 (lacking the amino
acid sequence RSRS) when the E47 reporter construct, containing a hexameric E-box
site, was used. In contrast, the E2-2 variant containing the RSRS sequence has no
significant effect on either the FGF-1 promoter or E47 promoter. These results
suggest that the relative abundance of the two splice variants of E2-2 in brain
could be an important determinant for the expression of FGF-1.

PMID: 9668116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Semin Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(2):143-53.

The role of E-proteins in B- and T-lymphocyte development.

Bain G(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

Department of lymphocytes from hematopoietic stem cells is controlled, in part,
by the activity of transcriptional regulatory proteins. In particular, one class 
of helix-loop-helix proteins, termed E-proteins, have been implicated in the
regulation of gene expression during B-cell development. Recent analysis of
gene-targeted mice has allowed a direct assessment of the functional roles of
several E-protein family members in hematopoiesis. In this review we describe the
defects in B- and T-lymphocyte development in mice carrying targeted mutations in
the E-protein genes and discuss our current understanding of the role of these
proteins in lymphoid development.

PMID: 9618760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gene Expr. 1998;7(1):25-38.

Induction of basic helix-loop-helix protein-containing complexes during erythroid
differentiation.

Lister JA(1), Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The involvement of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in
erythroid differentiation and development has been established by forced
expression of the proteins TAL1 and Id1 in cultured cell lines and by targeted
disruption of the mouse TAL1 gene. To better understand the mechanism by which
bHLH proteins regulate erythropoiesis, we have investigated HLH protein-DNA
interactions in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells before and during chemically
induced differentiation. Three bHLH (E-box) binding activities were found to be
induced in nuclei from differentiating MEL cells. Using specific antisera, we
have demonstrated that these complexes are dimers of TAL1 and ubiquitous E
proteins. Similar complexes were detected in nuclear extracts from a human
erythroid cell line, K562, and from mouse fetal liver. All three bHLH complexes
were disrupted in vitro by Id1, a dominant-negative HLH protein that we and
others have previously shown to antagonize MEL cell differentiation. During
differentiation of an Id1-overexpressing MEL cell line, induction of a complex
containing TAL1 and E2A was not only blocked but reduced below the levels seen in
undifferentiating cells. These observations are consistent with the idea that
TAL1 and Id1 have opposing effects on erythroid differentiation and that the
level of TAL1/E2A heterodimer and/or another E protein-containing complex may
influence the decision of a cell to terminally differentiate.

PMID: 9572395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Res. 1998 Mar 15;58(6):1130-4.

Mutational analysis of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer.

Sparks AB(1), Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene initiates 
the majority of colorectal (CR) cancers. One consequence of this inactivation is 
constitutive activation of beta-catenin/Tcf-mediated transcription. To further
explore the role of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in CR tumorigenesis, we
searched for mutations in genes implicated in this pathway in CR tumors lacking
APC mutations. No mutations of the gamma-catenin (CTNNG1), GSK-3alpha (GSK3A), or
GSK-3beta (GSK3B) genes were detected. In contrast, mutations in the NH2-terminal
regulatory domain of beta-catenin (CTNNB1) were found in 13 of 27 (48%) CR tumors
lacking APC mutations. Mutations in the beta-catenin regulatory domain and APC
were observed to be mutually exclusive, consistent with their equivalent effects 
on beta-catenin stability and Tcf transactivation. In addition, we found that
CTNNB1 mutations can occur in the early, adenomatous stage of CR neoplasia, as
has been observed previously with APC mutations. These results suggest that
CTNNB1 mutations can uniquely substitute for APC mutations in CR tumors and that 
beta-catenin signaling plays a critical role in CR tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9515795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1248-56.

Two members of the Tcf family implicated in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during
embryogenesis in the mouse.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Willert K, Molenaar M, Roose J, Wagenaar G, Markman M,
Lamers W, Destree O, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Tcf transcription factors interact with beta-catenin and Armadillo to mediate
Wnt/Wingless signaling. We now report the characterization of genes encoding two 
murine members of the Tcf family, mTcf-3 and mTcf-4. mTcf-3 mRNA is ubiquitously 
present in embryonic day 6.5 (E6.5) mouse embryos but gradually disappears over
the next 3 to 4 days. mTcf-4 expression occurs first at E10.5 and is restricted
to di- and mesencephalon and the intestinal epithelium during embryogenesis. The 
mTcf-3 and mTcf-4 proteins bind a canonical Tcf DNA motif and can complex with
the transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin. Overexpression of Wnt-1 in a
mammary epithelial cell line leads to the formation of a nuclear complex between 
beta-catenin and Tcf proteins and to Tcf reporter gene transcription. These data 
demonstrate a direct link between Wnt stimulation and beta-catenin/Tcf
transcriptional activation and imply a role for mTcf-3 and -4 in early Wnt-driven
developmental decisions in the mouse embryo.

PMCID: PMC108837
PMID: 9488439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):2866-73.

Identification of a highly conserved module in E proteins required for in vivo
helix-loop-helix dimerization.

Goldfarb AN(1), Lewandowska K, Pennell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4943, USA. ang@po.cwru.edu

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors often function as
heterodimeric complexes consisting of a tissue-specific factor such as SCL/tal or
MyoD bound to a broadly expressed E protein. bHLH dimerization therefore appears 
to represent a key regulatory step in cell lineage determination and oncogenesis.
Previous functional and structural studies have indicated that the well defined
HLH domain is both necessary and sufficient for dimerization. Most of these
studies, however, have employed in vitro systems for analysis of HLH
dimerization, and their implications for the requirements for in vivo
dimerization remain unclear. Using multiple approaches, we have analyzed bHLH
dimerization in intact, living cells and have identified a novel domain in E
proteins, domain C, which is required for in vivo dimerization. Domain C, which
lies just carboxyl-terminal to helix 2 of the HLH domain, represents the most
highly conserved region within E proteins and appears to influence the in vivo
conformation of the adjacent HLH domain. These results suggest that HLH
dimerization in vivo may represent a complex, regulated process that is distinct 
from HLH dimerization in vitro.

PMID: 9446597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gastroenterology. 1997 Dec;113(6):2009-10.

The gatekeeper has many keys: dissecting the function of the APC gene.

Bresalier RS.

PMID: 9394744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Oct;6(11):1855-63.

A novel, heritable, expanding CTG repeat in an intron of the SEF2-1 gene on
chromosome 18q21.1.

Breschel TS(1), McInnis MG, Margolis RL, Sirugo G, Corneliussen B, Simpson SG,
McMahon FJ, MacKinnon DF, Xu JF, Pleasant N, Huo Y, Ashworth RG, Grundstrom C,
Grundstrom T, Kidd KK, DePaulo JR, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)George Browne Genetics Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

There are currently 13 diseases known to be caused by unstable triplet repeat
mutations; however, there are some instances (as with FRAXF and FRA16) when these
mutations appear to be asymptomatic. In a search for polymorphic CTG repeats as
candidate genes for bipolar disorder, we screened a genomic human chromosome
18-specific library and identified a 1.6 kb clone (7,6A) with a CTG24 repeat that
maps to 18q21.1. The CTG repeat locus, termed CTG18.1, is located within an
intron of human SEF2-1, a gene encoding a basic hellx-loop-hellx DNA binding
protein involved in transcriptional regulation. The CTGn repeat is highly
polymorphic and very enlarged alleles, consistent with expansions of up to
CTG2100, were identified. PCR and Southern blot analysis in pedigrees ascertained
for a Johns Hopkins University bipolar disorder linkage study and in CEPH
reference pedigrees revealed a tripartite distribution of CTG18.1 alleles with
stable alleles (CTG10-CTG37), moderately enlarged and unstable alleles
(CTG53-CTG250), and very enlarged, unstable alleles (CTG800-CTG2100). Moderately 
enlarged alleles were not associated with an abnormal phenotype and have a
combined enlarged allele frequency of 3% in the CEPH and bipolar populations.
Very enlarged alleles, detectable only by Southern blot analysis of genomic
digests, have thus far been found in only three individuals from our bipolar
pedigrees, and to date, have not been found in any of the CEPH reference
pedigrees. These enlarged alleles may arise, at least in part, via somatic
mutation.

PMID: 9302263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1787-90.

Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in
beta-catenin or APC.

Morin PJ(1), Sparks AB, Korinek V, Barker N, Clevers H, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, 424 North
Bond Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1752-3.

Inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene
initiates colorectal neoplasia. One of the biochemical activities associated with
the APC protein is down-regulation of transcriptional activation mediated by
beta-catenin and T cell transcription factor 4 (Tcf-4). The protein products of
mutant APC genes present in colorectal tumors were found to be defective in this 
activity. Furthermore, colorectal tumors with intact APC genes were found to
contain activating mutations of beta-catenin that altered functionally
significant phosphorylation sites. These results indicate that regulation of
beta-catenin is critical to APC's tumor suppressive effect and that this
regulation can be circumvented by mutations in either APC or beta-catenin.

PMID: 9065402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1784-7.

Constitutive transcriptional activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC-/-
colon carcinoma.

Korinek V(1), Barker N, Morin PJ, van Wichen D, de Weger R, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA 
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Mar 21;275(5307):1752-3.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein binds to
beta-catenin, a protein recently shown to interact with Tcf and Lef transcription
factors. The gene encoding hTcf-4, a Tcf family member that is expressed in
colonic epithelium, was cloned and characterized. hTcf-4 transactivates
transcription only when associated with beta-catenin. Nuclei of APC-/- colon
carcinoma cells were found to contain a stable beta-catenin-hTcf-4 complex that
was constitutively active, as measured by transcription of a Tcf reporter gene.
Reintroduction of APC removed beta-catenin from hTcf-4 and abrogated the
transcriptional transactivation. Constitutive transcription of Tcf target genes, 
caused by loss of APC function, may be a crucial event in the early
transformation of colonic epithelium.

PMID: 9065401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6680-90.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor SEF-2 regulates the activity of a novel
initiator element in the promoter of the human somatostatin receptor II gene.

Pscherer A(1), Dörflinger U, Kirfel J, Gawlas K, Rüschoff J, Buettner R, Schüle
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Regensburg, Germany.

The effects of somatostatin hormones are mediated by a family of five different
seven-helix transmembrane spanning receptors (SSTR1-5). The expression of the
five different SSTR subtypes displays a complex temporal- and tissue-specific
pattern. To investigate the molecular mechanisms controlling the different
expression patterns of the SSTRs, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the human
SSTR2 gene. Characterization of the SSTR2 promoter resulted in the identification
of a novel initiator element (SSTR2inr). Transcriptional activity of the SSTR2inr
is dependent on the presence of a binding site (E-box) for basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors. By screening a mouse brain cDNA expression library 
we isolated a cDNA coding for the bHLH transcription factor SEF-2. SEF-2 binds to
the E-box present in the SSTR2inr, both in vitro and in vivo and activates
transcription from the SSTR2inr. A single point mutation within the E-box
eliminates binding of SEF-2 and results in a complete loss of transcriptional
activity of the SSTR2inr. Furthermore, DNA binding studies demonstrate that the
basal transcription factor TFIIB can be tethered to the SSTR2inr through physical
interaction with SEF-2. In summary, the SSTR2inr represents a novel type of
initiator element that confers gene expression in the absence of a TATA-box or
binding sites for other known initiator factors, like YY-1 or USF.

PMCID: PMC452492
PMID: 8978694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 15;269(28):18453-62.

Isolation of two E-box binding factors that interact with the rat tyrosine
hydroxylase enhancer.

Yoon SO(1), Chikaraishi DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111.

The enhancer of the rat tyrosine hydroxylase gene (TH) in PC8b cells is composed 
of the AP1 motif (TCATTCA, -205 to -199) and an overlapping 20-base pair dyad
symmetry element (TCAGAGGCAGGTGCCTGTGA, -201 to -182) whose core is an E-box. We 
have isolated two partial cDNA clones that encode factors which bind the TH-dyad.
One is rITF2 with a basic helix-loop-helix motif and the other is CDP2 with a
homeodomain. rITF2 is a rat homolog of human ITF2 (or E2-2), and CDP2 is a member
of a new family of homeoproteins defined by histidine as the 9th residue of the
recognition helix and by unique 64 amino acid repeats related to those of the
Drosophila cut gene. The binding affinity of CDP2 alone is relatively weak, but
it enhances the binding of rITF2 to the TH-dyad. In transfected F9 cells,
activation of a TH-driven reporter requires both rITF2 and CDP2, suggesting that 
the proteins may functionally interact. However, rITF2 and CDP2 are not
restricted to TH-expressing tissues; hence they may not be involved in the
tissue-specific expression of TH. In addition, CDP2 is phosphorylated in vitro
and in vivo.

PMID: 7913462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Virol. 1991 Nov;65(11):6084-93.

Helix-loop-helix transcriptional activators bind to a sequence in glucocorticoid 
response elements of retrovirus enhancers.

Corneliussen B(1), Thornell A, Hallberg B, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

A family of nuclear proteins, designated SL3-3 enhancer factors 2 (SEF2), were
found to interact with an Ephrussi box-like motif within the glucocorticoid
response element in the enhancer of the murine leukemia virus SL3-3. Mutation of 
the DNA sequence decreased the basal enhancer activity in various cell lines. The
important nucleotides for binding of SEF2 are conserved in most type C
retroviruses. Various cell types displayed differences both in the sets of
SEF2-DNA complexes formed and in their amounts. A cDNA which encoded a protein
that interacted specifically with the SEF2-binding sequence was isolated from
human thymocytes. The nucleotide sequence specificity of the recombinant protein,
expressed in Escherichia coli, corresponded to that of at least one of the
nuclear SEF2 proteins. Sequence analysis of the cDNA revealed that it belongs to 
the basic helix-loop-helix class of DNA-binding proteins. Several mRNA
transcripts of different sizes were identified. Molecular analysis of cDNA clones
revealed multiple related mRNA species containing alternative coding regions,
which are most probably a result of differential splicing.

PMCID: PMC250283
PMID: 1681116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Feb 11;18(3):678.

Sequence of the cDNA encoding ITF-2, a positive-acting transcription factor.

Henthorn P(1), McCarrick-Walmsley R, Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6145.

PMCID: PMC333500
PMID: 2308860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


