
1. Dev Growth Differ. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12276. [Epub ahead of print]

Roles of ERa during mouse trophectoderm lineage differentiation: revealed by
antagonist and agonist of ERa.

Cheng X(1), Xu S(2), Song C(1), He L(2), Lian X(2), Liu Y(1), Wei J(1,)(2), Pang 
L(1), Wang S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Engineering Center, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China. (2)Department
of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China.

During mouse early embryogenesis, blastomeres increase in number by the morula
stage. Among them, the outer cells are polarized and differentiated into
trophectoderm (TE), while the inner cells remain unpolarized and give rise to
inner cell mass (ICM). TE provides an important liquid environment for ICM
development. In spite of extensive research, the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TE formation are still obscure. In order to investigate the roles of estrogen
receptor a (ERa) in this course, mouse 8-cell embryos were collected and cultured
in media containing ERa specific antagonist MPP and/or agonist PPT. The results
indicated that MPP treatment inhibits blastocyst formation in a dose-dependent
manner, while PPT, at proper concentration, promotes the cavitation ratio of
mouse embryos. Immunofluorescence staining results showed that MPP significantly 
decreased the nuclear expression of CDX2 in morula, but no significant changes of
OCT4 were observed. Moreover, after MPP treatment, the expression levels of the
genes related to TE specification, Tead4, Gata3 and Cdx2, were significantly
reduced. Overall, these results indicated that ERa might affect mouse embryo
cavitation by regulating TE lineage differentiation.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 27037955  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 15;17(1):231. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2545-1.

Changes in gene methylation patterns in neonatal murine hearts: Implications for 
the regenerative potential.

Górnikiewicz B(1), Ronowicz A(2), Krzeminski M(3), Sachadyn P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Microbiology, Gdansk University of
Technology, Gdansk, Poland. (2)Department of Biology and Pharmaceutical Botany,
Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland. (3)Department of Probability and
Biomathematics, Gdansk University of Technology, Gdansk, Poland. (4)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Microbiology, Gdansk University of Technology,
Gdansk, Poland. psach@pg.gda.pl.

BACKGROUND: The neonatal murine heart is able to regenerate after severe injury; 
this capacity however, quickly diminishes and it is lost within the first week of
life. DNA methylation is an epigenetic mechanism which plays a crucial role in
development and gene expression regulation. Under investigation here are the
changes in DNA methylation and gene expression patterns which accompany the loss 
of regenerative potential.
RESULTS: The MeDIP-chip (methylated DNA immunoprecipitation microarray) approach 
was used in order to compare global DNA methylation profiles in whole murine
hearts at day 1, 7, 14 and 56 complemented with microarray transcriptome
profiling. We found that the methylome transition from day 1 to day 7 is
characterized by the excess of genomic regions which gain over those that lose
DNA methylation. A number of these changes were retained until adulthood. The
promoter genomic regions exhibiting increased DNA methylation at day 7 as
compared to day 1 are significantly enriched in the genes critical for heart
maturation and muscle development. Also, the promoter genomic regions showing an 
increase in DNA methylation at day 7 relative to day 1 are significantly enriched
with a number of transcription factors binding motifs including those of Mfsd6l, 
Mef2c, Meis3, Tead4, and Runx1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the extensive alterations in DNA
methylation patterns along the development of neonatal murine hearts are likely
to contribute to the decline of regenerative capabilities observed shortly after 
birth. This conclusion is supported by the evidence that an increase in DNA
methylation in the neonatal murine heart from day 1 to day 7 occurs in the
promoter regions of genes playing important roles in cardiovascular system
development.

PMCID: PMC4791959
PMID: 26979619  [PubMed - in process]


3. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Feb;20(4):664-72.

Identification of key genes involved in HER2-positive breast cancer.

Zhong BL(1), Bian LJ, Wang GM, Zhou YF, Chen YY, Peng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province/Guangdong Provincial Emergency Hospital, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
kejingwangkjw@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: As an invasive cancer, breast cancer is the most common tumour in
women and is with high mortality. To study the mechanisms of HER2-positive breast
cancer, we analyzed microarray of GSE52194.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GSE52194 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
including 5 HER2-positive breast cancer samples and 3 normal breast samples.
Using cuffdiff software, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially
expressed long non-coding RNAs (DE-lncRNAs) were screened. Functions of the DEGs 
were analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses. Then,
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was constructed using
Cytoscape and modules of the PPI network were screened by CFinder. Moreover,
lncRNA-DEG pairs were screened.
RESULTS: Total 209 lncRNA transcriptions were predicted, and 996 differentially
expressed transcriptions were screened. Besides, FOS had interaction
relationships with EGR1 and SOD2 separately in module E and F of the PPI network 
for the DEGs. Moreover, there were many lncRNA-DEG pairs (e.g.
TCONS_00003876-EGR1, TCONS_00003876-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-BCL6B, 
lnc-TEAD4-1:1-FOS and lnc-TEAD4-1:1-BCL6B), meanwhile, co-expressed DEGs of
TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and lnc-TEAD4-1:1 were enriched in p53 signaling
pathway, MAPK signaling pathway and cancer-related pathways, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: ANXA1, EGR1, BCL6, SOD2, FOS, TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and
lnc-TEAD4-1:1 might play a role in HER2-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 26957268  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7342. [Epub ahead of print]

Nuclear localization of TEF3-1 promotes cell cycle progression and angiogenesis
in cancer.

Teng K(1), Deng C(1), Xu J(1), Men Q(1), Lei T(1), Di D(1), Liu T(2), Li W(2),
Liu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug
Discovery, College of Pharmacy, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, P.R. China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P.R. China.

TEF3-1 (transcriptional enhancer factor 3 isoform 1), also known as TEAD4 (TEA
domain family member 4), was recently revealed as an oncogenic character in
cancer development. However, the underlying molecular pathogenic mechanisms
remain undefined. In this paper, we investigated nuclear TEF3-1 could promote
G1/S transition in HUVECs, and the expression levels of cyclins and CDKs were
upregulated. Additionally, if TEF3-1 was knocked down, the expression of cyclins 
and CDKs was downregulated while the expression of P21, a negative regulator of
the cell cycle, was upregulated. A microarray analysis also confirmed that TEF3-1
overexpression upregulates genes that are related to cell cycle progression and
the promotion of angiogenesis. Moreover, we observed that nuclear TEF3-1 was
highly expressed during the formation of vascular structures in gastric cancer
(GC). Finally, tumor xenograft experiments indicated that, when TEF3-1 was
knocked down, tumor growth and angiogenesis were also suppressed. Taken together,
these results demonstrate for the first time that TEF3-1 localization to the
nucleus stimulates the cell cycle progression in HUVECs and specifically
contributes to tumor angiogenesis. Nuclear TEF3-1 in HUVECs may serve as an
oncogenic biomarker, and the suppression of TEF3-1 may be a potential target in
anti-tumor therapy.

PMID: 26885617  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 9;14(5):1169-80. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.104. Epub 2016 
Jan 28.

Tead and AP1 Coordinate Transcription and Motility.

Liu X(1), Li H(1), Rajurkar M(1), Li Q(2), Cotton JL(1), Ou J(1), Zhu LJ(1), Goel
HL(1), Mercurio AM(1), Park JS(3), Davis RJ(4), Mao J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (2)Program in Molecular Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(3)Divisions of Pediatric Urology and Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (4)Program in
Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address:
junhao.mao@umassmed.edu.

The Tead family transcription factors are the major intracellular mediators of
the Hippo-Yap pathway. Despite the importance of Hippo signaling in
tumorigenesis, Tead-dependent downstream oncogenic programs and target genes in
cancer cells remain poorly understood. Here, we characterize Tead4-mediated
transcriptional networks in a diverse range of cancer cells, including
neuroblastoma, colorectal, lung, and endometrial carcinomas. By intersecting
genome-wide chromatin occupancy analyses of Tead4, JunD, and Fra1/2, we find that
Tead4 cooperates with AP1 transcription factors to coordinate target gene
transcription. We find that Tead-AP1 interaction is JNK independent but engages
the SRC1-3 co-activators to promote downstream transcription. Furthermore, we
show that Tead-AP1 cooperation regulates the activity of the Dock-Rac/CDC42
module and drives the expression of a unique core set of target genes, thereby
directing cell migration and invasion. Together, our data unveil a critical
regulatory mechanism underlying Tead- and AP1-controlled transcriptional and
functional outputs in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4749442
PMID: 26832411  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142442.
eCollection 2015.

The Efficient Derivation of Trophoblast Cells from Porcine In Vitro Fertilized
and Parthenogenetic Blastocysts and Culture with ROCK Inhibitor Y-27632.

Hou D(1), Su M(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1), Yun T(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang M(2,)(3), Zhao
L(2,)(3), Li R(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, P. 
R. China. (2)State Key Laboratories of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Xenotransplantation,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Trophoblasts (TR) are specialized cells of the placenta and play an important
role in embryo implantation. The in vitro culture of trophoblasts provided an
important tool to investigate the mechanisms of implantation. In the present
study, porcine trophoblast cells were derived from pig in vitro fertilized (IVF) 
and parthenogenetically activated (PA) blastocysts via culturing in medium
supplemented with KnockOut serum replacement (KOSR) and basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) on STO feeder layers, and the effect of ROCK (Rho-associated
coiled-coil protein kinases) inhibiter Y-27632 on the cell lines culture was
tested. 5 PA blastocyst derived cell lines and 2 IVF blastocyst derived cell
lines have been cultured more than 20 passages; one PA cell lines reached 110
passages without obvious morphological alteration. The derived trophoblast cells 
exhibited epithelium-like morphology, rich in lipid droplets, and had obvious
defined boundaries with the feeder cells. The cells were histochemically stained 
positive for alkaline phosphatase. The expression of TR lineage markers, such as 
CDX2, KRT7, KRT18, TEAD4, ELF5 and HAND1, imprinted genes such as IGF2, PEG1 and 
PEG10, and telomerase activity related genes TERC and TERF2 were detected by
immunofluorescence staining, reverse transcription PCR and quantitative real-time
PCR analyses. Both PA and IVF blastocysts derived trophoblast cells possessed the
ability to differentiate into mature trophoblast cells in vitro. The addition of 
Y-27632 improved the growth of both PA and IVF blastocyst derived cell lines and 
increased the expression of trophoblast genes. This study has provided an
alternative highly efficient method to establish trophoblast for research focused
on peri-implantation and placenta development in IVF and PA embryos.

PMCID: PMC4640852
PMID: 26555939  [PubMed - in process]


7. Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1969-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.015023.
Epub 2015 Oct 20.

9p21.3 Coronary Artery Disease Risk Variants Disrupt TEAD Transcription
Factor-Dependent Transforming Growth Factor ß Regulation of p16 Expression in
Human Aortic Smooth Muscle Cells.

Almontashiri NA(1), Antoine D(1), Zhou X(1), Vilmundarson RO(1), Zhang SX(1), Hao
KN(1), Chen HH(2), Stewart AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Ruddy Canadian Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart
Institute, Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.);
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and
Inherited Diseases, Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). (2)From Ruddy Canadian
Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ontario,
Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.); Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases,
Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). astewart@ottawaheart.ca
hchen@uottawa.ca.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1943-5.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism whereby the 9p21.3 locus confers risk for coronary
artery disease remains incompletely understood. Risk alleles are associated with 
reduced expression of the cell cycle suppressor genes CDKN2A (p16 and p14) and
CDKN2B (p15) and increased vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. We asked
whether risk alleles disrupt transcription factor binding to account for this
effect.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A bioinformatic screen was used to predict which of 59
single nucleotide polymorphisms at the 9p21.3 locus disrupt (or create)
transcription factor binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift and luciferase
reporter assays examined the binding and functionality of the predicted
regulatory sequences. Primary human aortic smooth muscle cells (HAoSMCs) were
genotyped for 9p21.3, and HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele showed reduced
p15 and p16 levels and increased proliferation. rs10811656 and rs4977757
disrupted functional TEF-1 TEC1 AbaA domain (TEAD) transcription factor binding
sites. TEAD3 and TEAD4 overexpression induced p16 in HAoSMCs homozygous for the
nonrisk allele, but not for the risk allele. Transforming growth factor ß, known 
to activate p16 and also to interact with TEAD factors, failed to induce p16 or
to inhibit proliferation of HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele. Knockdown of 
TEAD3 blocked transforming growth factor ß-induced p16 mRNA and protein
expression, and dual knockdown of TEAD3 and TEAD4 markedly reduced p16 expression
in heterozygous HAoSMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we identify a novel mechanism whereby sequences at the 9p21.3 
risk locus disrupt TEAD factor binding and TEAD3-dependent transforming growth
factor ß induction of p16 in HAoSMCs. This mechanism accounts, in part, for the
9p21.3 coronary artery disease risk.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26487755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.342. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased TEAD4 expression and nuclear localization in colorectal cancer promote 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis in a YAP-independent manner.

Liu Y(1,)(2), Wang G(1,)(2), Yang Y(1,)(2,)(3), Mei Z(1,)(2), Liang Z(1,)(2), Cui
A(1,)(2), Wu T(1,)(2), Liu CY(1,)(2), Cui L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal and Anal Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Shanghai Colorectal Cancer
Research Center, Shanghai, China. (3)Center for Medical Research, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Dysregulation of the Hippo pathway occurs in a variety of cancers and often
correlates with a poor prognosis. To further explore the potential role of Hippo 
pathway dysregulation in tumor development and progression, we investigated its
downstream transcription factor TEAD4 in colorectal cancer (CRC). Increased
expression and nuclear localization of TEAD4 were found in a significant portion 
of CRC tissues, in association with metastasis and a poor prognosis. In CRC
cells, TEAD4 knockdown induced the mesenchymal-epithelial transition and
decreased cell mobility in vitro and metastasis in vivo. Microarray analysis
revealed that TEAD4 promoted cell adhesion and upregulated the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related transcriptome in CRC cells. Vimentin
was identified as a new direct target gene mediating TEAD4 function in CRC cells,
whereby forced vimentin expression markedly reversed TEAD4-knockdown-induced cell
morphological changes and decreased mobility. Interestingly, rescued expression
of both WT TEAD4 and a Y429H mutant can reverse the mesenchymal-epithelial
transition and increase vimentin expression, cell mobility and metastatic
potential in TEAD4-knockdown CRC cells. The discrepant expression of YAP and
TEAD4 in CRC tissues, the rescue ability of TEAD4 mutant defect in YAP binding
and no effect on vimentin expression by YAP knockdown in CRC cells, all
implicated a YAP-independent manner of TEAD4 function in CRC. Furthermore,
vimentin positively correlated and CDH1 reversely correlated with the level of
TEAD4 in CRC tissues and xenograft tumors. Our results suggest that TEAD4 nuclear
expression can serve as a biomarker for CRC progression and poor prognosis. The
transcription factor TEAD4 regulates a pro-metastasis transcription program in a 
YAP-independent manner in CRC, thus providing a novel mechanism of TEAD4
transcriptional regulation and its oncogenic role in CRC, independently of the
Hippo pathway.Oncogene advance online publication, 21 September 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.342.

PMID: 26387538  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. BMC Urol. 2015 Jul 1;15:57. doi: 10.1186/s12894-015-0055-0.

Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinomas in young adults.

Xu L(1), Yang R(2), Gan W(3), Chen X(4), Qiu X(5), Fu K(6), Huang J(4), Zhu G(7),
Guo H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College
of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, 210008,
China. dalaoxu1107@sina.com. (2)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Drum Tower 
Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing,
Jiangsu Province, 210008, China. doctoryr@gmail.com. (3)Department of Urology,
The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University,
Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, 210008, China. gwd@nju.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College
of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, 210008,
China. 583949288@qq.com. (5)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Drum Tower
Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing,
Jiangsu Province, 210008, China. Hydewoods@gmail.com. (6)Department of Urology,
The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University,
Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, 210008, China.
dr.fukai1988@gmail.com. (7)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Drum Tower
Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing,
Jiangsu Province, 210008, China. 421092748@qq.com. (8)Department of Urology, The 
Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing University,
Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, 210008, China.
doctorghq@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the biological behavior of Xp11.2 translocation
renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) as few clinical studies have been performed using a 
large sample size.
METHODS: This study included 103 consecutive young adult patients (age<U+2009>=<U+2009>45
years) with RCC who underwent partial or radical nephrectomy at our institution
from 2008 to 2013. Five patients without complete clinical data were excluded. Of
the 98 remaining patients, 16 and 82 patients were included in the Xp11.2
translocation and non-Xp11.2 translocation groups, respectively.
Clinicopathologic data were collected, including age, gender, tumor size,
laterality, symptoms at diagnosis, surgical procedure, pathologic stage, tumor
grade, time of recurrence and death.
RESULTS: Xp11.2 translocation RCCs were associated with higher tumor grade and
pathologic stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, Fisher's exact test). During the median follow-up of 
36 months (range: 3-71 months), the number of cancer-related deaths was 4 (4.9%) 
and 3 (18.7%) in the non-Xp11.2 translocation and Xp11.2 translocation groups,
respectively. The Kaplan-Meier cancer specific survival curves revealed a
significant difference between non-Xp11.2 translocation RCCs and Xp11.2
translocation RCCs in young adults (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.042).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with non-Xp11.2 translocation RCCs, the Xp11.2
translocation RCCs seemingly showed a higher tumor grade and pathologic stage and
have similar recurrence-free survival rates but poorer cancer-specific survival
rates in young adults.

PMCID: PMC4487560
PMID: 26126525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16906-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642363. Epub 2015
May 20.

Hippo Component TAZ Functions as a Co-repressor and Negatively Regulates <U+0394>Np63
Transcription through TEA Domain (TEAD) Transcription Factor.

Valencia-Sama I(1), Zhao Y(1), Lai D(1), Janse van Rensburg HJ(1), Hao Y(1), Yang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
yang@path.queensu.ca.

Transcriptional co-activator with a PDZ binding domain (TAZ) is a WW
domain-containing transcriptional co-activator and a core component of an
emerging Hippo signaling pathway that regulates organ size, tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. TAZ regulates these biological functions by
up-regulating downstream cellular genes through transactivation of transcription 
factors such as TEAD and TTF1. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TAZ-induced tumorigenesis, we have recently performed a gene expression profile
analysis by overexpressing TAZ in mammary cells. In addition to the
TAZ-up-regulated genes that were confirmed in our previous studies, we identified
a large number of cellular genes that were down-regulated by TAZ. In this study, 
we have confirmed these down-regulated genes (including cytokines, chemokines,
and p53 gene family members) as bona fide downstream transcriptional targets of
TAZ. By using human breast and lung epithelial cells, we have further
characterized <U+0394>Np63, a p53 gene family member, and shown that TAZ suppresses
<U+0394>Np63 mRNA, protein expression, and promoter activity through interaction with
the transcription factor TEAD. We also show that TEAD can inhibit <U+0394>Np63 promoter 
activity and that TAZ can directly interact with <U+0394>Np63 promoter-containing TEAD
binding sites. Finally, we provide functional evidence that down-regulation of
<U+0394>Np63 by TAZ may play a role in regulating cell migration. Altogether, this study
provides novel evidence that the Hippo component TAZ can function as a
co-repressor and regulate biological functions by negatively regulating
downstream cellular genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505436 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 25995450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 May 19. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12215. [Epub ahead of print]

Blastomeres aggregation as an efficient alternative for trophoblast culture from 
porcine parthenogenetic embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1,)(2), Kim SJ(1), Lee BC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and the Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University,
Seoul, 151-742, Korea. (2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44519, Egypt. (3)Designed Animal and
Transplantation, Institute of Green Bio Science Technology, Seoul National
University, Pyeongchang, 232-916, Korea.

Zona pellucida free (ZPF) oocytes were cultured after electrical activation to
allow blastomeres aggregation and compared to ZP intact (ZPI) oocytes. In
feeder-dependent conditions, the trophoblast attachment and primary outgrowths
were significantly higher in ZPF than in ZPI groups. In feeder-free conditions,
trophoblast attachment and typical morphological trophoblast primary outgrowths
were observed in ZPF group. The primary colonies derived from the ZPF embryos in 
both culture conditions were able to establish secondary and tertiary colonies
and showed mRNA expression of CDX2, TEAD4 and KRT8 as trophoblast markers, while 
outgrowths from the ZPI embryos could not grow beyond primary colonies.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 25988391  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17685-97.

The interplay between TEAD4 and KLF5 promotes breast cancer partially through
inhibiting the transcription of p27Kip1.

Wang C(1,)(2,)(3), Nie Z(3), Zhou Z(1), Zhang H(1), Liu R(1), Wu J(1,)(2,)(4),
Qin J(1,)(2), Ma Y(3), Chen L(3), Li S(3), Chen W(5), Li F(1,)(2), Shi P(1,)(2), 
Wu Y(3), Shen J(3), Chen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of The Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (2)University of The Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. (3)First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Kunming
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (5)Cancer Hospital, Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

Growing evidence suggests that YAP/TAZ are mediators of the Hippo pathway and
promote breast cancer. However, the roles of YAP/TAZ transcription factor
partners TEADs in breast cancer remain unclear. Here we found that TEAD4 was
expressed in breast cancer cell lines, especially in triple negative breast
cancers (TNBC) cell lines. TEAD4 binds to KLF5. Knockdown of either TEAD4 or KLF5
in HCC1937 and HCC1806 cells induced the expression of CDK inhibitor p27.
Depletion of either TEAD4 or KLF5 activated the p27 gene promoter and increased
the p27 mRNA levels. Depletion of p27 partially prevents growth inhibition caused
by TEAD4 and KLF5 knockdown. TEAD4 overexpression stimulated proliferation in
vitro and tumor growth in mice, while stable knockdown of TEAD4 inhibited
proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in mice. Thus TEAD4 and KLF5, in
collaboration, promoted TNBC cell proliferation and tumor growth in part by
inhibiting p27 gene transcription. TEAD4 is a potential target and biomarker for 
the development of novel therapeutics for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4627338
PMID: 25970772  [PubMed - in process]


13. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015 Mar 1;569:54-61. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.02.003. Epub 
2015 Feb 14.

Characterization of the transcriptional activation domains of human TEF3-1
(transcription enhancer factor 3 isoform 1).

Qiao C(1), Jiang Y(1), Deng C(1), Huang Z(1), Teng K(1), Chen L(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery,
Ministry of Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China. Electronic address: lx@whu.edu.cn.

TEF3-1 (transcription enhancer factor 3 isoform 1) is a human transcriptional
factor, which has a N-terminal TEA/ATTS domain supposedly for DNA binding and
C-terminal PRD and STY domains for transcriptional activation. Taking advantage
of the efficient reporter design of yeast two-hybrid system, we characterized the
TEF3-1 domains in activating gene expression. Previously study usually mentioned 
that the C-terminal domain of TEF3-1 has the transcriptional activity, however,
our data shows that the peptides TEF3-11-66 and TEF3-1197-434 functioned as two
independent activation domains, suggesting that N-terminal domain of TEF3-1 also 
has transcriptional activation capacity. Additionally, more deletions of amino
acids 197-434 showed that only the peptides TEF3-1197-265 contained the minimum
sequences for the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain. The protein
structure is predicted to contain a helix-turn-helix structure in TEF3-11-66 and 
four ß sheets in TEF3-1197-265. Finally, after the truncated fragments of TEF3-1 
were expressed in HUVEC cells, the whole TEF3-1 and the two activation domains
could increase F-actin stress fiber, cell proliferation, migration and targeted
gene expression. Further analysis and characterization of the activation domains 
in TEF3-1 may broaden our understanding of the gene involved in angiogenesis and 
other pathological processes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;154:128-41. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.01.012.
Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Isolation and characterization of trophoblast-derived stem-like cells from
peri-implantation porcine embryos.

Suasnavas EA(1), Heywood S(1), Ward A(1), Cox L(1), O'Grady M(1), Zhao Y(1),
Gilbert L(1), Isom SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan, UT, USA. (2)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State
University, Logan, UT, USA. Electronic address: clay.isom@usu.edu.

In mammals, the trophoblast lineage of the embryo is specified before
attachment/implantation to become the fetal portion of the placenta.
Trophoblast-derived cells were isolated and cultured from day 10 and day 13
porcine embryos and were grown in vitro in a defined, serum-free culture medium
for over 2 years without showing any signs of senescence. However,
trophoblast-derived cells placed into serum-containing medium rapidly senesce and
fail to proliferate. Semiquantitative and quantitative gene expression analyses
of cells in culture from 0 to 30 days confirmed the presence (and relative
abundance) of mRNA transcripts from genes involved in trophoblast function (CDX2,
TEAD4, CYP17A1, HSD17B1, FGFR2, PLET, HAND1) as well as some genes known to
mediate pluripotency (POU5F1, KLF4, CMYC). Protein immunolocalization
demonstrated expression of both trophoblast and mesenchymal cell markers. DNA
methylation patterns in promoters of three critical developmental genes (HAND1,
KLF4, TEAD4) did not change appreciably over 4 months of culture in vitro. It was
demonstrated that these trophoblast-derived cells are easily stably transfected
with an exogenous transgene (eGFP) by a variety of methods, and show the ability 
to survive and to be passaged repeatedly after transfection. In summary, early
embryonic porcine trophoblast-derived cells have demonstrated unique
characteristics, which means they could be used as valuable tools for laboratory 
work. Anticipated applications include the study of trophoblast physiology as
well as possible solutions for improving efficiency of transgenesis by somatic
cell nuclear transfer and for pluripotency reprogramming of cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25660622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 27;458(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.077. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

YAP/TAZ enhance mammalian embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a
Tead-dependent manner.

Han D(1), Byun SH(1), Park S(1), Kim J(1), Kim I(1), Ha S(1), Kwon M(1), Yoon
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. (2)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. Electronic
address: keejung@skku.edu.

Mammalian brain development is regulated by multiple signaling pathways
controlling cell proliferation, migration and differentiation. Here we show that 
YAP/TAZ enhance embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a cell autonomous
fashion using diverse experimental approaches. Introduction of retroviral vectors
expressing YAP or TAZ into the mouse embryonic brain induced cell localization in
the ventricular zone (VZ), which is the embryonic neural stem cell niche. This
change in cell distribution in the cortical layer is due to the increased
stemness of infected cells; YAP-expressing cells were colabeled with Sox2, a
neural stem cell marker, and YAP/TAZ increased the frequency and size of
neurospheres, indicating enhanced self-renewal- and proliferative ability of
neural stem cells. These effects appear to be TEA domain family transcription
factor (Tead)-dependent; a Tead binding-defective YAP mutant lost the ability to 
promote neural stem cell characteristics. Consistently, in utero gene transfer of
a constitutively active form of Tead2 (Tead2-VP16) recapitulated all the features
of YAP/TAZ overexpression, and dominant negative Tead2-EnR resulted in marked
cell exit from the VZ toward outer cortical layers. Taken together, these results
indicate that the Tead-dependent YAP/TAZ signaling pathway plays important roles 
in neural stem cell maintenance by enhancing stemness of neural stem cells during
mammalian brain development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25634692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Int J Cancer. 2015 Aug 1;137(3):638-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29429. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Genetic variants in Hippo pathway genes YAP1, TEAD1 and TEAD4 are associated with
melanoma-specific survival.

Yuan H(1,)(2,)(3), Liu H(1,)(2), Liu Z(1,)(2), Zhu D(4), Amos CI(4), Fang S(5),
Lee JE(5), Wei Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Community and Family 
Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers. The Hippo
pathway controls cell migration, development and sizes of the organs in diverse
species, and deregulation of this pathway may affect CM progression and
prognosis. Therefore, we hypothesized that genetic variants of Hippo pathway
genes might predict survival of CM patients. We used the genotyping data of 1,115
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 12 pathway core genes (i.e.,
MST1, MST2, SAV1, LATS1, LATS2, MOB1A, MOB1B, YAP1, TEAD1, TEAD2, TEAD3 and
TEAD4) from the dataset of our previously published CM genome-wide association
study and comprehensively analyzed their associations with CM-specific survival
(CSS) in 858 CM patients by using the Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox proportional 
hazards regression models. We found a predictive role of YAP1 rs11225163 CC,
TEAD1 rs7944031 AG+GG and TEAD4 rs1990330 CA+AA in the prognosis of CM. In
addition, patients with an increasing number of unfavorable genotypes (NUG) had a
markedly increased risk of death. After incorporating NUG in the model with
clinical variables, the new model showed a significantly improved discriminatory 
ability to classify CSS (AUC increased from 82.03% to 84.56%). Our findings
suggest that genetic variants of Hippo pathway genes, particularly YAP1
rs11225163, TEAD1 rs7944031 and TEAD4 rs1990330, may independently or jointly
modulate survival of CM patients. Additional large, prospective studies are
needed to validate these findings.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4437894 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25628125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Aug;22(8):1328-40. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.221. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

Reactivation of epigenetically silenced miR-512 and miR-373 sensitizes lung
cancer cells to cisplatin and restricts tumor growth.

Adi Harel S(1), Bossel Ben-Moshe N(2), Aylon Y(1), Bublik DR(1), Moskovits N(1), 
Toperoff G(3), Azaiza D(3), Biagoni F(4), Fuchs G(1), Wilder S(1), Hellman A(3), 
Blandino G(4), Domany E(2), Oren M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel. (2)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (3)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer
Research, Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. (4)Translational
Oncogenomic Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRs) regulate a variety of cellular processes, and their impaired
expression is involved in cancer. Silencing of tumor-suppressive miRs in cancer
can occur through epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation and histone
deacetylation. We performed comparative miR profiling on cultured lung cancer
cells before and after treatment with 5'aza-deoxycytidine plus Trichostatin A to 
reverse DNA methylation and histone deacetylation, respectively. Several tens of 
miRs were strongly induced by such 'epigenetic therapy'. Two representatives,
miR-512-5p (miR-512) and miR-373, were selected for further analysis. Both miRs
were secreted in exosomes. Re-expression of both miRs augmented cisplatin-induced
apoptosis and inhibited cell migration; miR-512 also reduced cell proliferation. 
TEAD4 mRNA was confirmed as a direct target of miR-512; likewise, miR-373 was
found to target RelA and PIK3CA mRNA directly. Our results imply that miR-512 and
miR-373 exert cell-autonomous and non-autonomous tumor-suppressive effects in
lung cancer cells, where their re-expression may benefit epigenetic cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4495356 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25591738  [PubMed - in process]


18. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Oct 15;7(11):8223-6. eCollection 2014.

Primary alveolar soft part sarcoma of the uterine cervix: a case report and
literature review.

Feng M(1), Jiang W(1), He Y(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University.

Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a tumor of unknown histogenesis, composed of
large, epithelioid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, having an alveolar pattern.
Primary ASPS of uterine cervix is very rare. In this report, we present a
21-aged-old female with primary ASPS in the uterine cervix and discuss the
clinicopathological characteristics, immunophenotype, molecular genetic feature
and differential diagnosis of ASPS of cervix.

PMCID: PMC4270578
PMID: 25550876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Mar 6;10(3):372-81. doi: 10.2215/CJN.02390314. Epub
2014 Dec 26.

Mapping novel immunogenic epitopes in IgA nephropathy.

Woo SH(1), Sigdel TK(2), Dinh VT(2), Vu MT(2), Sarwal MM(3), Lafayette RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hospital Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (2)Department of Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, California; (3)Department of Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, California; czar@stanford.edu
minnie.sarwal@ucsfmedctr.org. (4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California
czar@stanford.edu minnie.sarwal@ucsfmedctr.org.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: IgA plays a key role in IgA nephropathy (IgAN) by
forming immune complexes and depositing in the glomeruli, leading to an
inflammatory response. However, the antigenic targets and functional
characterization of IgA have been incompletely defined in this disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: This study was performed in sera
from patients who were studied as part of a prospective, observational study of
IgAN. These patients (n=22) all had biopsy-proven IgAN within 3 years of study
initiation, complete clinical data, annual urinary inulin clearance for GFRs, and
at least 5 years of follow-up. Progression was defined as loss of >5 ml/min per
1.73 m(2) per year of inulin clearance measured over at least 5 years. A protein 
microarray was used for detection of IgAN-specific IgA autoantibodies in blood
across approximately 9000 human antigens to specifically identify the most
immunogenic protein targets that drive IgA antibodies in IgAN (n=22), healthy
controls (n=10), and non-IgAN glomerular diseases (n=17). Results were validated 
by ELISA assays in sera and by immunohistochemistry in IgAN kidney biopsies.
IgA-specific antibodies were correlated with clinical and histologic variables to
assess their effect on disease progression and prognosis.
RESULTS: Fifty-four proteins mounted highly significant IgA antibody responses in
patients with IgAN with a false discovery rate (q value) of =10%; 325 antibodies 
(P=0.05) were increased overall. Antitissue transglutaminase IgA was
significantly elevated in IgAN (P<0.001, q value of 0%). IgA antibodies to DDX4
(r=-0.55, P=0.01) and ZADH2 (r=-0.48, P=0.02) were significantly correlated with 
the decline of renal function. Specific IgA autoantibodies are elevated in IgAN
compared with normal participants and those with other glomerular diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, IgA autoantibodies target novel proteins,
highly expressed in the kidney glomerulus and tubules. These IgA autoantibodies
may play important roles in the pathogenesis of IgAN.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4348675
PMID: 25542908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Biol. 2014 Dec 1;396(1):31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.018. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

Transcriptional regulators in the Hippo signaling pathway control organ growth in
Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration.

Hayashi S(1), Ochi H(2), Ogino H(3), Kawasumi A(1), Kamei Y(4), Tamura K(1),
Yokoyama H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aza-Aoba 6-3, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578,
Miyagi, Japan. (2)Yamagata University, Faculty of Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi,
Yamagata 990-9585, Yamagata, Japan. (3)Department of Animal Bioscience, Nagahama 
Institute of Bio-Science and Technology, 1266 Tamura, Nagahama 526-0829, Shiga,
Japan; JST, CREST, 5, Sanbancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Spectrography and
Bioimaging Facility, National Institute for Basic Biology, Myodaiji, Okazaki
444-8585, Aichi, Japan; Department of Basic Biology in the School of Life Science
of the Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8585,
Aichi, Japan. (5)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate 
School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aza-Aoba 6-3, Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8578, Miyagi, Japan. Electronic address: yokoyoko@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

The size and shape of tissues are tightly controlled by synchronized processes
among cells and tissues to produce an integrated organ. The Hippo signaling
pathway controls both cell proliferation and apoptosis by dual
signal-transduction states regulated through a repressive kinase cascade. Yap1
and Tead, transcriptional regulators that act downstream of the Hippo signaling
kinase cascade, have essential roles in regulating cell proliferation. In
amphibian limb or tail regeneration, the local tissue outgrowth terminates when
the correct size is reached, suggesting that organ size is strictly controlled
during epimorphic organ-level regeneration. We recently demonstrated that Yap1 is
required for the regeneration of Xenopus tadpole limb buds (Hayashi et al., 2014,
Dev. Biol. 388, 57-67), but the molecular link between the Hippo pathway and
organ size control in vertebrate epimorphic regeneration is not fully understood.
To examine the requirement of Hippo pathway transcriptional regulators in
epimorphic regeneration, including organ size control, we inhibited these
regulators during Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration by overexpressing a
dominant-negative form of Yap (dnYap) or Tead4 (dnTead4) under a heat-shock
promoter in transgenic animal lines. Each inhibition resulted in regeneration
defects accompanied by reduced cell mitosis and increased apoptosis. Single-cell 
gene manipulation experiments indicated that Tead4 cell-autonomously regulates
the survival of neural progenitor cells in the regenerating tail. In amphibians, 
amputation at the proximal level of the tail (deep amputation) results in faster 
regeneration than that at the distal level (shallow amputation), to restore the
original-sized tail with similar timing. However, dnTead4 overexpression
abolished the position-dependent differential growth rate of tail regeneration.
These results suggest that the transcriptional regulators in the Hippo pathway,
Tead4 and Yap1, are required for general vertebrate epimorphic regeneration as
well as for organ size control in appendage regeneration. In regenerative
medicine, these findings should contribute to the development of
three-dimensional organs with the correct size for a patient's body.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25284091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Cell. 2014 Aug 25;30(4):410-22. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.06.019. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

Notch and hippo converge on Cdx2 to specify the trophectoderm lineage in the
mouse blastocyst.

Rayon T(1), Menchero S(1), Nieto A(2), Xenopoulos P(3), Crespo M(1), Cockburn
K(4), Cañon S(1), Sasaki H(5), Hadjantonakis AK(3), de la Pompa JL(6), Rossant
J(4), Manzanares M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Program, Department of Cardiovascular Development and
Repair, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor
Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. (2)Program in Developmental and Stem
Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada. (3)Developmental Biology Program,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Program in Developmental
and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8,
Canada. (5)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Department of Cell
Fate Control, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
(6)Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Program, Department of Cardiovascular
Development and Repair, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares
(CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. (7)Stem Cell Biology
Program, Department of Cardiovascular Development and Repair, Centro Nacional de 
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mmanzanares@cnic.es.

The first lineage choice in mammalian embryogenesis is that between the
trophectoderm, which gives rise to the trophoblast of the placenta, and the inner
cell mass, from which is derived the embryo proper and the yolk sac. The
establishment of these lineages is preceded by the inside-versus-outside
positioning of cells in the early embryo and stochastic expression of key
transcription factors, which is then resolved into lineage-restricted expression.
The regulatory inputs that drive this restriction and how they relate to cell
position are largely unknown. Here, we show an unsuspected role of Notch
signaling in regulating trophectoderm-specific expression of Cdx2 in cooperation 
with TEAD4. Notch activity is restricted to outer cells and is able to influence 
positional allocation of blastomeres, mediating preferential localization to the 
trophectoderm. Our results show that multiple signaling inputs at preimplantation
stages specify the first embryonic lineages.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4146744
PMID: 25127056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Aging Cell. 2014 Oct;13(5):926-34. doi: 10.1111/acel.12252. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

miR-125a-5p impairs endothelial cell angiogenesis in aging mice via RTEF-1
downregulation.

Che P(1), Liu J, Shan Z, Wu R, Yao C, Cui J, Zhu X, Wang J, Burnett MS, Wang S,
Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, NO. 58 Zhongshan Road 2, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Increasing evidence suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in
impaired endothelial cell (EC) angiogenesis during aging. However, their exact
roles in the aging process remain unclear. We aimed to determine whether miRNAs
cause angiogenesis defects in ECs during aging and to uncover the underlying
mechanisms. To study the miRNA-induced changes in ECs during aging, we performed 
microarray analyses on arterial ECs collected from young and aging mice. Using
qRT-PCR, we showed that microRNA-125a-5p (mir-125a-5p) expression was
approximately 2.9 times higher in old endothelial cells (OECs) compared with
samples collected from young animals. Western blot assays showed a lower
expression level of an mir-125a-5p target known as related transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) in OECs compared with its expression levels in young
cells. Overexpression of mir-125a-5p in young endothelial cells (YECs) using
pre-mir-125a-5p caused the downregulation of RTEF-1, endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (eNOS) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and resulted in
impaired angiogenesis, as evidenced by spheroid sprouting and tube formation
assays in vitro. Conversely, repression of mir-125a-5p in OECs using
anti-mir-125a-5p increased RTEF-1, eNOS and VEGF expression and improved EC
angiogenesis. Importantly, impaired angiogenesis caused by knock-down of RTEF-1
was not efficiently rescued by anti-mir-125a-5p. Dual-luciferase reporter gene
analysis showed that RTEF-1 is a direct target of mir-125a-5p, which regulates
angiogenesis by repressing RTEF-1 expression and modulating eNOS and VEGF
expression. These findings indicate that mir-125a-5p and RTEF-1 are potential
therapeutic targets for improving EC-mediated angiogenesis in elderly
individuals.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4331751
PMID: 25059272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biology (Basel). 2014 Jun 19;3(2):426-51. doi: 10.3390/biology3020426.

Myogenic differential methylation: diverse associations with chromatin structure.

Chandra S(1), Baribault C(2), Lacey M(3), Ehrlich M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
schandr1@tulane.edu. (2)Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. crlbrblt@gmail.com. (3)Tulane Cancer Center, 
Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
mlacey1@tulane.edu. (4)Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics, New Orleans, LA
70112, USA. ehrlich@tulane.edu.

Employing a new algorithm for identifying differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) from reduced representation bisulfite sequencing profiles, we identified
1972 hypermethylated and 3250 hypomethylated myogenic DMRs in a comparison of
myoblasts (Mb) and myotubes (Mt) with 16 types of nonmuscle cell cultures. DMRs
co-localized with a variety of chromatin structures, as deduced from ENCODE
whole-genome profiles. Myogenic hypomethylation was highly associated with both
weak and strong enhancer-type chromatin, while hypermethylation was infrequently 
associated with enhancer-type chromatin. Both myogenic hypermethylation and
hypomethylation often overlapped weak transcription-type chromatin and
Polycomb-repressed-type chromatin. For representative genes, we illustrate
relationships between DNA methylation, the local chromatin state, DNaseI
hypersensitivity, and gene expression. For example, MARVELD2 exhibited myogenic
hypermethylation in transcription-type chromatin that overlapped a silenced
promoter in Mb and Mt while TEAD4 had myogenic hypomethylation in intronic
subregions displaying enhancer-type or transcription-type chromatin in these
cells. For LSP1, alternative promoter usage and active promoter-type chromatin
were linked to highly specific myogenic or lymphogenic hypomethylated DMRs.
Lastly, despite its myogenesis-associated expression, TBX15 had multiple
hypermethylated myogenic DMRs framing its promoter region. This could help
explain why TBX15 was previously reported to be underexpressed and, unexpectedly,
its promoter undermethylated in placentas exhibiting vascular intrauterine growth
restriction.

PMCID: PMC4085616
PMID: 24949935  [PubMed]


24. Tissue Barriers. 2014 Jan 1;2(1):e28127. doi: 10.4161/tisb.28127. Epub 2014 Feb
21.

The role of angiomotin phosphorylation in the Hippo pathway during
preimplantation mouse development.

Hirate Y(1), Sasaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Control; Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics; Kumamoto University; Kumamoto, Japan.

The Hippo signaling pathway regulates a number of cellular events, including the 
control of cell fates in preimplantation mouse embryos. The inner and outer cells
of the embryo show high and low levels of Hippo signaling, respectively. This
position-dependent Hippo signaling promotes the specification of distinct cell
fates. In a recent paper, we identified the molecular mechanism that controls
Hippo signaling in preimplantation embryos. The junction-associated scaffold
protein Angiomotin (Amot) plays a key role in this mechanism. At the adherens
junctions of the inner cells, Amot activates the Hippo pathway by recruiting and 
activating the protein kinase large tumor suppressor (Lats). In contrast, Amot at
the apical membrane of the outer cells suppresses Hippo signaling by interacting 
with F-actin. The phosphorylation of Amot inhibits its interaction with F-actin
and activates Hippo signaling. We propose that Amot acts as a molecular switch
for the Hippo pathway and links F-actin with Lats activity.

PMCID: PMC4022607
PMID: 24843842  [PubMed]


25. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091770. eCollection
2014.

YAP promotes ovarian cancer cell tumorigenesis and is indicative of a poor
prognosis for ovarian cancer patients.

Xia Y(1), Chang T(2), Wang Y(3), Liu Y(3), Li W(4), Li M(5), Fan HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (2)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Pathology,
Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, China. (5)The Affiliated Guangren Hospital, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0152712.

YAP is a key component of the Hippo signaling pathway and plays a critical role
in the development and progression of multiple cancer types, including ovarian
cancer. However, the effects of YAP on ovarian cancer development in vivo and its
downstream effectors remain uncertain. In this study we found that strong YAP
expression was associated with poor ovarian cancer patient survival.
Specifically, we showed for the first time that high YAP expression levels were
positively correlated with TEAD4 gene expression, and their co-expression was a
prognostic marker for poor ovarian cancer survival. Hyperactivation of YAP by
mutating its five inhibitory phosphorylation sites (YAP-5SA) increased ovarian
cancer cell proliferation, resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs, cell migration, 
and anchorage-independent growth. In contrast, expression of a dominant negative 
YAP mutant reversed these phenotypes in ovarian cancer cells both in vitro and in
vivo. Our results suggested that YAP caused these effects by promoting an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Thus, YAP promotes ovarian cancer cell
growth and tumorigenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Further, high YAP and TEAD4
expression is a prognostic marker for ovarian cancer progression and a potential 
target for ovarian cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3951505
PMID: 24622501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Cell. 2014 Feb 10;25(2):166-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.010.

A peptide mimicking VGLL4 function acts as a YAP antagonist therapy against
gastric cancer.

Jiao S(1), Wang H(1), Shi Z(1), Dong A(2), Zhang W(1), Song X(1), He F(1), Wang
Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang W(1), Wang X(1), Guo T(1), Li P(1), Zhao Y(1), Ji H(3),
Zhang L(4), Zhou Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Protein Science Shanghai, State Key Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-Yang Road, Shanghai
200031, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and Internal Medicine, Nanjing
Xiaguan Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210085, China. (3)National Center for Protein 
Science Shanghai, State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry
and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue-Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address:
hbji@sibcb.ac.cn. (4)National Center for Protein Science Shanghai, State Key
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320
Yue-Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address: rayzhang@sibcb.ac.cn. 
(5)National Center for Protein Science Shanghai, State Key Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-Yang Road, Shanghai
200031, China. Electronic address: zczhou@sibcb.ac.cn.

The Hippo pathway has been implicated in suppressing tissue overgrowth and tumor 
formation by restricting the oncogenic activity of YAP. However, transcriptional 
regulators that inhibit YAP activity have not been well studied. Here, we uncover
clinical importance for VGLL4 in gastric cancer suppression and find that VGLL4
directly competes with YAP for binding TEADs. Importantly, VGLL4's tandem Tondu
domains are not only essential but also sufficient for its inhibitory activity
toward YAP. A peptide mimicking this function of VGLL4 potently suppressed tumor 
growth in vitro and in vivo. These findings suggest that disruption of YAP-TEADs 
interaction by a VGLL4-mimicking peptide may be a promising therapeutic strategy 
against YAP-driven human cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 10;9(2):e88143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088143. eCollection
2014.

Endothelial differentiation gene-1, a new downstream gene is involved in RTEF-1
induced angiogenesis in endothelial cells.

He P(1), Philbrick MJ(2), An X(2), Wu J(2), Messmer-Blust AF(2), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology of Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College of
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China ; Cardiovascular
Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Cardiovascular Institute, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

Related Transcriptional Enhancer Factor-1 (RTEF-1) has been suggested to induce
angiogenesis through regulating target genes. Whether RTEF-1 has a direct role in
angiogenesis and what specific genes are involved in RTEF-1 driven angiogenisis
have not been elucidated. We found that over-expressing RTEF-1 in Human dermal
microvascular endothelial cells-1 (HMEC-1) significantly increased endothelial
cell aggregation, growth and migration while the processes were inhibited by
siRNA of RTEF-1. In addition, we observed that Endothelial differentiation gene-1
(Edg-1) expression was up-regulated by RTEF-1 at the transcriptional level.
RTEF-1 could bind to Edg-1 promoter and subsequently induce its activity. Edg-1
siRNA significantly blocked RTEF-1-driven increases in endothelial cell
aggregation in a Matrigel assay and retarded RTEF-1-induced endothelial cell
growth and migration. Pertussis Toxin (PTX), a Gi/Go protein sensitive inhibitor,
was found to inhibit RTEF-1 driven endothelial cell aggregation and migration.
Our data demonstrates that Edg-1 is a potential target gene of RTEF-1 and is
involved in RTEF-1-induced angiogenesis in endothelial cells. Gi/Go protein
coupled receptor pathway plays a role in RTEF-1 driven angiogenesis in
endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3919740
PMID: 24520353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Chembiochem. 2014 Mar 3;15(4):537-42. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201300715. Epub 2014 Feb 
6.

The surprising features of the TEAD4-Vgll1 protein-protein interaction.

Mesrouze Y(1), Hau JC, Erdmann D, Zimmermann C, Fontana P, Schmelzle T, Chène P.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Area Oncology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 141
Klybeckstrasse, 4057 Basel (Switzerland).

The Hippo signaling pathway, which controls organ size in animals, is altered in 
various human cancers. The TEAD transcription factors, the most downstream
elements in this pathway, are regulated by different cofactors, such as the Vgll 
(vestigial-like) proteins. Having studied the interaction between Vgll1-derived
peptides and human TEAD4, we show that, although it lacks a key secondary
structure element required for tight binding by two other TEAD cofactors (YAP and
TAZ), Vgll1-derived peptides bind to TEAD with nanomolar affinity. We identify a 
ß-strand:loop:a-helix motif as the minimal Vgll binding site. Finally, we reveal 
an unexpected difference between mouse and human Vgll1-derived peptides.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24504694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Carcinogenesis. 2014 May;35(5):1020-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt409. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

Integrative genomics analysis reveals the multilevel dysregulation and oncogenic 
characteristics of TEAD4 in gastric cancer.

Lim B(1), Park JL, Kim HJ, Park YK, Kim JH, Sohn HA, Noh SM, Song KS, Kim WH, Kim
YS, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

Tumorigenesis is a consequence of failures of multistep defense mechanisms
against deleterious perturbations that occur at the genomic, epigenomic,
transcriptomic and proteomic levels. To uncover previously unrecognized genes
that undergo multilevel perturbations in gastric cancer (GC), we integrated
epigenomic and transcriptomic approaches using two recently developed tools: MENT
and GENT. This integrative analysis revealed that nine Hippo pathway-related
genes, including components [FAT, JUB, LATS2, TEA domain family member 4 (TEAD4) 
and Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1)] and targets (CRIM1, CYR61, CTGF and ITGB2), 
are concurrently hypomethylated at promoter CpG sites and overexpressed in GC
tissues. In particular, TEAD4, a link between Hippo pathway components and
targets, was significantly hypomethylated at CpG site cg21637033 (P = 3.8 × 10(-)
(20)) and overexpressed (P = 5.2 × 10(-) (10)) in 108 Korean GC tissues compared 
with the normal counterparts. A reduced level of methylation at the TEAD4
promoter was significantly associated with poor outcomes, including large tumor
size, high-grade tumors and low survival rates. Compared with normal tissues, the
TEAD4 protein was more frequently found in the nuclei of tumor cells along with
YAP1 in 53 GC patients, demonstrating the posttranslational activation of this
protein. Moreover, the knockdown of TEAD4 resulted in the reduced growth of GC
cells both in vitro and in vivo. Finally, chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing and microarray analysis revealed the oncogenic
properties of TEAD4 and its novel targets (ADM, ANG, ARID5B, CALD1, EDN2, FSCN1
and OSR2), which are involved in cell proliferation and migration. In conclusion,
the multilevel perturbations of TEAD4 at epigenetic, transcriptional and
posttranslational levels may contribute to GC development.

PMID: 24325916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014 Jan 15;306(2):H233-42. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00069.2013. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Structural and functional analysis of the related transcriptional enhancer
factor-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B interaction.

Ma J(1), Zhang L, Tipton AR, Wu J, Messmer-Blust AF, Philbrick MJ, Qi Y, Liu ST, 
Liu H, Li J, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Liaoning University, Shenyang, China;

The related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) increases gene
transcription of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) and enhances angiogenesis
in endothelium. Both hypoxia and inflammatory factor TNF-a regulate gene
expression of HIF-1a, but how RTEF-1 and TNF-a coordinately regulate HIF-1a gene 
transcription is unclear. Here, we found that RTEF-1 interacts with p65 subunit
of NF-<U+03BA>B, a primary mediator of TNF-a. RTEF-1 increased HIF-1a promoter activity,
whereas expression of p65 subunit inhibited the stimulatory effect. By contrast, 
knockdown of p65 markedly enhanced RTEF-1 stimulation on the HIF-1a promoter
activity (7-fold). A physical interaction between RTEF-1 and p65 was confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation experiments in cells and glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-pull-down assays. A computational analysis of RTEF-1 crystal structures
revealed that a conserved surface of RTEF-1 potentially interacts with p65 via
four amino acid residues located at T347, Y349, R351, and Y352. We performed
site-directed mutagenesis and GST-pull-down assays and demonstrated that Tyr352
(Y352) in RTEF-1 is a key site for the formation of RTEF-1 and p65-NF-<U+03BA>B complex.
An alanine mutation at Y352 of RTEF-1 disrupted the interaction of RTEF-1 with
p65. Moreover, expression of RTEF-1 decreased TNF-a-induced HIF-1a promoter
activity, IL-1ß, and IL-6 mRNA levels in cells; however, the effect of RTEF-1 was
largely lost when Y352 was mutated to alanine. These results indicate that RTEF-1
interacts with p65-NF-<U+03BA>B through Y352 and that they antagonize each other for
HIF-1a transcriptional activation, suggesting a novel mechanism by which RTEF-1
regulates gene expression, linking hypoxia to inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3920133
PMID: 24213609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2014 Aug;40(2):440-7. doi: 10.1002/jmri.24349. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Renal carcinomas associated with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions:
findings on MRI and computed tomography imaging.

Liu K(1), Xie P, Peng W, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China; Department of Radiology, Fudan University
Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To retrospectively analyze MRI and computed tomographic (CT) findings
from renal carcinomas associated with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions
(Xp11-RCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Institutional review board permission was obtained to
review patient medical records, and the requirement for informed consent was
waved . The clinical and MRI/CT features of five cases with Xp11-RCC that were
confirmed by pathology were analyzed retrospectively. The image characteristics
included the lesion location and size, contribution of cystic and solid
components, intratumoral necrosis or hemorrhage, invasion of perinephric tissue
and renal sinus, lymphadenopathy, major venous or arterial vascular invasion,
pattern of the tumor growth, intratumor calcification and lipids, homogeneity of 
SI on T2-weighted images, attenuation and SI of the mass with respect to the
normal renal cortex on precontrast and contrasted CT/MRI images, tumor SIs, tumor
attenuations and tumor-to-cortex indices, homogeneity of enhancement on the
contrasted images.
RESULTS: The mean age was 32 years (range, 15-47 years). Most patients (4/5) were
women. All tumors showed a cortical location. The average tumor size was 9 cm
(range, 4-18 cm). Four tumors comprised a predominantly solid lesion with focal
necrosis, and one tumor comprised a solid lesion with significant necrosis. All
tumors showed intertumor hemorrhage, infiltrative growth and invasion of the
perirenal adipose/renal sinus. Four cases showed retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy,
of which one case showed simultaneous mediastinal and supraclavicular
lymphadenopathy. All tumors from four cases showed mild hyperintensity on
T1-weighted MRI images, and three tumors showed hypointensity on T2-weighted MRI 
images relative to the renal cortex except for 1 tumor that showed significant
hemorrhage and a relative hyperintensity. For 3 cases who were imaged with CT,
two tumors imaged using nonenhanced CT images showed mild hyperdensity relative
to the renal cortex. Calcification was noted in all three tumors. All tumors
showed mild, persistent enhancement.
CONCLUSION: Typical Xp11-RCC manifests as an advanced, solid renal mass with mild
persistent enhancement, a prevalence of intertumor hemorrhage/calcification, and 
a cortical epicenter location. The predilection for children and young adults is 
a useful clinical feature when confirming a diagnosis of Xp11-RCC.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24136829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Feb;92(2):185-96. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1089-y. Epub
2013 Sep 27.

Tissue-specific differences in the regulation of KIBRA gene expression involve
transcription factor TCF7L2 and a complex alternative promoter system.

Guske K(1), Schmitz B, Schelleckes M, Duning K, Kremerskothen J, Pavenstädt HJ,
Brand SM, Brand E.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine D, Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology, University
Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Münster, Germany.

KIBRA has been described as a key regulator of the Hippo signaling pathway,
regulating organ size control, cell contact inhibition, cell growth, as well as
tumorigenesis and cystogenesis. Since there is scarce information on KIBRA gene
expression regulation, we analyzed the molecular basis of tissue-specific KIBRA
expression in human kidney epithelial (IHKE, HPCT) and neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y,
SK-SN-SH) cells. We detected four novel and differentially used transcription
start sites, two of which positioned in the first intron, generating two novel
alternative exons. We identified one constitutively active core promoter (P1a)
and three alternative promoters (P1b, P2, and P3), which were exclusively active 
in kidney cells. Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) selectively activated
KIBRA at P1a, P2, and P3 in kidney cells. The two genetic variants -580C>T
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and -1691C>T (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) significantly affected the transcriptional
activity of the KIBRA core promoter. We propose a novel functional structure of
the KIBRA gene and provide detailed insight into molecular cell type-specific
KIBRA transcriptional regulation by TCF7L2, the Yes-associated protein 1 and TEA 
domain family member. Our findings provide a potential basis for future studies
on malfunctioning KIBRA regulation in pathophysiological conditions such as
cancer development.KEY MESSAGE: KIBRA expression is regulated by three
independent, cell type-specific promoters Two novel TSS were located within
intron one resulting in two alternative exons TSS utilization is cell
type-specific TCF7L2, YAP1, and TEAD are involved in the differential KIBRA
expression regulation.

PMID: 24072042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Development. 2013 Sep;140(17):3680-90. doi: 10.1242/dev.093799. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

TEAD4 establishes the energy homeostasis essential for blastocoel formation.

Kaneko KJ(1), DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-2753, USA.
KanekoK@mail.nih.gov

It has been suggested that during mouse preimplantation development, the
zygotically expressed transcription factor TEAD4 is essential for specification
of the trophectoderm lineage required for producing a blastocyst. Here we show
that blastocysts can form without TEAD4 but that TEAD4 is required to prevent
oxidative stress when blastocoel formation is accompanied by increased oxidative 
phosphorylation that leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Both two-cell and eight-cell Tead4(-/-) embryos developed into blastocysts when
cultured under conditions that alleviate oxidative stress, and Tead4(-/-)
blastocysts that formed under these conditions expressed trophectoderm-associated
genes. Therefore, TEAD4 is not required for specification of the trophectoderm
lineage. Once the trophectoderm was specified, Tead4 was not essential for either
proliferation or differentiation of trophoblast cells in culture. However,
ablation of Tead4 in trophoblast cells resulted in reduced mitochondrial membrane
potential. Moreover, Tead4 suppressed ROS in embryos and embryonic fibroblasts.
Finally, ectopically expressed TEAD4 protein could localize to the mitochondria
as well as to the nucleus, a property not shared by other members of the TEAD
family. These results reveal that TEAD4 plays a crucial role in maintaining
energy homeostasis during preimplantation development.

PMCID: PMC3742148
PMID: 23903192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):1195-201. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.044. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

The Hippo pathway member Nf2 is required for inner cell mass specification.

Cockburn K(1), Biechele S, Garner J, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):R559-61.

During mammalian development, the first two lineages to be specified are the
trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM). The Hippo pathway kinases Lats 
1 and 2 (Lats1/2) and the transcriptional coactivator Yap play important roles in
this specification process [1]. In outside cells of the embryo, Yap is nuclear
localized and cooperates with Tead4 to induce the TE-specifying transcription
factor Cdx2. In inside cells, Lats1/2 phosphorylate Yap and prevent its nuclear
localization. The factors acting upstream of Lats1/2 and Yap in this context have
not been identified. Here, we demonstrate that the upstream Hippo pathway member 
Nf2/Merlin is required for Lats1/2-dependent Yap phosphorylation in the
preimplantation embryo. Injection of dominant-negative Nf2 mRNA causes Yap
mislocalization and ectopic Cdx2 expression, effects that can be rescued by
overexpression of Lats2 kinase. Zygotic Nf2 mutant blastocysts have mild defects 
in Yap localization and Cdx2 expression, but these become much more severe upon
removal of both maternal and zygotic Nf2. The inside cells of maternal-zygotic
mutants fail to establish a pluripotent ICM and form excess TE, resulting in
peri-implantation lethality. Together, these data establish a clear role for Nf2 
upstream of Yap in the preimplantation embryo and demonstrate that Hippo
signaling is essential to segregate the ICM from the TE.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Chembiochem. 2013 Jul 8;14(10):1218-25. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201300163. Epub 2013
Jun 18.

The TEAD4-YAP/TAZ protein-protein interaction: expected similarities and
unexpected differences.

Hau JC(1), Erdmann D, Mesrouze Y, Furet P, Fontana P, Zimmermann C, Schmelzle T, 
Hofmann F, Chène P.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Area Oncology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 141
Klybeckstrasse, 4057 Basel, Switzerland.

The Hippo pathway controls cell homeostasis, and its deregulation can lead to
human diseases. In this pathway, the YAP and TAZ transcriptional cofactors play a
key role in stimulating gene transcription through their interaction with the
TEAD transcriptional factors. Our study of YAP and TAZ peptides in biochemical
and biophysical assays shows that both proteins have essentially the same
affinity for TEAD. Molecular modeling and structural biology data suggest that
they also bind to the same site on TEAD. However, this apparent similarity hides 
differences in the ways in which the two proteins interact with TEAD. The
secondary structure elements of their TEAD binding site do not contribute equally
to the overall affinity, and critical interactions with TEAD are made through
different residues. This convergent optimization of the YAP/TAZ TEAD binding site
suggests that the similarity in the affinities of binding of YAP to TEAD and of
TAZ to TEAD is important for Hippo pathway functionality.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23780915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Evol Dev. 2013 May;15(3):171-85. doi: 10.1111/ede.12031.

Expression patterns of Oct4, Cdx2, Tead4, and Yap1 proteins during blastocyst
formation in embryos of the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica Wagner.

Morrison JT(1), Bantilan NS, Wang VN, Nellett KM, Cruz YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074, USA.

The marsupial blastocyst forms in an entirely different manner from its eutherian
counterpart, involving cell-zona rather than cell-cell adhesion during the 8-
to-16-cell transition. While the eutherian blastocyst consists of a spherical
trophoblast completely enveloping a pluripotent inner cell mass, or pluriblast,
the marsupial blastocyst forms initially as a bowl-shaped monolayer of cells
lining the zona pellucida at the embryonic pole (ep). This monolayer contains a
small patch of centrally positioned pluriblast cells edged with trophoblast cells
that later coalesce at the abembryonic pole. Using immunocytochemistry, we
examined the localization of the proteins Oct4, Cdx2, Tead4, Sox2, and Yap1 in
opossum embryos to determine if their temporal expression pattern differed from
that in the mouse, given the important differences in cell behavior preceding
blastocyst formation in these mammals. Our results indicate that these proteins
are expressed in similar temporal patterns despite the topological differences
between mouse and opossum cleavage-stage embryos and blastocysts. That the
Hippo-pathway protein Yap1 localized specifically around the approximately
128-cell stage to opossum trophoblast nuclei but remained in the cytoplasm of
pluriblast cells suggests that this transcriptional regulator participates in
allocating cells to the trophoblast lineage, as it does in mouse. Interestingly, 
in both mouse and opossum embryos, expression of the pluripotency marker Oct4
persisted after Cdx2, which signals trophoblast specification, began to be
expressed in trophoblast cells. This and the observation that Cdx2 is present in 
opossum embryos well before blastomere-zona adhesion even occurs suggests that
the proteins studied may have other roles in early mammalian embryonic
development.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23607301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3615-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3793. Epub 
2013 Apr 10.

YAP/TEAD-mediated transcription controls cellular senescence.

Xie Q(1), Chen J, Feng H, Peng S, Adams U, Bai Y, Huang L, Li J, Huang J, Meng S,
Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Transcription coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) plays an important role in
the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, we identify a new role 
of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence. We find that the expression
levels of YAP proteins decrease following the replication-induced cellular
senescence in IMR90 cells. Silencing of YAP inhibits cell proliferation and
induces premature senescence. In additional experiments, we observe that cellular
senescence induced by YAP deficiency is TEAD- and Rb/p16/p53-dependent.
Furthermore, we show that Cdk6 is a direct downstream target gene of YAP in the
regulation of cellular senescence, and the expression of Cdk6 is through the
YAP-TEAD complex. Ectopic expression of Cdk6 rescued YAP knockdown-induced
senescence. Finally, we find that downregulation of YAP in tumor cells increases 
senescence in response to chemotherapeutic agents, and YAP or Cdk6 expression
rescues cellular senescence. Taken together, our findings define the critical
role of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence and provide a novel insight 
into a potential chemotherapeutic avenue for tumor suppression.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23576552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1468-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.88. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

SIRT1 regulates YAP2-mediated cell proliferation and chemoresistance in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Mao B(1), Hu F(2), Cheng J(1), Wang P(1), Xu M(3), Yuan F(3), Meng S(4), Wang
Y(3), Yuan Z(5), Bi W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin, China. (3)Department of 
Orthopedics, Clinical Division of Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing,
China. (4)1] Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University Cancer
Center, Dalian, China [2] The Chinese Hippo Consortium, China. (5)1] Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China [2] The Chinese Hippo
Consortium, China.

The MST/YAP (mammalian Ste20-like kinase/Yes-associated protein 2) pathway plays 
an important role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although post-translational 
modification-especially MST/Lats (large tumor suppressor)-mediated
phosphorylation and PP1 (protein phosphatase-1)-mediated dephosphorylation-has
been found to regulate the activity of YAP2, very little is known about its
acetylation. In our experiments, we observed that the expression of SIRT1 is
significantly upregulated in the tumor samples of the hepatocarcinoma patients,
and SIRT1 mRNA level positively correlates with connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF) mRNA level. We then found that SIRT1 deacetylates YAP2 protein in HCC
cells and SIRT1-mediated deacetylation increases the YAP2/TEAD4 association,
leading to YAP2/TEAD4 transcriptional activation and upregulated cell growth in
HCC cells. Moreover, knockdown of SIRT1 blocks the cisplatin (CDDP)-induced
nuclear translocation of YAP2 and enhances the chemosensitivity of HCC cells to
CDDP treatment. Together, our findings reveal a new regulatory mechanism of YAP2 
by the SIRT1-mediated deacetylation that may be involved in HCC tumorigenesis and
drug resistance.

PMID: 23542177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Sleep Res. 2013 Oct;22(5):482-95. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12044. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Clinical, polysomnographic and genome-wide association analyses of narcolepsy
with cataplexy: a European Narcolepsy Network study.

Luca G(1), Haba-Rubio J, Dauvilliers Y, Lammers GJ, Overeem S, Donjacour CE,
Mayer G, Javidi S, Iranzo A, Santamaria J, Peraita-Adrados R, Hor H, Kutalik Z,
Plazzi G, Poli F, Pizza F, Arnulf I, Lecendreux M, Bassetti C, Mathis J, Heinzer 
R, Jennum P, Knudsen S, Geisler P, Wierzbicka A, Feketeova E, Pfister C, Khatami 
R, Baumann C, Tafti M; European Narcolepsy Network.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics (CIG), University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

The aim of this study was to describe the clinical and PSG characteristics of
narcolepsy with cataplexy and their genetic predisposition by using the
retrospective patient database of the European Narcolepsy Network (EU-NN). We
have analysed retrospective data of 1099 patients with narcolepsy diagnosed
according to International Classification of Sleep Disorders-2. Demographic and
clinical characteristics, polysomnography and multiple sleep latency test data,
hypocretin-1 levels, and genome-wide genotypes were available. We found a
significantly lower age at sleepiness onset (men versus women: 23.74 ± 12.43
versus 21.49 ± 11.83, P = 0.003) and longer diagnostic delay in women (men versus
women: 13.82 ± 13.79 versus 15.62 ± 14.94, P = 0.044). The mean diagnostic delay 
was 14.63 ± 14.31 years, and longer delay was associated with higher body mass
index. The best predictors of short diagnostic delay were young age at diagnosis,
cataplexy as the first symptom and higher frequency of cataplexy attacks. The
mean multiple sleep latency negatively correlated with Epworth Sleepiness Scale
(ESS) and with the number of sleep-onset rapid eye movement periods (SOREMPs),
but none of the polysomnographic variables was associated with subjective or
objective measures of sleepiness. Variant rs2859998 in UBXN2B gene showed a
strong association (P = 1.28E-07) with the age at onset of excessive daytime
sleepiness, and rs12425451 near the transcription factor TEAD4 (P = 1.97E-07)
with the age at onset of cataplexy. Altogether, our results indicate that the
diagnostic delay remains extremely long, age and gender substantially affect
symptoms, and that a genetic predisposition affects the age at onset of symptoms.

© 2013 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 23496005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(7):1530-1542.e12. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.02.009. Epub 2013 Feb 16.

Yes-associated protein up-regulates Jagged-1 and activates the Notch pathway in
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Tschaharganeh DF(1), Chen X, Latzko P, Malz M, Gaida MM, Felix K, Ladu S, Singer 
S, Pinna F, Gretz N, Sticht C, Tomasi ML, Delogu S, Evert M, Fan B, Ribback S,
Jiang L, Brozzetti S, Bergmann F, Dombrowski F, Schirmacher P, Calvisi DF,
Breuhahn K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cancer cells often lose contact inhibition to undergo
anchorage-independent proliferation and become resistant to apoptosis by
inactivating the Hippo signaling pathway, resulting in activation of the
transcriptional co-activator yes-associated protein (YAP). However, the oncogenic
mechanisms of YAP activity are unclear.
METHODS: By using cross-species analysis of expression data, the Notch ligand
Jagged-1 (Jag-1) was identified as a downstream target of YAP in hepatocytes and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. We analyzed the functions of YAP in HCC
cells via overexpression and RNA silencing experiments. We used transgenic mice
that overexpressed a constitutively activated form of YAP (YAP(S127A)), and
measured protein levels in HCC, colorectal and pancreatic tumor samples from
patients.
RESULTS: Human HCC cell lines and mouse hepatocytes that overexpress YAP(S127A)
up-regulated Jag-1, leading to activation of the Notch pathway and increased
proliferation. Induction of Jag-1, activation of Notch, and cell proliferation
required binding of YAP to its transcriptional partner TEA domain family member 4
(TEAD4); TEAD4 binding required the Mst1/2 but not ß-catenin signaling. Levels of
YAP correlated with Jag-1 expression and Notch signaling in human tumor samples
and correlated with shorter survival times of patients with HCC or colorectal
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional regulator YAP up-regulates Jag-1 to activate
Notch signaling in HCC cells and mouse hepatocytes. YAP-dependent activity of
Jag-1 and Notch correlate in human HCC and colorectal tumor samples with patient 
survival times, suggesting the use of YAP and Notch inhibitors as therapeutics
for gastrointestinal cancer. Transcript profiling: microarray information was
deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?token=jxepvsumwosqkve&acc=GSE35004
).

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3665638
PMID: 23419361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(2):151-8. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Changes in the expression patterns of the genes involved in the segregation and
function of inner cell mass and trophectoderm lineages during porcine
preimplantation development.

Fujii T(1), Sakurai N, Osaki T, Iwagami G, Hirayama H, Minamihashi A, Hashizume
T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

In mouse embryos, segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE)
lineages is regulated by genes, such as OCT-4, CDX2 and TEAD4. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the segregation of the ICM and TE lineages in 
porcine embryos remain unknown. To obtain insights regarding the segregation of
the ICM and TE lineages in porcine embryos, we examined the mRNA expression
patterns of candidate genes, OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc
and FGFR2-IIIc, in blastocyst and elongated stage embryos. In blastocyst embryos,
the expression levels of OCT-4, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were significantly higher in 
the ICM than in the TE, while the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels did not differ
between the ICM and TE. The expression ratio of CDX2 to OCT-4 (CDX2/OCT-4) also
did not differ between the ICM and TE at the blastocyst stage. In elongated
embryos, OCT-4, NANOG, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were abundantly expressed in the
embryo disc (ED; ICM lineage), but their expression levels were very low in the
TE. In contrast, the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels were significantly higher in
the TE than in the ED. In addition, the CDX2/OCT-4 ratio was markedly higher in
the TE than in the ED. We demonstrated that differences in the expression levels 
of OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc and FGFR2-IIIc genes
between ICM and TE lineages cells become more clear during development from
porcine blastocyst to elongated embryos, which indicates the possibility that in 
porcine embryos, functions of ICM and TE lineage cells depend on these gene
expressions proceed as transition from blastocyst to elongated stage.

PMCID: PMC3934199
PMID: 23257836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1833(3):460-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.11.012. 
Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Induction of a trophoblast-like phenotype by hydralazine in the p19 embryonic
carcinoma cell line.

O'Driscoll CM(1), Coulter JB, Bressler JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicological Sciences, Department of Environmental Health
Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and Hugo Moser Research
Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
odriscoll@kennedykrieger.org

Chemicals that affect cellular differentiation through epigenetic mechanisms have
potential utility in treating a wide range of diseases. Hydralazine decreases DNA
methylation in some cell types but its effect on differentiation has not been
well explored. After five days of exposure to hydralazine, P19 embryocarcinoma
cells displayed a giant cell morphology and were binucleate, indicative of a
trophoblast-like morphology. Other trophoblast-like properties included the
intermediary filament Troma-1/cytokeratin 8 and the transcription factor Tead4. A
decrease in CpG methylation at three sites in the TEAD4 promoter and the B1
repeated sequence was observed. Knocking down expression of Tead4 with siRNA
blocked the increase in Troma-1/cytokeratin 8 and over expression of Tead4
induced the expression of Troma-1/cytokeratin 8. Cells treated for 5days with
hydralazine were no longer capable of undergoing retinoic acid-mediated neuronal 
differentiation. An irreversible loss of the pluripotent transcription factor
Oct-4 was observed following hydralazine exposure. In summary, hydralazine
induces P19 cells to assume a trophoblast-like phenotype by upregulating Tead4
expression through a mechanism involving DNA demethylation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23195226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):E3389-90; author reply E3391-2.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1211810109. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Tead4 is constitutively nuclear, while nuclear vs. cytoplasmic Yap distribution
is regulated in preimplantation mouse embryos.

Hirate Y, Cockburn K, Rossant J, Sasaki H.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7362-7.

PMCID: PMC3528498
PMID: 23169672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Circ Res. 2012 Sep 28;111(8):951-3.

Microvascular management of systemic insulin sensitivity.

Rubinow KB, Bornfeldt KE.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 28;111(8):991-1001.

PMCID: PMC3488957
PMID: 23023504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell Cycle. 2012 Sep 15;11(18):3373-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.21397. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Convergent signaling in the regulation of connective tissue growth factor in
malignant mesothelioma: TGFß signaling and defects in the Hippo signaling
cascade.

Fujii M(1), Nakanishi H, Toyoda T, Tanaka I, Kondo Y, Osada H, Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. fujiim@aichi-cc.jp

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a neoplasm that arises from serosal surfaces of
the pleural, peritoneal and pericardial cavities with worldwide incidence, much
of which is caused by asbestos exposure. Patients suffer from pain and dyspnea
due to direct invasion of the chest wall, lungs and vertebral or intercostal
nerves by masses of thick fibrotic tumors. Although there has been recent
progress in the clinical treatment, current therapeutic approaches do not provide
satisfactory results. Therefore, development of a molecularly targeted therapy
for MM is urgently required. Our recent studies suggest that normal mesothelial
and MM cell growth is promoted by TGFß, and that TGFß signaling together with
intrinsic disturbances in neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) and Hippo signaling
cascades in MM cells converges upon further expression of connective tissue
growth factor (CTGF). The formation of a YAP-TEAD4-Smad3-p300 complex on the
specific CTGF promoter site with an adjacent TEAD and Smad binding motif is a
critical and synergistic event caused by the dysregulation of these two distinct 
cascades. Furthermore, we demonstrated the functional importance of CTGF through 
the mouse studies and human histological analyses, which may elucidate the
clinical features of MM with severe fibrosis in the thoracic cavity.

PMCID: PMC3466546
PMID: 22918238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Circ Res. 2012 Sep 28;111(8):991-1001. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

RTEF-1 attenuates blood glucose levels by regulating insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-1 in the endothelium.

Messmer-Blust AF(1), Philbrick MJ, Guo S, Wu J, He P, Guo S, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 28;111(8):951-3.

RATIONALE: Related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) plays an important 
role in endothelial cell function by regulating angiogenesis; however, the
mechanism underlying the role of RTEF-1 in the endothelium in vivo is not well
defined.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the biological functions of RTEF-1 by disrupting the
gene that encodes it in mice endothelium -specific RTEF-1-deficient transgenic
mice (RTEF-1(-/-)).
METHODS AND RESULTS: RTEF-1(-/-) mice showed significantly increased blood
glucose levels and insulin resistance, accompanied by decreased levels of
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) mRNA in the endothelium
and decreased serum IGFBP-1 levels. Additionally, the RTEF-1(-/-) phenotype was
exacerbated when the mice were fed a high-fat diet, which correlated with
decreased IGFBP-1 levels. In contrast, vascular endothelial
cadherin/RTEF-1-overexpressing(1) transgenic mice (VE-Cad/RTEF1) demonstrated
improved glucose clearance and insulin sensitivity in response to a high-fat
diet. Furthermore, we demonstrated that RTEF-1 upregulates IGFBP-1 through
selective binding and promotion of transcription from the insulin response
element site. Insulin prevented RTEF-1 expression and significantly inhibited
IGFBP-1 transcription in endothelial cells in a dose-dependent fashion.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating
that RTEF-1 stimulates promoter activity through an insulin response element and 
also mediates the effects of insulin on gene expression. These results show that 
RTEF-1-stimulated IGFBP-1 expression may be central to the mechanism by which
RTEF-1 attenuates blood glucose levels. These findings provide the basis for
novel insights into the transcriptional regulation of IGFBP-1 and contribute to
our understanding of the role of vascular endothelial cells in metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4165345
PMID: 22843786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e31260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031260. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

The related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 isoform, TEAD4(216), can repress
vascular endothelial growth factor expression in mammalian cells.

Appukuttan B(1), McFarland TJ, Stempel A, Kassem JB, Hartzell M, Zhang Y, Bond D,
West K, Wilson R, Stout A, Pan Y, Ilias H, Robertson K, Klein ML, Wilson D, Smith
JR, Stout JT.

Author information: 
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon,
United States of America. appukutt@ohsu.edu

Increased cellular production of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
responsible for the development and progression of multiple cancers and other
neovascular conditions, and therapies targeting post-translational VEGF products 
are used in the treatment of these diseases. Development of methods to control
and modify the transcription of the VEGF gene is an alternative approach that may
have therapeutic potential. We have previously shown that isoforms of the
transcriptional enhancer factor 1-related (TEAD4) protein can enhance the
production of VEGF. In this study we describe a new TEAD4 isoform, TEAD4(216),
which represses VEGF promoter activity. The TEAD4(216) isoform inhibits human
VEGF promoter activity and does not require the presence of the hypoxia
responsive element (HRE), which is the sequence critical to hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF)-mediated effects. The TEAD4(216) protein is localized to the
cytoplasm, whereas the enhancer isoforms are found within the nucleus. The
TEAD4(216) isoform can competitively repress the stimulatory activity of the
TEAD4(434) and TEAD4(148) enhancers. Synthesis of the native VEGF(165) protein
and cellular proliferation is suppressed by the TEAD4(216) isoform. Mutational
analysis indicates that nuclear or cytoplasmic localization of any isoform
determines whether it acts as an enhancer or repressor, respectively. The
TEAD4(216) isoform appears to inhibit VEGF production independently of the HRE
required activity by HIF, suggesting that this alternatively spliced isoform of
TEAD4 may provide a novel approach to treat VEGF-dependent diseases.

PMCID: PMC3382240
PMID: 22761647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Aug;32(8):1951-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.250159. Epub 2012 May 31.

Endothelial cells require related transcription enhancer factor-1 for cell-cell
connections through the induction of gap junction proteins.

An X(1), Jin Y, Philbrick MJ, Wu J, Messmer-Blust A, Song X, Cully BL, He P, Xu
M, Duffy HS, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Capillary network formation represents a specialized endothelial cell 
function and is a prerequisite to establish a continuous vessel lumen. Formation 
of endothelial cell connections that form the vascular structure is regulated, at
least in part, at the transcriptional level. We report here that related
transcription enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) plays an important role in vascular
structure formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Knockdown of RTEF-1 by small interfering RNA or blockage of 
RTEF-1 function by the transcription enhancer activators domain decreased
endothelial connections in a Matrigel assay, whereas overexpression of RTEF-1 in 
endothelial cells resulted in a significant increase in cell connections and
aggregation. In a model of oxygen-induced retinopathy, endothelial-specific
RTEF-1 overexpressing mice had enhanced angiogenic sprouting and vascular
structure remodeling, resulting in the formation of a denser and more highly
interconnected superficial capillary plexus. Mechanistic studies revealed that
RTEF-1 induced the expression of functional gap junction proteins including
connexin 43, connexin 40, and connexin 37. Blocking connexin 43 function
inhibited RTEF-1-induced endothelial cell connections and aggregation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide novel insights into the transcriptional
control of endothelial function in the coordination of cell-cell connections.

PMID: 22652601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012 Aug;29(8):723-33. doi: 10.1007/s10815-012-9797-8.
Epub 2012 May 26.

Developmental expression of lineage specific genes in porcine embryos of
different origins.

Kumar BM(1), Maeng GH, Jeon RH, Lee YM, Lee WJ, Jeon BG, Ock SA, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinju-daero, Jinju, 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: This study compared the expression of genes involved in pluripotency,
segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE), and primitive
endoderm (PE) formation in porcine embryos produced by in vitro fertilization
(IVF), parthenogenetic activation (PA), and nuclear transfer (NT) using either
fetal fibroblasts (FF-NT) or mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-NT).
METHODS: Blastocyst formation and total cell number were analyzed. The expression
patterns of transcripts, including SRY-related HMG-box gene 2 (SOX2), reduced
expression gene 1 (REX1/ZFP42), LIN28, caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), TEA domain 
family member 4 (TEAD4), integrin beta 1 (ITGB1) and GATA6 were assessed at the
4-8 cell and blastocyst stage embryos by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Developmental rates to blastocyst stage and total cell number were
higher in IVF and PA embryos than in NT embryos. But MSC-NT embryos had increased
blastocyst formation and higher total cell number compared to FF-NT embryos. The 
relative expressions of transcripts were higher in blastocysts than in 4-8 cell
stage embryos. The mRNA expression levels of SOX2 and REX1 were largely similar
in embryos of different origins. However, the genes such as LIN28, CDX2, TEAD4,
ITGB1 and GATA6 showed the differential expression pattern in PA and NT embryos
compared to IVF embryos. Importantly, the transcript levels in MSC-NT embryos
were relatively less variable to IVF than those in FF-NT embryos.
CONCLUSION: MSCs seem to be better donors for porcine NT as they improved the
developmental competency, and influenced the expression pattern of genes quite
similar with IVF embryos than that of FFs.

PMCID: PMC3430790
PMID: 22639061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Structure. 2012 Jul 3;20(7):1135-40. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.04.004. Epub 2012
May 24.

Structural and functional similarity between the Vgll1-TEAD and the YAP-TEAD
complexes.

Pobbati AV(1), Chan SW, Lee I, Song H, Hong W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology in Health and Disease Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Proteos, Singapore 138673. ajaybabuvp@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

The structure of the complex between the transcription cofactor Vgll1 and the
transcription factor TEAD4, the mammalian equivalent of the Drosophila Vestigial 
and Scalloped, respectively, is determined in this study. Remarkably, Vgll1
interacts with TEAD in a manner similar to the transcription coactivators, as
well as oncogenes YAP and TAZ, despite having a varied primary sequence.
Vgll1-TEAD complex upregulates the expression of IGFBP-5, a
proliferation-promoting gene, and facilitates anchorage-independent cell
proliferation. The YAP/TAZ-TEAD complex also upregulates several other
proliferation-promoting genes and also promotes anchorage-independent cell
proliferation. Given its structural and functional similarity to YAP/TAZ, Vgll1
has the potential to promote cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22632831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7362-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1201595109. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Altered subcellular localization of transcription factor TEAD4 regulates first
mammalian cell lineage commitment.

Home P(1), Saha B, Ray S, Dutta D, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Pal A, Vivian JL, Larson
M, Petroff M, Gallagher PG, Schulz VP, White KL, Golos TG, Behr B, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):E3389-90; author reply E3391-2.

In the preimplantation mouse embryo, TEAD4 is critical to establishing the
trophectoderm (TE)-specific transcriptional program and segregating TE from the
inner cell mass (ICM). However, TEAD4 is expressed in the TE and the ICM. Thus,
differential function of TEAD4 rather than expression itself regulates
specification of the first two cell lineages. We used ChIP sequencing to define
genomewide TEAD4 target genes and asked how transcription of TEAD4 target genes
is specifically maintained in the TE. Our analyses revealed an evolutionarily
conserved mechanism, in which lack of nuclear localization of TEAD4 impairs the
TE-specific transcriptional program in inner blastomeres, thereby allowing their 
maturation toward the ICM lineage. Restoration of TEAD4 nuclear localization
maintains the TE-specific transcriptional program in the inner blastomeres and
prevents segregation of the TE and ICM lineages and blastocyst formation. We
propose that altered subcellular localization of TEAD4 in blastomeres dictates
first mammalian cell fate specification.

PMCID: PMC3358889
PMID: 22529382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Vasc Res. 2012;49(3):249-59. doi: 10.1159/000335180. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Related transcriptional enhancer factor 1 increases endothelial-dependent
microvascular relaxation and proliferation.

Messmer-Blust AF(1), Zhang C, Shie JL, Song Q, He P, Lubenec I, Liu Y, Sellke F, 
Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Related transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (RTEF-1) is a key
transcriptional regulator in endothelial function. In this study, we investigated
a possible role for RTEF-1 in the regulation of microvascular relaxation and the 
underlying mechanism involved. Activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
(FGFR1) by FGFs increases vasodilation, although transcriptional control of the
molecular mechanisms underlying FGFR1 is still unclear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We demonstrated that RTEF-1 stimulated FGFR1 expression at
the transcriptional level, specifically an area including Sp1 elements, as
evidenced by promoter assays. Additionally, RTEF-1 increased FGFR1 mRNA and
protein expression in vitro and in VE-cadherin-promoted RTEF-1 (VE-Cad/RTEF-1)
transgenic mice, whereas RTEF-1 siRNA blocked the upregulation of FGFR1
expression. Furthermore, increased endothelial-dependent microvessel relaxation
was observed in the coronary arteries of VE-Cad/RTEF-1 mice, and increased
proliferation was observed in RTEF-1-overexpressing cells, both of which
correlated to increased FGF/FGFR1 signaling and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
(eNOS) upregulation. Our results indicate that RTEF-1 acts as a transcriptional
stimulator of FGFR1 and is involved in FGF pathways by increasing microvessel
dilatation via eNOS.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that RTEF-1 plays an important role in FGFR1-
stimulated vasodilatation. Understanding the effect of RTEF-1 in microvessel
relaxation may provide beneficial knowledge in improving treatments in regards to
ischemic vascular disorders.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3369257
PMID: 22433836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):479-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111653. Epub 2012 Feb
13.

TGF-ß synergizes with defects in the Hippo pathway to stimulate human malignant
mesothelioma growth.

Fujii M(1), Toyoda T, Nakanishi H, Yatabe Y, Sato A, Matsudaira Y, Ito H,
Murakami H, Kondo Y, Kondo E, Hida T, Tsujimura T, Osada H, Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan. fujiim@aichi-cc.jp

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an incurable malignancy that is caused by exposure
to asbestos and is accompanied by severe fibrosis. Because MM is usually
diagnosed at an advanced stage and clinical identification of early lesions is
difficult, its molecular pathogenesis has not been completely elucidated. Nearly 
75% of MM cases have inactivating mutations in the NF2 (neurofibromatosis type 2;
Merlin) gene or in downstream signaling molecules of the Hippo signaling cascade,
which negatively regulates the transcription factor Yes-associated protein (YAP).
In this study, we demonstrate a functional interaction between the Hippo and
TGF-ß pathways in regulating connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). Expression
of CTGF in MM cells was induced by the formation of a YAP-TEAD4-Smad3-p300
complex on the CTGF promoter. Knocking down CTGF expression in MM cells prolonged
the survival of xenografted mice, and a significant association was seen between 
CTGF expression and extracellular matrix deposition in MM xenografts and in
patient tissue specimens. We further suggest that CTGF may influence the
malignancy of mesothelioma because of the different histological expression
patterns observed in human MM tissues. These data suggest that CTGF is an
important modulator of MM growth and pathology and represents a novel therapeutic
target for this disease.

PMCID: PMC3302232
PMID: 22329991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Jan;130(1-2):91-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.12.011. 
Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Lipid-rich blastomeres in the two-cell stage of porcine parthenotes show bias
toward contributing to the embryonic part.

Kim K(1), Park S, Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming & Embryo Biotechnology Lab, School of Dentistry, CLS21 
and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.

This study was designed to determine the fate of the blastomeres in two-cell
porcine parthenotes that display uneven size (larger vs. smaller) or cytoplasmic 
brightness (darker vs. brighter) during development to the blastocyst stage. For 
the non-invasive tracing of cell lineage, lipophilic fluorescence dye DiI (red)
and DiD (blue) was randomly microinjected into each of two different blastomeres 
in each embryo. In blastocysts derived from the two-cell parthenotes with
unevenly-sized blastomeres, no biased contribution was found in the progeny of
either blastomere. However, in the blastocysts derived from the two-cell
parthenote having different cytoplasmic brightnesses, the progeny of darker (more
lipid-rich cytoplasm) blastomeres were more than two-fold more likely to form the
embryonic part (43.6%; 17/39) than they were to form the abembryonic part (17.9%;
7/39), while the contribution of brighter blastomeres (less lipid) was just the
opposite. The expressions of four marker genes involved in lineage allocation
(Cdx2, Tead4, Oct4 and Carm1) were also analyzed in darker and brighter
blastomeres of two-cell parthenotes using quantitative RT-PCR. The expression of 
Carm1 that encodes arginine methyltransferase 1 and that promotes inner cell mass
(ICM) differentiation was significantly higher (P<0.05) in darker blastomeres.
The ICM marker Oct4 also tended to be more highly expressed in the darker
blastomeres, while Cdx2 and the TE marker Tead4 showed comparably higher
expressions in the brighter blastomeres. However, in all cases, the marginal
differences in the expression levels of Oct4, Cdx2 and Tead4 were not
statistically significant (P>0.05). Our findings indicate that expression of
genes related to early differentiation, especially Carm1, are partially
associated with lipid droplet distribution in the two-cell porcine parthenote and
may lead to biased embryonal axis formation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22277840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Reprod Dev. 2012;58(1):91-7. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Importance of methionine metabolism in morula-to-blastocyst transition in bovine 
preimplantation embryos.

Ikeda S(1), Sugimoto M, Kume S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology and Functional Anatomy, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. ikedash@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The roles of methionine metabolism in bovine preimplantation embryo development
were investigated by using ethionine, an antimetabolite of methionine. In vitro
produced bovine embryos that had developed to the 5-cell stage or more at 72 h
after the commencement of in vitro fertilization (IVF) were then cultured until
day 8 (IVF = day 0) in medium supplemented with 0 (control), 1, 5 and 10 mM
ethionine. Compared with the blastocyst development in the control (40.0%),
ethionine at 10 mM almost completely blocked blastocyst development (1.1%,
P<0.001), and this concentration was used in the following experiments.
Methionine added at the same concentration (10 mM, a concentration control of
ethionine) did not cause such an intense developmental inhibition. Development to
the compacted morula stage on day 6 was not affected by 10 mM ethionine
treatment. S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) added to the ethionine treatment partly
restored the blastocyst development. Semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of cell lineage-related
transcription factors in day 6 compacted morulae showed that the expressions of
NANOG and TEAD4 were increased by ethionine treatment relative to the control
(P<0.01). Furthermore, immunofluorescence analysis of 5-methylcytosine revealed
that DNA was hypomethylated in the ethionine-treated day 6 morulae compared with 
the control (P<0.001). These results demonstrate that the disruption of
methionine metabolism causes impairment of the morula-to-blastocyst transition
during bovine preimplantation development in part via SAM deficiency, indicating 
the indispensable roles of methionine during this period. The disruption of
methionine metabolism may cause hypomethylation of DNA and consequently lead to
the altered expression of developmentally important genes, which then results in 
the impairment of blastocyst development.

PMID: 22052008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Feb;19(2):220-31. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.87. Epub 2011 Jun
24.

Transcription factor TEAD4 regulates expression of myogenin and the unfolded
protein response genes during C2C12 cell differentiation.

Benhaddou A(1), Keime C, Ye T, Morlon A, Michel I, Jost B, Mengus G, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/UDS, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

The TEAD (1-4) transcription factors comprise the conserved TEA/ATTS DNA-binding 
domain recognising the MCAT element in the promoters of muscle-specific genes.
Despite extensive genetic analysis, the function of TEAD factors in muscle
differentiation has proved elusive due to redundancy among the family members.
Expression of the TEA/ATTS DNA-binding domain that acts as a dominant negative
repressor of TEAD factors in C2C12 myoblasts inhibits their differentiation,
whereas selective shRNA knockdown of TEAD4 results in abnormal differentiation
characterised by the formation of shortened myotubes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled to array hybridisation shows that TEAD4 occupies 867 
promoters including those of myogenic miRNAs. We show that TEAD factors directly 
induce Myogenin, CDKN1A and Caveolin 3 expression to promote myoblast
differentiation. RNA-seq identifies a set of genes whose expression is strongly
reduced upon TEAD4 knockdown among which are structural and regulatory proteins
and those required for the unfolded protein response. In contrast, TEAD4
represses expression of the growth factor CTGF (connective tissue growth factor) 
to promote differentiation. Together these results show that TEAD factor activity
is essential for normal C2C12 cell differentiation and suggest a role for TEAD4
in regulating expression of the unfolded protein response genes.

PMCID: PMC3263497
PMID: 21701496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int J Androl. 2011 Aug;34(4 Pt 2):e189-203. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2605.2011.01172.x. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

TGF-ß1, EGF and FGF4 synergistically induce differentiation of the seminoma cell 
line TCam-2 into a cell type resembling mixed non-seminoma.

Nettersheim D(1), Gillis AJ, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Malignant germ-cell tumours arise from a neoplastic precursor, the carcinoma in
situ, and develop into seminomas and/or non-seminomas (embryonal carcinomas,
teratomas, yolk-sac tumours and choriocarcinomas). Based on histological and
clinical findings, it has been postulated that seminomas can eventually transform
into non-seminomas. Here, we used the cell line TCam-2 as model for seminomas and
interrogated their differentiation potential. We demonstrate that TCam-2 cells
are able to differentiate into mixed non-seminomatous lineages after
supplementing the media with TGF-ß1, EGF and FGF4. On a molecular level, the
differentiation is initiated by repression of BMP/SMAD signalling. As a
consequence, BLIMP1, a molecule known to inhibit the differentiation of murine
primordial germ cells, is down-regulated and differentiation-inhibiting histone
modifications are lost. The appearance of multinucleated giant cells and the
expression of marker genes indicate that cells differentiate predominantly into
extra-embryonic choriocarcinoma-like cells. This is most likely due to the
presence of components of the Hippo pathway, TEAD4 and YAP1. These molecules have
been described to trigger extra-embryonic fate determination in the murine
system. This study supports the model that seminomas indeed have an intrinsic
ability to transform into a non-seminoma. In addition, the data suggest that the 
transformation does not require an additional mutation, but can be triggered by
changes in the tumour microenvironment.

© 2011 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 21649665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):22699-705. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237024. Epub
2011 May 2.

RTEF-1, an upstream gene of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a, accelerates recovery
from ischemia.

Jin Y(1), Wu J, Song X, Song Q, Cully BL, Messmer-Blust A, Xu M, Foo SY,
Rosenzweig A, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The amount of available hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a has been considered to 
be largely a consequence of post-translational modification by multiple
ubiquitin-proteasome pathways. However, the role of transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1a is less certain, and the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1a require further investigation. Here we report that related transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1), a member of the TEF transcriptional factor family,
transcriptionally regulates the HIF-1a gene under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. The expression of HIF-1a mRNA was decreased in endothelial cells in
which RTEF-1 was knocked down with siRNA. Sequential deletional analysis of the
HIF-1a promoter revealed that the MCAT-like element in the HIF-1a promoter was
essential for HIF-1a transcription. Binding of RTEF-1 to the MCAT-like element
was confirmed by ChIP. Treatment of endothelial cells with a HIF-1 inhibitor
resulted in retardation of RTEF-1-induced proliferation and tube formation.
Moreover, increased HIF-1a expression was observed in transgenic mice expressing 
RTEF-1 under the VE-cadherin promoter (VE-Cad/RTEF-1). VE-Cad/RTEF-1 mice
subjected to hindlimb ischemia demonstrated increased levels of HIF-1a,
accelerated recovery of blood flow, and increased capillary density compared with
littermate controls. These results identify RTEF-1 as a regulator of HIF-1a
transcription, which results in up-regulation of HIF-1a and acceleration of
recovery from ischemia.

PMCID: PMC3121413
PMID: 21540178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Cell. 2011 Mar 15;20(3):e3. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.03.006.

Differential hippo signaling in early mouse embryos.

Uemura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):398-410.

PMID: 21411395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. FASEB J. 2011 Apr;25(4):1188-97. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-167619. Epub 2010 Dec 17.

Requirement of the nuclear localization of transcription enhancer factor 3 for
proliferation, migration, tube formation, and angiogenesis induced by vascular
endothelial growth factor.

Liu X(1), Zhao D, James L, Li J, Zeng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor 3 (TEF3) is known to regulate the expression of
muscle-specific genes and to play important roles in muscle development and
diseases. However, little is known about its role in vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenesis. Most recently, we discovered a novel function
of TEF3, in which TEF3 is required for the up-regulation of a proangiogenic
factor, Down syndrome candidate region 1 isoform 1L (DSCR1-1L), induced by
VEGF-A(165) in endothelial cells. Overexpression of TEF3 isoform 1 (TEF3-1) is
sufficient to induce DSCR1-1L expression. Here, we report that knocking down the 
expression of TEF3 almost completely inhibits VEGF-A(165)-induced proliferation, 
migration, tube formation, formation of F-actin stress fiber, and in vivo
Matrigel angiogenesis. This inhibition cannot be rescued by DSCR1-1L
overexpression. Further, overexpression of TEF3-1, but not its nuclear
localization signal-deletion mutant (TEF3-<U+0394>NLS), induces human umbilical vein
endothelial cell proliferation, migration, tube formation, and formation of
F-actin stress fiber, even in the absence of VEGF-A(165) stimulation, which is
partially inhibited by DSCR1-1L silencing. Our data demonstrate that TEF3, mainly
its nuclear localization, is required for VEGF-A(165)-induced endothelial
proliferation, migration, tube formation, and in vivo Matrigel angiogenesis.

PMID: 21169383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 May 1;90(2):325-34. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq400. Epub 2010 Dec
17.

The endothelium-dependent effect of RTEF-1 in pressure overload cardiac
hypertrophy: role of VEGF-B.

Xu M(1), Jin Y, Song Q, Wu J, Philbrick MJ, Cully BL, An X, Guo L, Gao F, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

AIMS: Related transcription enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) has previously been
demonstrated to play an important role in both endothelial cells and
cardiomyocytes. However, the function of RTEF-1 in the communication between
these two adjacent cell types has not been elucidated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have found that endothelium-specific RTEF-1 transgenic
mice (VE-Cad/RTEF-1) developed significant cardiac hypertrophy after transverse
aortic constriction surgery, as evidenced by an increased ratio of heart weight
to tibia length, enlarged cardiomyocyte size, thickened left ventricular wall and
elevated expression of hypertrophic gene markers, with up-regulation of vascular 
endothelial growth factor B (VEGF-B). Additionally, VEGF-B was increased in
endothelial cells from VE-Cad/RTEF-1 mice, as well as in endothelial cells with
forced RTEF-1 expression (HMEC-1/RTEF-1), and coincidentally decreased when
RTEF-1 was deficient in HMEC-1. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and
luciferase assays, we found that RTEF-1 increased VEGF-B promoter activity
through a direct interaction. Hypertrophy-associated genes and protein synthesis 
were up-regulated in cardiomyocytes that were incubated with conditioned medium
from HMEC-1/RTEF-1 and the endothelial cells of VE-Cad/RTEF-1 mice. This effect
could be abrogated by treating the myocytes with VEGF-B small interfering RNA and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that increased RTEF-1 in endothelial cells
upregulates VEGF-B, which is able to stimulate hypertrophic genes in
cardiomyocytes. These results suggest that the RTEF-1-driven increase of VEGF-B
plays an important role in communication between the endothelium and myocardium.

PMCID: PMC3078796
PMID: 21169295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 12;5(11):e13952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013952.

Sox2 is essential for formation of trophectoderm in the preimplantation embryo.

Keramari M(1), Razavi J, Ingman KA, Patsch C, Edenhofer F, Ward CM, Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In preimplantation mammalian development the transcription factor
Sox2 (SRY-related HMG-box gene 2) forms a complex with Oct4 and functions in
maintenance of self-renewal of the pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM). Previously 
it was shown that Sox2-/- embryos die soon after implantation. However, maternal 
Sox2 transcripts may mask an earlier phenotype. We investigated whether Sox2 is
involved in controlling cell fate decisions at an earlier stage.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We addressed the question of an earlier role for Sox2 using
RNAi, which removes both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA present during the
preimplantation period. By depleting both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA at the
2-cell stage and monitoring embryo development in vitro we show that, in the
absence of Sox2, embryos arrest at the morula stage and fail to form
trophectoderm (TE) or cavitate. Following knock-down of Sox2 via three different 
short interfering RNA (siRNA) constructs in 2-cell stage mouse embryos, we have
shown that the majority of embryos (76%) arrest at the morula stage or slightly
earlier and only 18.7-21% form blastocysts compared to 76.2-83% in control
groups. In Sox2 siRNA-treated embryos expression of pluripotency associated
markers Oct4 and Nanog remained unaffected, whereas TE associated markers Tead4, 
Yap, Cdx2, Eomes, Fgfr2, as well as Fgf4, were downregulated in the absence of
Sox2. Apoptosis was also increased in Sox2 knock-down embryos. Rescue experiments
using cell-permeant Sox2 protein resulted in increased blastocyst formation from 
18.7% to 62.6% and restoration of Sox2, Oct4, Cdx2 and Yap protein levels in the 
rescued Sox2-siRNA blastocysts.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that the first essential function of
Sox2 in the preimplantation mouse embryo is to facilitate establishment of the
trophectoderm lineage. Our findings provide a novel insight into the first
differentiation event within the preimplantation embryo, namely the segregation
of the ICM and TE lineages.

PMCID: PMC2980489
PMID: 21103067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4159-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.056630.

Initiation of trophectoderm lineage specification in mouse embryos is independent
of Cdx2.

Wu G(1), Gentile L, Fuchikami T, Sutter J, Psathaki K, Esteves TC, Araúzo-Bravo
MJ, Ortmeier C, Verberk G, Abe K, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany.

The separation of the first two lineages - trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass
(ICM) - is a crucial event in the development of the early embryo. The ICM, which
constitutes the pluripotent founder cell population, develops into the embryo
proper, whereas the TE, which comprises the surrounding outer layer, supports the
development of the ICM before and after implantation. Cdx2, the first
transcription factor expressed specifically in the developing TE, is crucial for 
the differentiation of cells into the TE, as lack of zygotic Cdx2 expression
leads to a failure of embryos to hatch and implant into the uterus. However,
speculation exists as to whether maternal Cdx2 is required for initiation of TE
lineage separation. Here, we show that effective elimination of both maternal and
zygotic Cdx2 transcripts by an RNA interference approach resulted in failure of
embryo hatching and implantation, but the developing blastocysts exhibited normal
gross morphology, indicating that TE differentiation had been initiated.
Expression of keratin 8, a marker for differentiated TE, further confirmed the
identity of the TE lineage in Cdx2-deficient embryos. However, these embryos
exhibited low mitochondrial activity and abnormal ultrastructure, indicating that
Cdx2 plays a key role in the regulation of TE function. Furthermore, we found
that embryonic compaction does not act as a 'switch' regulator to turn on Cdx2
expression. Our results clearly demonstrate that neither maternal nor zygotic
Cdx2 transcripts direct the initiation of ICM/TE lineage separation.

PMCID: PMC2990207
PMID: 21098565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Oct;12(5):617-25. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0017.

Aberrant expression patterns of genes involved in segregation of inner cell mass 
and trophectoderm lineages in bovine embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear
transfer.

Fujii T(1), Moriyasu S, Hirayama H, Hashizume T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Iwate University, Japan.

High rates of embryonic, fetal, or placental abnormalities have consistently been
observed in bovine cloning. Segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) lineages in early embryos is an important process for fetal
and placental formation. In mouse embryos, differentiation of ICM and TE is
regulated by various transcription factors, such as OCT-4, CDX2, and TEAD4, but
molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation in bovine embryos remain
unknown. To clarify gene transcripts involved in segregation of ICM and TE
lineages in bovine embryos, we examined the relative abundances of OCT-4, CDX2,
TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, and FGF4 transcripts in blastocyst embryos derived from in
vitro fertilization (IVF). Furthermore, transcript levels of such genes in bovine
embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT-SC) and in vivo (Vivo)
were also compared. OCT-4, NANOG, and FGF4 transcript levels in IVF embryos were 
significantly higher in ICM than in TE. In contrast, the CDX2 transcript level
was lower in ICM than in TE. In NT-SC embryos at the blastocyst stage, transcript
levels of all genes except CDX2 were lower than that in Vivo embryos. In the
elongated stage, expression levels of the six genes did not differ between NT-SC 
and Vivo embryos. We observed aberrant expression patterns of various genes
involved in segregation of ICM and TE lineages in bovine NT-SC embryos. These
results raise the possibility that abnormalities in the cloned fetus and placenta
are related to the aberrant expression of genes involved in segregation and
differentiation process in the early developmental stage.

PMID: 20726774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. FASEB J. 2010 Dec;24(12):4825-34. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-167049. Epub 2010 Aug 11.

IRF2BP2 is a skeletal and cardiac muscle-enriched ischemia-inducible activator of
VEGFA expression.

Teng AC(1), Kuraitis D, Deeke SA, Ahmadi A, Dugan SG, Cheng BL, Crowson MG,
Burgon PG, Suuronen EJ, Chen HH, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We sought to identify an essential component of the TEAD4/VGLL4 transcription
factor complex that controls vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA)
expression in muscle. A yeast 2-hybrid screen was used to clone a novel component
of the TEAD4 complex from a human heart cDNA library. We identified interferon
response factor 2 binding protein 2 (IRF2BP2) and confirmed its presence in the
TEAD4/VGLL4 complex in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation and mammalian 2-hybrid
assays. Coexpression of IRF2BP2 with TEAD4/VGLL4 or TEAD1 alone potently
activated, whereas knockdown of IRF2BP2 reduced, VEGFA expression in C(2)C(12)
muscle cells. Thus, IRF2BP2 is required to activate VEGFA expression. In mouse
embryos, IRF2BP2 was ubiquitously expressed but became progressively enriched in 
the fetal heart, skeletal muscles, and lung. Northern blot analysis revealed high
levels of IRF2BP2 mRNA in adult human heart and skeletal muscles, but immunoblot 
analysis showed low levels of IRF2BP2 protein in skeletal muscle, indicating
post-transcriptional regulation of IRF2BP2 expression. IRF2BP2 protein levels are
markedly increased by ischemia in skeletal and cardiac muscle compared to
normoxic controls. IRF2BP2 is a novel ischemia-induced coactivator of VEGFA
expression that may contribute to revascularization of ischemic cardiac and
skeletal muscles.

PMID: 20702774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):347-58. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084400. Epub 2010
May 26.

Cell polarity regulator PARD6B is essential for trophectoderm formation in the
preimplantation mouse embryo.

Alarcon VB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry, and
Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
Hawaii 96813, USA. vernadet@hawaii.edu

In preimplantation mouse development, the first cell lineages to be established
are the trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass. TE possesses epithelial features,
including apical-basal cell polarity and intercellular junctions, which are
crucial to generate a fluid-filled cavity in the blastocyst. Homologs of the
partitioning defective (par) genes in Caenorhabditis elegans are critical
regulators of cell polarity. However, their roles in regulating TE
differentiation and blastocyst formation remain unclear. Here, the role of mouse 
Pard6b, a homolog of par-6 gene and a component of the PAR-atypical protein
kinase C (aPKC) complex, was investigated. Pard6b expression was knocked down by 
microinjecting RNA interference construct into zygotes. Pard6b-knockdown embryos 
cleaved and compacted normally but failed to form the blastocyst cavity. The
cavitation failure is likely the result of defective intercellular junctions,
because Pard6b knockdown caused abnormal distribution of actin filaments and TJP1
(ZO-1) tight junction (TJ) protein and interfered with cavitation in chimeras
containing cells from normal embryos. Defective TJ formation may be caused by
abnormal cell polarization, because the apical localization of PRKCZ (aPKCzeta)
was absent in Pard6b-knockdown embryos. Pard6b knockdown also diminished the
expression of CDX2, a TE-lineage transcription factor, in the outer cells. TEAD4,
a transcriptional activator that is required for Cdx2 expression and cavity
formation, was not essential for the transcription of Pard6b. Taken together,
Pard6b is necessary for blastocyst morphogenesis, particularly the development of
TE-specific features-namely, the apical-basal cell polarity, formation of TJ,
paracellular permeability sealing, and up-regulated expression of Cdx2.

PMCID: PMC2924801
PMID: 20505164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2010 Jul 1;343(1-2):71-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.012. Epub 2010 
Apr 22.

Governing cell lineage formation in cloned mouse embryos.

Balbach ST(1), Esteves TC, Brink T, Gentile L, McLaughlin KJ, Adjaye JA, Boiani
M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrabetae 20, D-48149
Münster, Germany.

Blastomeres of the pre-implantation mouse embryo form trophectoderm and inner
cell mass via a process that requires the transcription factors Tead4, Cdx2, Oct4
and Nanog. In mouse morulae cloned by somatic cell nuclear transfer, we observed 
that the trophectoderm transcription factor Cdx2 is expressed very differently at
the protein level compared to time- and stage-matched fertilized counterparts.
Protein levels of Cdx2 in cloned embryos appear 'erratic,' i.e. are widely
distributed, when plotted as histograms. In contrast to Cdx2, protein levels of
the upstream factor Tead4 and of inner cell mass transcription factors Oct4 and
Nanog are similar in cloned and fertilized embryos. These observations suggest
that trophectoderm formation is initiated but not maintained correctly in cloned 
mouse morulae, which is consistent with cloned blastocysts' limited implantation 
and post-implantation success. Because a cell's ability to differentiate is
greatly enhanced if it is surrounded by more cells differentiating the same way, 
a concept designated community effect by Gurdon, we reasoned that the
insufficient cell numbers often observed in cloned embryos might lead to
premature Cdx2 expression and differentiation of blastomeres into trophectoderm. 
Therefore, we created larger cloned embryos by aggregating them at the 4-cell
stage. Homologous aggregation stimulates expression of multiple signaling
pathways' components and results in cloned embryos with levels of Cdx2 similar to
fertilized embryos. Most of the resultant morulae and blastocysts consist of
cells of all three founders, indicating that aggregation increases stability of
all of the individual components. We conclude that the induction of pluripotency 
in cloned embryos is more efficient than previously assumed, and we propose that 
a minimum cell number is necessary to stabilize pluripotency and inhibit
premature expression of Cdx2 in cloned mouse embryos.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20417198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 1;24(3):290-300. doi: 10.1101/gad.1865310.

Structural basis of YAP recognition by TEAD4 in the hippo pathway.

Chen L(1), Chan SW, Zhang X, Walsh M, Lim CJ, Hong W, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)The Cancer and Developmental Cell Biology Division, Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore.

The Hippo signaling pathway controls cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis by
regulating the expression of target genes that execute these processes. Acting
downstream from this pathway is the YAP transcriptional coactivator, whose
biological function is mediated by the conserved TEAD family transcription
factors. The interaction of YAP with TEADs is critical to regulate Hippo
pathway-responsive genes. Here, we describe the crystal structure of the
YAP-interacting C-terminal domain of TEAD4 in complex with the TEAD-interacting
N-terminal domain of YAP. The structure reveals that the N-terminal region of YAP
is folded into two short helices with an extended loop containing the PXXPhiP
motif in between, while the C-terminal domain of TEAD4 has an immunoglobulin-like
fold. YAP interacts with TEAD4 mainly through the two short helices. Point
mutations of TEAD4 indicate that the residues important for YAP interaction are
required for its transforming activity. Mutagenesis reveals that the PXXPhiP
motif of YAP, although making few contacts with TEAD4, is important for TEAD4
interaction as well as for the transforming activity.

PMCID: PMC2811830
PMID: 20123908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Growth Differ. 2010 Apr;52(3):263-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01158.x. 
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Mechanisms of trophectoderm fate specification in preimplantation mouse
development.

Sasaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. sasaki@cdb.riken.jp

During preimplantation mouse development, embryos establish two distinct cell
lineages by the time of blastocyst formation: trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell
mass (ICM). To explain the mechanism of this cell fate specification, two
classical models, namely the inside-outside model and polarity model have been
proposed based on experimental manipulation studies on embryos. This review
summarizes recent findings on the molecular mechanisms of fate specification, and
discusses how these findings fit into the classical models. TE development is
regulated by a transcription factor cascade, the core transcription factors of
which are Tead4 and Cdx2. The transcriptional activity of Tead4 is regulated by
the position-dependent Hippo signaling pathway, thus supporting the
inside-outside model. In contrast, several findings support the polarity model;
some other findings suggest different mechanisms. We also discuss how the two
classical models could be further developed in the light of recent molecular
findings.

PMID: 20100249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):395-403. doi: 10.1242/dev.038828.

Gata3 regulates trophoblast development downstream of Tead4 and in parallel to
Cdx2.

Ralston A(1), Cox BJ, Nishioka N, Sasaki H, Chea E, Rugg-Gunn P, Guo G, Robson P,
Draper JS, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, MARS Building, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, ON
M5G 1L7, Canada.

The mouse blastocyst and stem cells derived from its tissue lineages provide a
unique genetic system for examining the establishment and loss of pluripotency.
The transcription factor Cdx2 plays a central role by repressing pluripotency
genes, such as Oct4, and promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate at the
blastocyst stage. However, genetic evidence has suggested that Cdx2 does not work
alone in the trophoblast lineage. We have used bioinformatic and functional
genomic strategies to identify the transcription factor Gata3 as a trophoblast
factor. We show Gata3 to be capable of inducing trophoblast fate in embryonic
stem cells and driving trophoblast differentiation in trophoblast stem cells. In 
addition, Cdx2 is not required for Gata3-induced expression of a subset of
trophoblast genes in embryonic stem cells. We show that Gata3 is coexpressed with
Cdx2 in the blastocyst, but this does not depend on Cdx2. In the embryo,
expression of Gata3, like that of Cdx2, depends on Tead4, and the expression of
both factors becomes restricted to trophoblast by a mechanism that does not
initially rely on Oct4. These observations suggest that Gata3 and Cdx2 can act in
parallel pathways downstream of Tead4 to induce the expression of common and
independent targets in the trophoblast lineage, whereas Oct4 is required for
continued repression of trophoblast fate in the embryonic lineage.

PMID: 20081188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1425. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.096. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Letter to the editor regarding recent retractions.

Li J, Song Q, Shie JL, Lubenec I.

Comment on
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 16;388(2):464.
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 16;388(2):463.

PMID: 19853578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):398-410. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.003.

The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to
distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass.

Nishioka N(1), Inoue K, Adachi K, Kiyonari H, Ota M, Ralston A, Yabuta N,
Hirahara S, Stephenson RO, Ogonuki N, Makita R, Kurihara H, Morin-Kensicki EM,
Nojima H, Rossant J, Nakao K, Niwa H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):321-2.
    Dev Cell. 2011 Mar 15;20(3):e3.

Outside cells of the preimplantation mouse embryo form the trophectoderm (TE), a 
process requiring the transcription factor Tead4. Here, we show that
transcriptionally active Tead4 can induce Cdx2 and other trophoblast genes in
parallel in embryonic stem cells. In embryos, the Tead4 coactivator protein Yap
localizes to nuclei of outside cells, and modulation of Tead4 or Yap activity
leads to changes in Cdx2 expression. In inside cells, Yap is phosphorylated and
cytoplasmic, and this involves the Hippo signaling pathway component Lats. We
propose that active Tead4 promotes TE development in outside cells, whereas Tead4
activity is suppressed in inside cells by cell contact- and Lats-mediated
inhibition of nuclear Yap localization. Thus, differential signaling between
inside and outside cell populations leads to changes in cell fate specification
during TE formation.

PMID: 19289085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380(3):689-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.151. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

Related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 induces fibroblast growth factor
receptor-1 expression in endothelial cells.

Zhang C(1), Song QH, Khachigian LM, Lubenec I, Shie JL, Yang B, Li J, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Medical University, Baojian Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China.

Retraction in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 16;388(2):464.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR-1) has been implicated in the process
of cardiogenesis, although the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly
understood. In this study, we report the regulation of FGFR-1 expression by
related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) in vitro (endothelial cells)
and in vivo (RTEF-1 transgenic mice). FGFR-1 promoter activity, FGFR-1 mRNA and
protein level were measured in bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC) in response
to RTEF-1 and in endothelial cells isolated from livers in RTEF-1 transgenic
mice. RTEF-1 stimulated FGFR-1 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner.
RTEF-1 enhanced FGFR-1 mRNA (4-fold) and protein expression (3.5-fold) whereas
RTEF-1 siRNA decreased FGFR-1 protein expression (4-fold). FGFR-1 mRNA and
protein expression were also increased in endothelial cells isolated from livers 
of RTEF-1 transgenic mice. Furthermore, RTEF-1 enhanced tubule formation whereas 
this was decreased by RTEF-1 knockdown. Moreover, increased relaxation of
microvessels was found in RTEF-1 transgenic mice compared to wild-type mice. Our 
results indicate that RTEF-1 acts as a transcriptional stimulator of FGFR-1 in
endothelial cells through its activation of the FGFR-1 promoter. RTEF-1 thus
plays an important role in the regulation of FGFR-1 expression. These findings
help further understand FGFR activity in angiogenesis and may lead to new
therapeutic targets in ischemic vascular disorders.

PMID: 19285023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 10;381(3):333-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.083. Epub 2009 Feb 21.

Hypoxia-induced expression of RTEF-1 (related transcriptional enhancer factor-1) 
in endothelial cells is independent of HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor-1).

Zhang C(1), Song QH, Li J, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081,
China.

Retraction in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 16;388(2):463.

Related transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1) plays an important role in
transcriptional regulation of angiogenic genes in hypoxic endothelial cells. The 
mechanisms involved in the induction of RTEF-1 expression in hypoxia are poorly
understood. In bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC) subjected to hypoxia,
Western blot and quantitative PCR analysis revealed that RTEF-1 protein and mRNA 
levels were significantly increased by hypoxia. To address the potential role of 
the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in RTEF-1 induction, a hepatoma cell line 
deficient in HIF-1 (c4) and a control HIF-1 positive cell line (vT{2}) were
exposed to hypoxia. We report that RTEF-1 protein expression assessed by either
Western blotting or immunofluorescence was increased in both cell lines. This
demonstrates that HIF-1 is not required for RTEF-1 upregulation by hypoxia.
Conversely, RTEF-1 appeared to regulate the expression of HIF-1: HIF-1alpha
promoter activity was increased (3.6-fold) by RTEF-1 overexpression in BAEC.
Furthermore, RTEF-1 enhanced BAEC proliferation and tubule formation; these were 
inhibited by RTEF-1 knockdown with siRNA. We propose that RTEF-1, acting via
HIF-1, is a key regulator of angiogenesis in response to hypoxia.

PMID: 19236848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 1;22(23):3320-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.1726608. Epub 2008 Nov 17.

YAP regulates neural progenitor cell number via the TEA domain transcription
factor.

Cao X(1), Pfaff SL, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Tight control of cell proliferation is essential for proper growth during
development and for tissue homeostasis in mature animals. The evolutionarily
conserved Hippo pathway restrains proliferation through a kinase cascade that
culminates in the inhibition of the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
Unphosphorylated YAP activates genes involved in cell proliferation and survival 
by interacting with a DNA-binding factor. Here we show that during vertebrate
neural tube development, the TEA domain transcription factor (TEAD) is the
cognate DNA-binding partner of YAP. YAP and TEAD gain of function causes marked
expansion of the neural progenitor population, partly owing to their ability to
promote cell cycle progression by inducing cyclin D1 and to inhibit
differentiation by suppressing NeuroM. Their loss of function results in
increased apoptosis, whereas repressing their target genes leads to premature
neuronal differentiation. Inhibiting the upstream kinases of the Hippo pathway
also causes neural progenitor overproliferation. Thus, the Hippo pathway plays
critical roles in regulating neural progenitor cell number by affecting
proliferation, fate choice, and cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2600760
PMID: 19015275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34159-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806338200. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Transcription enhancer factor 3 (TEF3) mediates the expression of Down syndrome
candidate region 1 isoform 1 (DSCR1-1L) in endothelial cells.

Liu X(1), Zhao D, Qin L, Li J, Zeng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The Down syndrome candidate region 1 gene (DSCR1) can be expressed as four
isoforms, one of which is the well-studied isoform 4 (DSCR1-4) that is induced by
VEGF-A(165) to provide a negative feedback loop in the VEGF-A(165)-induced
angiogenesis. We reported previously that another DSCR1 isoform, DSCR1-1L, was
also up-regulated by VEGF-A(165) in cultured endothelial cells and in several in 
vivo models of pathological angiogenesis and that different from DSCR1-4,
DSCR1-1L overexpression alone induced cultured endothelial cell proliferation and
promoted angiogenesis in Matrigel assays. It was reported recently that tumor
growth was greatly repressed in DSCR1 knock-out mice. Although DSCR1-4
transcription was primarily regulated by NFAT, the mechanism regulating DSCR1-1L 
expression was still unknown. We developed human DSCR1-1L promoter-driven
luciferase system and found that deletion of a putative conserved M-CAT site
located 1426-bp upstream of the translation start site blunted promoter activity.
We further showed that knockdown of TEF3, not other members of TEF family
inhibited VEGF-A(165)-induced DSCR1-1L expression. We also demonstrated that TEF3
directly interacted with the putative M-CAT site in the DSCR1-1L promoter in
vitro and in vivo. Finally, overexpression of TEF3 isoform 1, not isoform 3, in
HUVEC was sufficient to induce DSCR1-1L expression even in the absence of
VEGF-A(165) stimulation. Taken together, we elucidated a novel function of
transcriptional factor TEF3. TEF3 was required for DSCR1-1L expression through
binding to the M-CAT site in its promoter and could be an attractive target for
anti-angiogenesis therapy.

PMCID: PMC2662233
PMID: 18840614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;198(3):489-97. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0027. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Identification of NR5A1 (SF-1/AD4BP) gene expression modulators by large-scale
gain and loss of function studies.

Sakai N(1), Terami H, Suzuki S, Haga M, Nomoto K, Tsuchida N, Morohashi K, Saito 
N, Asada M, Hashimoto M, Harada D, Asahara H, Ishikawa T, Shimada F, Sakurada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Based Drug Discovery, Research Center Kobe, Bayer
Yakuhin Ltd, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group A, member 1 (NR5A1 previously known as
SF-1/AD4BP) is a transcription factor involved in the development of
adrenal/gonadal tissues and steroidogenic lineage cell differentiation in adult
somatic stem cells. To understand the cellular signaling network that regulates
NR5A1 gene expression, loss of function screening with an siRNA kinome library,
and gain of function screening with an addressable full-length cDNA library
representing one quarter of the human genome was carried out. The NR5A1 gene
expression was activated in mesenchymal stem cells by siRNA directed against
protein kinase C (PKC)-delta, erb-B3, RhoGAP (ARHGAP26), and hexokinase 2, none
of which were previously known to be involved in the NR5A1 gene expression. Among
these, we identified crosstalk between erb-B3 and PKC-delta signaling cascades.
In addition, the gain of function studies indicated that sex-determining region Y
(SRY)-box 15 (SOX15), TEA domain family member 4, KIAA1257 (a gene of unknown
function), ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif 6, Josephin
domain containing 1, centromere protein, TATA box-binding protein-associated
factor 5-like RNA polymerase, and inducible T-cell co-stimulator activate NR5A1
gene expression. These results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms
of NR5A1 gene expression.

PMID: 18579725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):270-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Tead4 is required for specification of trophectoderm in pre-implantation mouse
embryos.

Nishioka N(1), Yamamoto S, Kiyonari H, Sato H, Sawada A, Ota M, Nakao K, Sasaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

During pre-implantation mouse development, embryos form blastocysts with
establishment of the first two cell lineages: the trophectoderm (TE) which gives 
rise to the placenta, and the inner cell mass (ICM) which will form the embryo
proper. Differentiation of TE is regulated by the transcription factor
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2), but the mechanisms which act upstream of Cdx2
expression remain unknown. Here we show that the TEA domain family transcription 
factor, Tead4, is required for TE development. Tead1, Tead2 and Tead4 were
expressed in pre-implantation embryos, and at least Tead1 and Tead4 were
expressed widely in both TE and ICM lineages. Tead4-/- embryos died at
pre-implantation stages without forming the blastocoel. The mutant embryos
continued cell proliferation, and adherens junction and cell polarity were not
significantly affected. In Tead4-/- embryos, Cdx2 was weakly expressed at the
morula stage but was not expressed in later stages. None of the TE specific
genes, including Eomes and a Cdx2 independent gene, Fgfr2, was detected in
Tead4-/- embryos. Instead, the ICM specific transcription factors, Oct3/4 and
Nanog, were expressed in all the blastomeres. Tead4-/- embryos also failed to
differentiate trophoblast giant cells when they were cultured in vitro. ES cells 
with normal in vitro differentiation abilities were established from Tead4-/-
embryos. These results suggest that Tead4 has a distinct role from Tead1 and
Tead2 in trophectoderm specification of pre-implantation embryos, and that Tead4 
is an early transcription factor required for specification and development of
the trophectoderm lineage, which includes expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18083014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):856-8.

mCAT got youR TEF?

Herring BP, Zhou J.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):883-92.

PMID: 17967794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Development. 2007 Nov;134(21):3827-36. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Transcription factor TEAD4 specifies the trophectoderm lineage at the beginning
of mammalian development.

Yagi R(1), Kohn MJ, Karavanova I, Kaneko KJ, Vullhorst D, DePamphilis ML,
Buonanno A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda,
MD 20892-2753, USA.

Specification of cell lineages in mammals begins shortly after fertilization with
formation of a blastocyst consisting of trophectoderm, which contributes
exclusively to the placenta, and inner cell mass (ICM), from which the embryo
develops. Here we report that ablation of the mouse Tead4 gene results in a
preimplantation lethal phenotype, and TEAD4 is one of two highly homologous TEAD 
transcription factors that are expressed during zygotic gene activation in mouse 
2-cell embryos. Tead4(-/-) embryos do not express trophectoderm-specific genes,
such as Cdx2, but do express ICM-specific genes, such as Oct4 (also known as
Pou5f1). Consequently, Tead4(-/-) morulae do not produce trophoblast stem cells, 
trophectoderm or blastocoel cavities, and therefore do not implant into the
uterine endometrium. However, Tead4(-/-) embryos can produce embryonic stem
cells, a derivative of ICM, and if the Tead4 allele is not disrupted until after 
implantation, then Tead4(-/-) embryos complete development. Thus, Tead4 is the
earliest gene shown to be uniquely required for specification of the
trophectoderm lineage.

PMID: 17913785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genesis. 2007 Sep;45(9):577-87.

Transcription factor TEAD2 is involved in neural tube closure.

Kaneko KJ(1), Kohn MJ, Liu C, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

TEAD2, one of the first transcription factors expressed at the beginning of
mammalian development, appears to be required during neural development. For
example, Tead2 expression is greatest in the dorsal neural crest where it appears
to regulate expression of Pax3, a gene essential for brain development.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that inactivation of the Tead2 gene in 
mice significantly increased the risk of exencephaly (a defect in neural tube
closure). However, none of the embryos exhibited spina bifida, the major
phenotype of Pax3 nullizygous embryos, and expression of Pax3 in E11.5 Tead2
nullizygous embryos was normal. Thus, Tead2 plays a role in neural tube closure
that is independent of its putative role in Pax3 regulation. In addition, the
risk of exencephaly was greatest with Tead2 nullizygous females, and could be
suppressed either by folic acid or pifithrin-alpha. These results reveal a
maternal genetic contribution to neural tube closure, and suggest that
Tead2-deficient mice provide a model for anencephaly, a common human birth defect
that can be prevented by folic acid.

PMCID: PMC2765819
PMID: 17868131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):883-92. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Smooth muscle cells and myofibroblasts use distinct transcriptional mechanisms
for smooth muscle alpha-actin expression.

Gan Q(1), Yoshida T, Li J, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):856-8.

There has been considerable controversy regarding the lineage relationship
between smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and myofibroblasts, because they express a
number of common cell-selective markers including smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin.
We have shown previously that MCAT elements within the SM alpha-actin promoter
confer differential activity in cultured SMCs versus myofibroblasts. In the
present study, to determine the role of MCAT elements in vivo, we generated
transgenic mice harboring an SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer-LacZ reporter gene 
containing MCAT element mutations and compared transgene expression patterns with
wild-type SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer-LacZ transgenic mice. Results showed
no differences in LacZ expression patterns in adult SMC-containing tissues.
However, of interest, mutations of MCAT elements selectively abolished transgene 
expression in myofibroblasts within granulation tissue of skin wounds. In
addition, mutations of MCAT elements caused a delay in the induction of transgene
expression in SMCs, as well as loss of expression in cardiac and skeletal muscles
during embryogenesis. Results of small interfering RNA-induced knockdown
experiments showed that RTEF-1 regulated SM alpha-actin transcription in
myofibroblasts, but not in differentiated SMCs. Moreover, quantitative chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that RTEF-1 bound to the MCAT
element-containing region within the SM alpha-actin promoter in myofibroblasts,
whereas transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 was bound to the same region in
differentiated SMCs. These results provide novel evidence that, although both
SMCs and myofibroblasts express SM alpha-actin, they use distinct transcriptional
control mechanisms for regulating its expression. Results also indicate that the 
MCAT element-mutated SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer is a useful tool to direct 
gene expression selectively in differentiated SMCs.

PMID: 17823374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):46-55.

DNA profiling of primary serous ovarian and fallopian tube carcinomas with array 
comparative genomic hybridization and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification.

Nowee ME(1), Snijders AM, Rockx DA, de Wit RM, Kosma VM, Hämäläinen K, Schouten
JP, Verheijen RH, van Diest PJ, Albertson DG, Dorsman JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Primary serous ovarian carcinoma (OVCA) and serous Fallopian tube carcinoma
(FTC), both belonging to the BRCA-linked tumour spectrum, share many properties
and are treated similarly. However, a detailed molecular comparison has been
lacking. We hypothesized that comparative genomic studies of serous OVCAs and
FTCs should point to gene regions critically involved in their tumorigenesis.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) analysis indicated that
serous OVCAs and serous FTCs displayed common but also more distinctive patterns 
of recurrent changes. Targeted gene identification using a dedicated multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probe set directly identified
EIF2C2 on 8q as a potentially important driver gene. Other previously
unappreciated gained/amplified genes included PSMB4 on 1q, MTSS1 on 8q, TEAD4 and
TSPAN9 on 12p, and BCAS4 on 20q. SPINT2 and ACTN4 on 19q were predominantly found
in FTCs. Gains/amplifications of CCNE1 and MYC, often in conjunction with changes
in genes of the AKT pathway, EVI1 and PTK2, seemed to be involved at earlier
stages, whereas changes of ERBB2 were associated with advanced stages. The only
BRCA1-mutated FTC shared common denominators with the sporadic tumours. In
conclusion, the data suggest that serous OVCAs and FTCs, although related,
exhibit differences in genomic profiles. In addition to known pathways, new
genes/pathways are likely to be involved, with changes in an miRNA-associated
gene, EIF2C2, as one important new feature. Dedicated MLPA sets constitute
potentially important tools for differential diagnosis and may provide footholds 
for tailored therapy.

PMID: 17668415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Aug;48(8):3775-82.

Identification of novel alternatively spliced isoforms of RTEF-1 within human
ocular vascular endothelial cells and murine retina.

Appukuttan B(1), McFarland TJ, Davies MH, Atchaneeyasakul LO, Zhang Y, Babra B,
Pan Y, Rosenbaum JT, Acott T, Powers MR, Stout JT.

Author information: 
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon
97239, USA.

PURPOSE: Identification of transcription factors that regulate the transcription 
of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene may facilitate
understanding of the etiology and progression of ocular neovascular diseases. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether transcriptional enhancer factor
1-related (RTEF-1) was present within ocular vascular endothelial cells and
whether it played a role in the control of the transcription of the VEGF gene.
METHODS: Primary cultures of human retinal vascular endothelial cells (RVECs)
were maintained under normoxic or hypoxic conditions before isolation of mRNA.
RT-PCR was performed to detect RTEF-1 transcripts. Amplified products were cloned
into an expression plasmid. Human VEGF promoter and deletion constructs were
cloned into a pSEAP reporter vector. Various RTEF-1 isoforms and VEGF promoter
constructs were coelectroporated into human cells, and reporter expression levels
were determined. Retinal tissue from a mouse model of retinopathy of prematurity 
(ROP) was analyzed by RT-PCR for the presence of RTEF-1 transcripts.
RESULTS: Full-length 1305-bp and novel 936-bp RTEF-1 transcripts were identified 
in cultured human RVECs under normoxic conditions. A novel 447-bp isoform was
present in cells maintained in a hypoxic environment. Four of the 11 translated
exons predicted to code for the 1305-bp product were spliced out of the 936-bp
transcript. The 1305-bp product enhanced expression from the VEGF promoter 4-fold
greater than background, whereas the 936-bp and the 447-bp isoforms enhanced
expression 3x and 12x, respectively. Analysis with deletion promoter constructs
determined that all isoforms required the presence of Sp1 elements for efficient 
activation and that the hypoxia response element (HRE) was not essential for
enhancement. Transcripts for novel RTEF-1 isoforms were also identified in neural
retinal tissue of mice. Different murine-specific isoforms were present at
different stages of postnatal development.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel RTEF-1 transcripts are present within human ocular vascular
endothelial cells and mouse neural retina during normal and ROP development, and 
alternatively spliced products are produced under hyperoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Alternative spliced variants of human RTEF-1 transcripts are able to 
potentiate expression from the VEGF 5' proximal promoter region.

PMID: 17652751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Oncol. 2006;28(5-6):315-26.

Novel genomic aberrations in testicular germ cell tumors by array-CGH, and
associated gene expression changes.

Skotheim RI(1), Autio R, Lind GE, Kraggerud SM, Andrews PW, Monni O, Kallioniemi 
O, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Testicular germ cell tumors of adolescent and young adult men
(TGCTs) generally have near triploid and complex karyotypes. The actual genes
driving the tumorigenesis remain essentially to be identified.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To determine the detailed DNA copy number changes, and
investigate their impact on gene expression levels, we performed an integrated
microarray profiling of TGCT genomes and transcriptomes. We analyzed 17 TGCTs,
three precursor lesions, and the embryonal carcinoma cell lines, NTERA2 and
2102Ep, by comparative genomic hybridization microarrays (array-CGH), and
integrated the data with transcriptome profiles of the same samples.
RESULTS: The gain of chromosome arm 12p was, as expected, the most common
aberration, and we found CCND2, CD9, GAPD, GDF3, NANOG, and TEAD4 to be the
therein most highly over-expressed genes. Additional frequent genomic aberrations
revealed some shorter chromosomal segments, which are novel to TGCT, as well as
known aberrations for which we here refined boundaries. These include gains from 
7p15.2 and 21q22.2, and losses of 4p16.3 and 22q13.3. Integration of DNA copy
number information to gene expression profiles identified that BRCC3, FOS,
MLLT11, NES, and RAC1 may act as novel oncogenes in TGCT. Similarly, DDX26,
ERCC5, FZD4, NME4, OPTN, and RB1 were both lost and under-expressed genes, and
are thus putative TGCT suppressor genes.
CONCLUSION: This first genome-wide integrated array-CGH and gene expression
profiling of TGCT provides novel insights into the genome biology underlying
testicular tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4615958
PMID: 17167184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2006 Apr 4;6:13.

ALK1 signalling analysis identifies angiogenesis related genes and reveals
disparity between TGF-beta and constitutively active receptor induced gene
expression.

Lux A(1), Salway F, Dressman HK, Kröner-Lux G, Hafner M, Day PJ, Marchuk DA,
Garland J.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Mannheim, Germany. a.lux@hs-mannhei.de

BACKGROUND: TGF-beta1 is an important angiogenic factor involved in the different
aspects of angiogenesis and vessel maintenance. TGF-beta signalling is mediated
by the TbetaRII/ALK5 receptor complex activating the Smad2/Smad3 pathway. In
endothelial cells TGF-beta utilizes a second type I receptor, ALK1, activating
the Smad1/Smad5 pathway. Consequently, a perturbance of ALK1, ALK5 or TbetaRII
activity leads to vascular defects. Mutations in ALK1 cause the vascular disorder
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT).
METHODS: The identification of ALK1 and not ALK5 regulated genes in endothelial
cells, might help to better understand the development of HHT. Therefore, the
human microvascular endothelial cell line HMEC-1 was infected with a recombinant 
constitutively active ALK1 adenovirus, and gene expression was studied by using
gene arrays and quantitative real-time PCR analysis.
RESULTS: After 24 hours, 34 genes were identified to be up-regulated by ALK1
signalling. Analysing ALK1 regulated gene expression after 4 hours revealed 13
genes to be up- and 2 to be down-regulated. Several of these genes, including
IL-8, ET-1, ID1, HPTPeta and TEAD4 are reported to be involved in angiogenesis.
Evaluation of ALK1 regulated gene expression in different human endothelial cell 
types was not in complete agreement. Further on, disparity between constitutively
active ALK1 and TGF-beta1 induced gene expression in HMEC-1 cells and primary
HUVECs was observed.
CONCLUSION: Gene array analysis identified 49 genes to be regulated by ALK1
signalling and at least 14 genes are reported to be involved in angiogenesis.
There was substantial agreement between the gene array and quantitative real-time
PCR data. The angiogenesis related genes might be potential HHT modifier genes.
In addition, the results suggest endothelial cell type specific ALK1 and TGF-beta
signalling.

PMCID: PMC1534055
PMID: 16594992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem J. 2005 May 15;388(Pt 1):217-25.

The transcriptional co-activator TAZ interacts differentially with
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family members.

Mahoney WM Jr(1), Hong JH, Yaffe MB, Farrance IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Members of the highly related TEF-1 (transcriptional enhancer factor-1) family
(also known as TEAD, for TEF-1, TEC1, ABAA domain) bind to MCAT (muscle C, A and 
T sites) and A/T-rich sites in promoters active in cardiac, skeletal and smooth
muscle, placenta, and neural crest. TEF-1 activity is regulated by interactions
with transcriptional co-factors [p160, TONDU (Vgl-1, Vestigial-like protein-1),
Vgl-2 and YAP65 (Yes-associated protein 65 kDa)]. The strong transcriptional
co-activator YAP65 interacts with all TEF-1 family members, and, since YAP65 is
related to TAZ (transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif), we wanted
to determine if TAZ also interacts with members of the TEF-1 family. In the
present study, we show by GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, by
co-immunoprecipitation and by modified mammalian two-hybrid assays that TEF-1
interacts with TAZ in vitro and in vivo. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
with purified TEF-1 and GST-TAZ fusion protein showed that TAZ interacts with
TEF-1 bound to MCAT DNA. TAZ can interact with endogenous TEF-1 proteins, since
exogenous TAZ activated MCAT-dependent reporter promoters. Like YAP65, TAZ
interacted with all four TEF-1 family members. GST pull-down assays with
increasing amounts of [35S]TEF-1 and [35S]RTEF-1 (related TEF-1) showed that TAZ 
interacts more efficiently with TEF-1 than with RTEF-1. This differential
interaction also extended to the interaction of TEF-1 and RTEF-1 with TAZ in
vivo, as assayed by a modified mammalian two-hybrid experiment. These data show
that differential association of TEF-1 proteins with transcriptional
co-activators may regulate the activity of TEF-1 family members.

PMCID: PMC1186710
PMID: 15628970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Circulation. 2004 Nov 9;110(19):2980-7. Epub 2004 Nov 1.

Transcription enhancer factor-1-related factor-transgenic mice develop cardiac
conduction defects associated with altered connexin phosphorylation.

Chen HH(1), Baty CJ, Maeda T, Brooks S, Baker LC, Ueyama T, Gursoy E, Saba S,
Salama G, London B, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pa 15213, USA.

BACKGROUND: Conduction system defects and slowed ventricular conduction are
common in patients with systolic dysfunction and contribute to arrhythmias and
sudden death. In animal models of heart failure, cardiac alpha1-adrenergic
signaling is constitutively activated. Here, we report the effects of
constitutive activation of alpha1-adrenergic signaling on connexin
phosphorylation and cardiac conduction.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transgenic mice were generated with cardiac-specific
overexpression of the transcription factor RTEF-1 (transcription enhancer
factor-1-related factor), which mediates alpha1-adrenergic signaling in cardiac
myocytes. Surface and intracardiac ECGs revealed prolongation of the PR, QRS, and
AH intervals and the appearance of progressive atrial arrhythmias in RTEF-1 mice.
Optical mapping using voltage-sensitive dye revealed slower conduction velocities
across the atrial and ventricular myocardium. Intercellular dye transfer between 
RTEF-1 transgenic cardiac myocytes confirmed impaired conduction at the cellular 
level. Conduction defects were correlated with dephosphorylation of connexin40
and connexin43 and upregulation of protein phosphatase 1beta (PP1beta).
Overexpression of PP1beta in HeLa cells dephosphorylated cardiac connexin.
Confocal microscopy revealed increased levels of dephosphorylated connexin43 at
the cardiac gap junctions in RTEF-1 mice, suggesting that defective conduction is
a result of impaired gap-junction conductance rather than assembly.
CONCLUSIONS: Constitutive activation of alpha1-adrenergic signaling through the
RTEF-1 transcription factor results in chronic elevation of PP1beta expression
and connexin dephosphorylation. This mechanism may underlie some defects in
cardiac conduction.

PMID: 15520314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;544:31-7.

Mulibrey nanism--a novel peroxisomal disorder.

Kallijärvi J(1), Lehesjoki AE, Lipsanen-Nyman M.

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman 
Institute, Biomedicum Helsinki, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.
jukka.kallijarvi@helsinki.fi

PMID: 14713209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003 Jan;284(1):H193-203. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Regulation of the S100B gene by alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation in cardiac
myocytes.

Tsoporis JN(1), Marks A, Van Eldik LJ, O'Hanlon D, Parker TG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University of Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6, Canada.

We previously reported that S100B, a 20-kDa Ca(2+)-binding homodimer, inhibited
the postinfarct myocardial hypertrophic response mediated by alpha(1)-adrenergic 
stimulation through the protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathway. In the present 
study, we examined whether the same pathway induced the S100B gene, supporting
the hypothesis that S100B is a feedback negative regulator of this pathway. We
transfected cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes with a luciferase reporter
gene driven by the maximal human S100B promoter and progressively shorter
segments of this promoter sequentially deleted from the 5' end. We identified a
basic promoter essential for transcription spanning 162 bp upstream of the
transcription initiation site and positive (at -782/-162 and -6,689/-4,463) and
negative (at -4,463/-782) myocyte-selective regulatory elements. We showed that
the basic and maximal S100B promoters were activated specifically by
alpha(1)-adrenergic agonists through the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor, but not
by any other trophic hormonal stimuli. The activation of the S100B promoter was
mediated through the PKC signaling pathway. Transcription enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) influenced transcription from the maximal, 
but not the basic, promoter implicating active MCAT elements upstream from the
basic promoter. Acting in opposing fashions, TEF-1 transrepressed the S100B
promoter and RTEF-1 transactivated the promoter. Our results suggest that
alpha(1)-adrenergic stimulation induces the S100B gene after myocardial
infarction through the PKC signaling pathway and that this induction is modulated
by TEF-1 and RTEF-1.

PMID: 12388300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 6;296(5):1279-85.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate activity of the mouse mammary tumor virus
LTR.

Maeda T(1), Maeda M, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, 200 Lothrop Street, 15213, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (LTR) is a potent
transcriptional enhancer. We identified several putative binding sites for the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors (TEF-1, RTEF-1, DTEF-1, and ETF) in the
proximal negative regulatory element of the LTR. Gel mobility shift assays
revealed strong TEF-1 factor binding to one site using nuclear extracts from CV-1
cells and from the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Mutation of this site
increased basal activity of the LTR. In transient transfection assays, TEF-1
squelched the basal LTR activity and completely abrogated the response to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone. RTEF-1 and DTEF-1 had little effect on the basal
activity, whereas ETF activated the LTR. These TEF-1 factors also interfered with
the response to dexamethasone. Taken together, our results reveal an important
new role for TEF-1 factors in regulating MMTV LTR activity and suggest that TEF-1
factors might participate in mammary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12207913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 9;275(23):17476-80.

Identification of the functional domain in the transcription factor RTEF-1 that
mediates alpha 1-adrenergic signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

Ueyama T(1), Zhu C, Valenzuela YM, Suzow JG, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. stewartaf@msx.upmc.edu

Cardiac myocytes respond to alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor stimulation by a
progressive hypertrophy accompanied by the activation of many fetal genes,
including skeletal muscle alpha-actin. The skeletal muscle alpha-actin gene is
activated by signaling through an MCAT element, the binding site of the
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family of transcription factors.
Previously, we showed that overexpression of the TEF-1-related factor (RTEF-1)
increased the alpha(1)-adrenergic response of the skeletal muscle alpha-actin
promoter, whereas TEF-1 overexpression did not. Here, we identified the
functional domains and specific sequences in RTEF-1 that mediate the
alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Chimeric TEF-1 and RTEF-1 expression constructs
localized the region responsible for the alpha(1)-adrenergic response to the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RTEF-1. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to
inactivate eight serine residues of RTEF-1, not present in TEF-1, that are
putative targets of alpha(1)-adrenergic-dependent kinases. Mutation of a single
serine residue, Ser-322, reduced the alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of RTEF-1 by 
70% without affecting protein stability, suggesting that phosphorylation at this 
serine residue accounts for most of the alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Thus, these
results demonstrate that RTEF-1 is a direct target of alpha(1)-adrenergic
signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 10764782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):127-9.

Localization of human transcription factor TEF-4 and TEF-5 (TEAD2, TEAD3) genes
to chromosomes 19q13.3 and 6p21.2 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid analysis.

Jacquemin P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/, Illkirch Cédex, F-67404, France.

PMID: 9889009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Microbiology. 1998 Sep;144 ( Pt 9):2407-15.

A controllable gene-expression system for the pathogenic fungus Candida glabrata.

Nakayama H(1), Izuta M, Nagahashi S, Sihta EY, Sato Y, Yamazaki T, Arisawa M,
Kitada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mycology, Nippon Roche Research Center, Kanagawa, Japan.
hironobu.nakayama@roche.com

A system for controlling gene expression was established in the pathogenic fungus
Candida glabrata to elucidate the physiological functions of genes. To control
the expression of the gene of interest, the C. glabrata cells were first
transformed with the plasmid carrying the tetracycline repressor-transactivator
fusion tetR::GAL4, then with the DNA fragment containing the controllable
cassette, the tetracycline operator chimeric promoter (tetO::ScHOP1). The peptide
elongation factor 3 (CgTEF3) and DNA topoisomerase II (CgTOP2) genes from C.
glabrata were cloned and their expression assessed using this system. When the
promoter of CgTEF3 or CgTOP2 was replaced with tetO::ScHOP1, doxycycline almost
completely repressed the expression of both mRNAs, and impaired growth.
Repression of the TOP2 or TEF3 gene by doxycycline also hampered the survival of 
C. glabrata cells in mice; in mouse kidneys the number of C. glabrata cells, in
which the TOP2 or TEF3 promoter was replaced with the tetO::ScHOP1 controllable
cassette, did not increase when the mice were given doxycycline. Thus, it appears
that the gene repression mediated by doxycycline occurred not only in culture
media but also in animals; therefore, this system can be used to elucidate the
function of the gene in fungal infections and pathogenesis.

PMID: 9782488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Circ Res. 1998 Jul 13;83(1):43-9.

Transcription factor RTEF-1 mediates alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal 
gene program in cardiac myocytes.

Stewart AF(1), Suzow J, Kubota T, Ueyama T, Chen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
als6+@pitt.edu

Alpha1-adrenergic receptor stimulation induces cardiac myocytes to hypertrophy
and reactivates many fetal genes, including beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC)
and skeletal alpha-actin (SKA), by signaling through myocyte-specific CAT (M-CAT)
cis elements, binding sites of the transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1)
family of transcription factors. To examine functional differences between TEF-1 
and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) in alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal
program, expression constructs were cotransfected with betaMyHC and SKA
promoter/reporter constructs in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. TEF-I
overexpression tended to transactivate a minimal betaMyHC promoter but
significantly interfered with a minimal SKA promoter. In contrast, RTEF-1
transactivated both the minimal betaMyHC and SKA promoters. TEF-1 and RTEF-I also
affected the alpha1-adrenergic response of the betaMyHC and SKA promoters
differently. TEF-1 had no effect. In contrast, RTEF-1 potentiated the
alpha1-adrenergic responses of the SKA promoter and of a -3.3-kb betaMyHC
promoter. To determine why the promoters responded differently to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, promoters with mutated M-CAT elements were tested in the same way. The
betaMyHC promoter required an intact M-CAT element to respond to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, whereas the SKA promoter M-CAT was required for the TEF-1 response but
not for the RTEF-1 response, suggesting that SKA promoter-specific cofactors may 
be involved. By competition gel shift assay, the M-CAT of the minimal betaMyHC
promoter had a lower affinity than that of the SKA promoter, which partly
explains the different responses of these promoters to TEF-1. These results
highlight functional differences between TEF-1 and RTEF-1 and suggest a novel
function of RTEF-1 in mediating the alpha1-adrenergic response in hypertrophic
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9670917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15294-8.

Fusion of the transcription factor TFE3 gene to a novel gene, PRCC, in
t(X;1)(p11;q21)-positive papillary renal cell carcinomas.

Weterman MA(1), Wilbrink M, Geurts van Kessel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The (X;1)(p11;q21) translocation is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality in a
subset of human papillary renal cell carcinomas, and is sometimes the sole
cytogenetic abnormality present. Via positional cloning, we were able to identify
the genes involved. The translocation results in a fusion of the transcription
factor TFE3 gene on the X chromosome to a novel gene, designated PRCC, on
chromosome 1. Through this fusion, reciprocal translocation products are formed, 
which are both expressed in papillary renal cell carcinomas. PRCC is ubiquitously
expressed in normal adult and fetal tissues and encodes a putative protein of 491
aa with a relatively high content of prolines. No relevant homologies with known 
sequences at either the DNA or the protein level were found.

PMCID: PMC26398
PMID: 8986805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):365-70.

A novel family of TEA domain-containing transcription factors with distinct
spatiotemporal expression patterns.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We cloned two novel types of TEA domain-containing transcription factor (ETFR-1
and -2) cDNAs. Amino acid sequences deduced for ETFR-1 and -2 as well as those of
other known proteins of the same family, TEF-1 and ETF, exhibited significant
identity (63-75% overall) to each other not only in the TEA DNA binding domain
but also in the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis revealed that both the
mRNAs were expressed in embryos as well as in many adult tissues, although their 
levels of expression varied. The results demonstrate that the mammalian TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family consists of at least four distinct 
members, TEF-1, ETF, ETFR-1, and ETFR-2, which exhibit overlapping but differing 
spatiotemporal expression patterns, suggesting their redundant yet unique roles
involved in not only developmental control but also tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 8920920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genomics. 1996 Oct 1;37(1):68-76.

Cloning of human RTEF-1, a transcriptional enhancer factor-1-related gene
preferentially expressed in skeletal muscle: evidence for an ancient multigene
family.

Stewart AF(1), Richard CW 3rd, Suzow J, Stephan D, Weremowicz S, Morton CC, Adra 
CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
als6+@pitt.edu

Transcriptional Enhancer Factor-1 (TEF-1) is a transcription factor required for 
cardiac muscle gene activation. Since ablation of TEF-1 does not abolish cardiac 
gene expression, we sought to identify a human gene related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1)
that might also participate in cardiac gene regulation. A human heart cDNA
library was screened to obtain a full-length RTEF-1 cDNA. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization assigned the RTEF-1 gene to chromosome 12p13.2-p13.3. In contrast, 
PCR screening of human/rodent cell hybrid panels identified TEF-1 on chromosome
11p15.2, between D11S1315 and D11S1334, extending a region of known synteny
between human chromosomes 11 and 12 and arguing for an ancient divergence between
these two closely related genes. Northern blot analysis revealed a striking
similarity in the tissue distribution of RTEF-1 and TEF-1 mRNAs; skeletal muscle 
showed the highest abundance of both mRNAs, with lower levels detected in
pancreas, placenta, and heart. Phylogenetic analysis of all known TEF-1-related
proteins identified human RTEF-1 as one of four vertebrate members of this
multigene family and further suggests that these genes diverged in the earliest
metazoan ancestors.

PMID: 8921372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21775-85.

A novel family of developmentally regulated mammalian transcription factors
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain.

Jacquemin P(1), Hwang JJ, Martial JA, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of two novel human and murine transcription
factors containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). These factors bind to the consensus TEA/ATTS cognate
binding site exemplified by the GT-IIC and Sph enhansons of the SV40 enhancer but
differ in their ability to bind cooperatively to tandemly repeated sites. The
human TEFs are differentially expressed in cultured cell lines and the mouse
(m)TEFs are differentially expressed in embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues in 
early post-implantation embryos. Strikingly, at later stages of embryogenesis,
mTEF-3 is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle precursors, whereas mTEF-1 is
expressed not only in developing skeletal muscle but also in the myocardium.
Together with previous data, these results point to important, partially
redundant, roles for these TEF proteins in myogenesis and cardiogenesis. In
addition, mTEF-1 is strongly coexpressed with mTEF-4 in mitotic neuroblasts,
while accentuated mTEF-4 expression is also observed in the gut and the
nephrogenic region of the kidney. These observations suggest additional roles for
the TEF proteins in central nervous system development and organogenesis.

PMID: 8702974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13786-95.

Identification of a murine TEF-1-related gene expressed after mitogenic
stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts and during myogenic differentiation.

Hsu DK(1), Guo Y, Alberts GF, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Peifley KA,
Winkles JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Holland Laboratory, American Red Cross,
Rockville, Maryland 20855, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1 binding to cell surface receptors stimulates an 
intracellular signaling pathway that ultimately promotes the transcriptional
activation of specific genes. We have used a mRNA differential display method to 
identify FGF-1-inducible genes in mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Here, we report that
one of these genes, FGF-regulated (FR)-19, is predicted to encode a member of the
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 family of structurally related
DNA-binding proteins. Specifically, the deduced FR-19 amino acid sequence has
approximately89, 77, and 68% overall identity to chicken TEF-1A, mouse TEF-1, and
mouse embryonic TEA domain-containing factor, respectively. Gel mobility shift
experiments indicate that FR-19, like TEF-1, can bind the GT-IIC motif found in
the SV40 enhancer. The FR-19 gene maps in the distal region of mouse chromosome
6, and analysis of several FR-19 cDNA clones indicates that at least two FR-19
isoforms may be expressed from this locus. FGF-1 induction of FR-19 mRNA
expression in mouse fibroblasts is first detectable at 4 h after FGF-1 addition
and is dependent on de novo RNA and protein synthesis. FGF-2, calf serum,
platelet-derived growth factor-BB, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate can also
induce FR-19 mRNA levels. We have also found that FR-19 mRNA expression increases
during mouse C2C12 myoblast differentiation in vitro. The FR-19 gene is expressed
in vivo in a tissue-specific manner, with a relatively high level detected in
lung. These results indicate that increased expression of a TEF-1-related protein
may be important for both mitogen-stimulated fibroblast proliferation and
skeletal muscle cell differentiation.

PMID: 8662936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3727-36.

cDNA cloning and characterization of murine transcriptional enhancer
factor-1-related protein 1, a transcription factor that binds to the M-CAT motif.

Yockey CE(1), Smith G, Izumo S, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Beth Israel Hospital and Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The M-CAT motif is a cis-regulatory DNA sequence that is essential for
muscle-specific transcription of several genes. Previously, we had shown that
both muscle-specific (A1) and ubiquitous (A2) factors bind to an essential M-CAT 
motif in the myosin heavy chain beta gene and that the ubiquitous factor is
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1. Here we report the isolation of mouse
cDNAs encoding two forms (a and b) of a TEF-1-related protein, TEFR1. The TEFR1a 
cDNA encodes a 427-amino acid protein. The coding region of TEFR1b is identical
to 1a in both nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence except for the absence
of 43 amino acids downstream of the TEA DNA-binding domain. Three TEFR1
transcripts (approximately 7, approximately 3.5, and approximately 2 kilobase
pairs) are enriched in differentiated skeletal muscle (myotubes) relative to
undifferentiated skeletal muscle (myoblasts) and non-muscle cells in culture. In 
situ hybridization analysis indicated that TEFR1 transcripts are enriched in the 
skeletal muscle lineage during mouse embryogenesis. Transient expression of
fusion proteins of TEFR1 and the yeast GAL4 DNA-binding domain in cell lines
activated the expression of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter
constructs containing GAL4 binding sites, indicating that TEFR1 contains an
activation domain. An anti-TEFR1 polyclonal antibody supershifted the
muscle-specific M-CAT.A1 factor complex in gel mobility shift assays, suggesting 
that TEFR1 is a major component of this complex. Our results suggest that TEFR1
might play a role in the embryonic development of skeletal muscle in the mouse.

PMID: 8631987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


