
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1859(4):599-611. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2016.02.010. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) controls the invasiveness of glioblastoma through
YAP-dependent expression of CYR61/CCN1 and miR-296-3p.

Lee H(1), Hwang SJ(1), Kim HR(1), Shin CH(1), Choi KH(1), Joung JG(2), Kim HH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced
Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Institute for Future
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
hyeonhkim@skku.edu.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive type of primary
brain tumor derived from non-neuronal glial cells. Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2)
protein, also termed as merlin, is a well-known tumor suppressor; however, the
molecular mechanism underlying this effect has not yet been fully defined. To
investigate the role of NF2 in the invasiveness of GBM, we used two GBM cell
lines: NF2-expressing T98G cells and NF2-deficient A172 cells. Knockdown of NF2
increased the invasiveness of T98G cells, whereas NF2-overexpressing A172 cells
showed decreased invasive activity. Moreover, re-expression of NF2 reversed the
high invasiveness of NF2-silenced T98G cells, indicating that NF2 negatively
regulates GBM invasiveness. We further found that the NF2-mediated regulation of 
invasiveness was dependent on YAP and TEAD2 expression levels. NF2 also
controlled the expression of YAP targets, including cysteine-rich angiogenic
inducer 61 (CYR61/CCN1), by regulating the nuclear localization of YAP. Silencing
of CYR61/CCN1 blocked the increased invasiveness of T98G cells, suggesting that
CYR61/CCN1 is required for NF2-mediated invasiveness. Through microRNA microarray
analysis, we found that NF2 negatively regulates the expression of miR-296-3p.
Overexpression of miR-296-3p suppressed the expression of STAT5A, induced the
phosphorylation of STAT3 by downregulating SOCS2, and increased the invasiveness 
of T98G cells. Taken together, we demonstrate that NF2 negatively controls the
invasiveness of GBM through YAP-dependent induction of CYR61/CCN1 and miR-296-3p.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923924  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Structure. 2016 Jan 5;24(1):179-86. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.11.005. Epub 2015 Dec
24.

Palmitoylation of TEAD Transcription Factors Is Required for Their Stability and 
Function in Hippo Pathway Signaling.

Noland CL(1), Gierke S(2), Schnier PD(3), Murray J(1), Sandoval WN(3), Sagolla
M(2), Dey A(4), Hannoush RN(5), Fairbrother WJ(6), Cunningham CN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (2)Center for Advanced Light Microscopy, Genentech,
Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Department of Protein
Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(4)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (5)Department of Early Discovery Biochemistry,
Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (6)Department of 
Early Discovery Biochemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. Electronic address: fairbrother.wayne@gene.com. (7)Department of
Early Discovery Biochemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. Electronic address: cunningham.christian@gene.com.

The Hippo signaling pathway is responsible for regulating the function of TEAD
family transcription factors in metazoans. TEADs, with their co-activators
YAP/TAZ, are critical for controlling cell differentiation and organ size through
their transcriptional activation of genes involved in cell growth and
proliferation. Dysregulation of the Hippo pathway has been implicated in multiple
forms of cancer. Here, we identify a novel form of regulation of TEAD family
proteins. We show that human TEADs are palmitoylated at a universally conserved
cysteine, and report the crystal structures of the human TEAD2 and TEAD3
YAP-binding domains in their palmitoylated forms. These structures show a
palmitate bound within a highly conserved hydrophobic cavity at each protein's
core. Our findings also demonstrate that this modification is required for proper
TEAD folding and stability, indicating a potential new avenue for
pharmacologically regulating the Hippo pathway through the modulation of TEAD
palmitoylation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26724994  [PubMed - in process]


3. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 22;6:10206. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10206.

Exome-wide association analysis reveals novel coding sequence variants associated
with lipid traits in Chinese.

Tang CS(1), Zhang H(2), Cheung CY(3), Xu M(4), Ho JC(3), Zhou W(2,)(5), Cherny
SS(1,)(6,)(7), Zhang Y(8), Holmen O(9,)(10), Au KW(3), Yu H(4), Xu L(11), Jia
J(8), Porsch RM(1), Sun L(4), Xu W(4), Zheng H(4), Wong LY(3), Mu Y(12), Dou
J(12), Fong CH(3), Wang S(13), Hong X(3), Dong L(14), Liao Y(14), Wang J(14), Lam
LS(6), Su X(15), Yan H(15), Yang ML(2), Chen J(2), Siu CW(3,)(16), Xie G(17), Woo
YC(3), Wu Y(18), Tan KC(3,)(16), Hveem K(9), Cheung BM(3,)(16,)(19), Zöllner
S(20), Xu A(3,)(16,)(19,)(21), Eugene Chen Y(2), Jiang CQ(22), Zhang Y(23), Lam
TH(11), Ganesh SK(2,)(24), Huo Y(8), Sham PC(1,)(6,)(7), Lam KS(3,)(16,)(19),
Willer CJ(2,)(5,)(24), Tse HF(3,)(16,)(25), Gao W(26).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)Department of
Cardiology, Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Key
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of Education, Beijing
100191, China. (5)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (6)Centre for Genomic
Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (7)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (8)Department of Cardiology, Peking
University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, China. (9)Department of Public Health 
and General Practice, HUNT Research Centre, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, 7600 Levanger, Norway. (10)St Olav Hospital, Trondheim University
Hospital, 7030 Trondheim, Norway. (11)School of Public Health, the University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (12)Department of Endocrinology, Chinese People's
Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (13)Beijing Hypertension
League Institute, Beijing 100039, China. (14)Peking University Shougang Hospital,
Beijing, China. (15)Department of Cardiology, Wuhan Asia Heart Hospital, China.
(16)Research Centre of Heart, Brain, Hormone and Healthy Aging, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (17)Peking
University Clinical Research Institute, Beijing, China. (18)Peking University
Clinical Research Institute, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Peking
University School of Public Health, Beijing, China. (19)State Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(20)Department of Biostatistics, Center for Statistical Genetics, University of
Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (21)Department 
of Pharmacology &Pharmacy, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(22)Guangzhou No.12 Hospital, Guangzhou 510620, China. (23)Institute of Vascular 
Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Receptors Research, Beijing 100191, China. (24)Department of Human
Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (25)Hong
Kong-Guangdong Joint Laboratory on Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, the
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (26)Department of Cardiology, Peking
University Third Hospital, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology and
Regulatory Peptides, Ministry of Health, Beijing 100191, China.

Blood lipids are important risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD). Here
we perform an exome-wide association study by genotyping 12,685 Chinese, using a 
custom Illumina HumanExome BeadChip, to identify additional loci influencing
lipid levels. Single-variant association analysis on 65,671 single nucleotide
polymorphisms reveals 19 loci associated with lipids at exome-wide significance
(P<2.69 × 10(-7)), including three Asian-specific coding variants in known genes 
(CETP p.Asp459Gly, PCSK9 p.Arg93Cys and LDLR p.Arg257Trp). Furthermore, missense 
variants at two novel loci-PNPLA3 p.Ile148Met and PKD1L3 p.Thr429Ser-also
influence levels of triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
respectively. Another novel gene, TEAD2, is found to be associated with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol through gene-based association analysis.
Most of these newly identified coding variants show suggestive association
(P<0.05) with CAD. These findings demonstrate that exome-wide genotyping on
samples of non-European ancestry can identify additional population-specific
possible causal variants, shedding light on novel lipid biology and CAD.

PMCID: PMC4703860
PMID: 26690388  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Reprod Dev. 2016 Feb 20;62(1):93-102. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2015-092. Epub 2015 Dec 
6.

Search for regulatory factors of the pituitary-specific transcription factor
PROP1 gene.

Nishimura N(1), Ueharu H, Nishihara H, Shibuya S, Yoshida S, Higuchi M, Kanno N, 
Horiguchi K, Kato T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Agriculture, Meiji University,
Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

Pituitary-specific transcription factor PROP1, a factor important for pituitary
organogenesis, appears on rat embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5) in SOX2-expressing
stem/progenitor cells and always coexists with SOX2 throughout life.
PROP1-positive cells at one point occupy all cells in Rathke's pouch, followed by
a rapid decrease in their number. Their regulatory factors, except for RBP-J,
have not yet been clarified. This study aimed to use the 3 kb upstream region and
1st intron of mouse prop1 to pinpoint a group of factors selected on the basis of
expression in the early pituitary gland for expression of Prop1. Reporter assays 
for SOX2 and RBP-J showed that the stem/progenitor marker SOX2 has cell
type-dependent inhibitory and activating functions through the proximal and
distal upstream regions of Prop1, respectively, while RBP-J had small regulatory 
activity in some cell lines. Reporter assays for another 39 factors using the 3
kb upstream regions in CHO cells ultimately revealed that 8 factors, MSX2, PAX6, 
PIT1, PITX1, PITX2, RPF1, SOX8 and SOX11, but not RBP-J, regulate Prop1
expression. Furthermore, a synergy effect with SOX2 was observed for an
additional 10 factors, FOXJ1, HES1, HEY1, HEY2, KLF6, MSX1, RUNX1, TEAD2, YBX2
and ZFP36Ll, which did not show substantial independent action. Thus, we
demonstrated 19 candidates, including SOX2, to be regulatory factors of Prop1
expression.

PMCID: PMC4768783
PMID: 26640231  [PubMed - in process]


5. Structure. 2015 Nov 3;23(11):2076-86. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.09.009. Epub 2015
Oct 22.

Targeting the Central Pocket in Human Transcription Factor TEAD as a Potential
Cancer Therapeutic Strategy.

Pobbati AV(1), Han X(2), Hung AW(3), Weiguang S(3), Huda N(3), Chen GY(3), Kang
C(3), Chia CS(3), Luo X(4), Hong W(5), Poulsen A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A(*)STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore 138673, Singapore. Electronic address: ajaybabuvp@imcb.a-star.edu.sg.
(2)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology & Engineering, the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China;
Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6001
Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Experimental Therapeutics Centre,
A(*)STAR, 31 Biopolis Way, #3-01, Singapore 138669, Singapore. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6001 Forest Park
Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: xuelian.luo@utsouthwestern.edu. 
(5)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A(*)STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore 138673, Singapore. (6)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, A(*)STAR, 31
Biopolis Way, #3-01, Singapore 138669, Singapore. Electronic address:
apoulsen@etc.a-star.edu.sg.

The human TEAD family of transcription factors (TEAD1-4) is required for
YAP-mediated transcription in the Hippo pathway. Hyperactivation of TEAD's
co-activator YAP contributes to tissue overgrowth and human cancers, suggesting
that pharmacological interference of TEAD-YAP activity may be an effective
strategy for anticancer therapy. Here we report the discovery of a central pocket
in the YAP-binding domain (YBD) of TEAD that is targetable by small-molecule
inhibitors. Our X-ray crystallography studies reveal that flufenamic acid, a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), binds to the central pocket of
TEAD2 YBD. Our biochemical and functional analyses further demonstrate that
binding of NSAIDs to TEAD inhibits TEAD-YAP-dependent transcription, cell
migration, and proliferation, indicating that the central pocket is important for
TEAD function. Therefore, our studies discover a novel way of targeting TEAD
transcription factors and set the stage for therapeutic development of specific
TEAD-YAP inhibitors against human cancers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4660270 [Available on 2016-11-03]
PMID: 26592798  [PubMed - in process]


6. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:921517. doi: 10.1155/2015/921517. Epub 2015 Oct 11.

Coexpression Network Analysis of miRNA-142 Overexpression in Neuronal Cells.

Thapa I(1), Fox HS(2), Bastola D(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Information Science and Technology, University of Nebraska Omaha,
Omaha, NE 68182, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNA molecules, which are differentially expressed
in diverse biological processes and are also involved in the regulation of
multiple genes. A number of sites in the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of
different mRNAs allow complimentary binding for a microRNA, leading to their
posttranscriptional regulation. The miRNA-142 is one of the microRNAs
overexpressed in neurons that is found to regulate SIRT1 and MAOA genes.
Differential analysis of gene expression data, which is focused on identifying
up- or downregulated genes, ignores many relationships between genes affected by 
miRNA-142 overexpression in a cell. Thus, we applied a correlation network model 
to identify the coexpressed genes and to study the impact of miRNA-142
overexpression on this network. Combining multiple sources of knowledge is useful
to infer meaningful relationships in systems biology. We applied coexpression
model on the data obtained from wild type and miR-142 overexpression neuronal
cells and integrated miRNA seed sequence mapping information to identify genes
greatly affected by this overexpression. Larger differences in the enriched
networks revealed that the nervous system development related genes such as
TEAD2, PLEKHA6, and POGLUT1 were greatly impacted due to miRNA-142
overexpression.

PMCID: PMC4619910
PMID: 26539539  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16906-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642363. Epub 2015
May 20.

Hippo Component TAZ Functions as a Co-repressor and Negatively Regulates <U+0394>Np63
Transcription through TEA Domain (TEAD) Transcription Factor.

Valencia-Sama I(1), Zhao Y(1), Lai D(1), Janse van Rensburg HJ(1), Hao Y(1), Yang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
yang@path.queensu.ca.

Transcriptional co-activator with a PDZ binding domain (TAZ) is a WW
domain-containing transcriptional co-activator and a core component of an
emerging Hippo signaling pathway that regulates organ size, tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. TAZ regulates these biological functions by
up-regulating downstream cellular genes through transactivation of transcription 
factors such as TEAD and TTF1. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TAZ-induced tumorigenesis, we have recently performed a gene expression profile
analysis by overexpressing TAZ in mammary cells. In addition to the
TAZ-up-regulated genes that were confirmed in our previous studies, we identified
a large number of cellular genes that were down-regulated by TAZ. In this study, 
we have confirmed these down-regulated genes (including cytokines, chemokines,
and p53 gene family members) as bona fide downstream transcriptional targets of
TAZ. By using human breast and lung epithelial cells, we have further
characterized <U+0394>Np63, a p53 gene family member, and shown that TAZ suppresses
<U+0394>Np63 mRNA, protein expression, and promoter activity through interaction with
the transcription factor TEAD. We also show that TEAD can inhibit <U+0394>Np63 promoter 
activity and that TAZ can directly interact with <U+0394>Np63 promoter-containing TEAD
binding sites. Finally, we provide functional evidence that down-regulation of
<U+0394>Np63 by TAZ may play a role in regulating cell migration. Altogether, this study
provides novel evidence that the Hippo component TAZ can function as a
co-repressor and regulate biological functions by negatively regulating
downstream cellular genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505436 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 25995450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):1690-7. eCollection 2015.

LATS2-mediated YAP1 phosphorylation is involved in HCC tumorigenesis.

Guo C(1), Wang X(1), Liang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital
Changsha 410005, P.R. China.

YAP (yes-associated protein) is a transcriptional co-activator that acts
downstream of the Hippo signaling pathway and regulates multiple cellular
processes, including proliferation and apoptosis. Although YAP plays an important
role in various tumors, the underlying mechanism in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) tumorigenesis remains unclear. In this study, we observed that the LATS2
was highly expressed in Bel-7402 and HepG2 cell lines, and LATS2 protein level
was negatively correlated with YAP1 in HCC cells. And then, we inhibited LATS2
expression by transfecting with siRNA. Western blot and Immunofluorescent
staining analysis demonstrated that LATS2 inhibition decreased the
dephosphorylation of YAP1 protein and promoted YAP1 nuclear accumulation in HCC
cells. Moreover, Immunoprecipitation assay results also indicated that Yap binds 
directly to TEAD2 and LATS2 inhibition-mediated dephosphorylation increased the
YAP1/TEAD2 association, leading to YAP1/TEAD2 transcriptional activation, which
in turn upregulated cell invasion in HCC cells. Taken together, our current data 
indicated a new regulatory mechanism of YAP1 by the LATS2-mediated
phosphorylation that was involved in HCC tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4396227
PMID: 25973055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Future Oncol. 2015;11(7):1027-36. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.18.

SOX4, SOX11 and PAX6 mRNA expression was identified as a (prognostic) marker for 
the aggressiveness of neuroendocrine tumors of the lung by using next-generation 
expression analysis (NanoString).

Walter RF(1), Mairinger FD, Werner R, Ting S, Vollbrecht C, Theegarten D,
Christoph DC, Zarogoulidis K, Schmid KW, Zarogoulidis P, Wohlschlaeger J.

Author information: 
(1)Ruhrlandklinik, West German Lung Center, University Hospital Essen, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung (NELC) account for 25% of all lung 
cancer cases and transcription factors may drive dedifferentiation of these
tumors. This study was conducted to identify supportive diagnostic and prognostic
biomarkers.
MATERIALS & METHODS: A total of 16 TC, 13 AC, 16 large cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas and 15 small cell lung cancer were investigated for the mRNA
expression of 11 transcription factors and related genes (MYB, MYBBP1A, OCT4,
PAX6, PCDHB, RBP1, SDCBP, SOX2, SOX4, SOX11, TEAD2).
RESULTS: SOX4 (p = 0.0002), SOX11 (p < 0.0001) and PAX6 (p = 0.0002) were
significant for tumor type. Elevated PAX6 and SOX11 expression correlated with
poor outcome in large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and small cell lung cancer
(p < 0.0001 and p = 0.0232, respectively) based on survival data of 34 patients
(57%).
CONCLUSION: Aggressiveness of NELC correlated with increasing expression of
transcription factors. SOX11 seems to be a highly valuable diagnostic and
prognostic marker for aggressive NELC.

PMID: 25804118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Stem Cells. 2015 Jun;33(6):1705-18. doi: 10.1002/stem.1993.

YAP1 Regulates OCT4 Activity and SOX2 Expression to Facilitate Self-Renewal and
Vascular Mimicry of Stem-Like Cells.

Bora-Singhal N(1), Nguyen J(1), Schaal C(1), Perumal D(2), Singh S(3), Coppola
D(4), Chellappan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA. (2)Department of Hematology & Medical Oncology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. (3)National
Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal, India. (4)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa,
Florida, USA.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is highly correlated with smoking and has very
low survival rates. Multiple studies have shown that stem-like cells contribute
to the genesis and progression of NSCLC. Our results show that the
transcriptional coactivator yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1), which is the
oncogenic component of the Hippo signaling pathway, is elevated in the stem-like 
cells from NSCLC and contributes to their self-renewal and ability to form
angiogenic tubules. Inhibition of YAP1 by a small molecule or depletion of YAP1
by siRNAs suppressed self-renewal and vascular mimicry of stem-like cells. These 
effects of YAP1 were mediated through the embryonic stem cell transcription
factor, Sox2. YAP1 could transcriptionally induce Sox2 through a physical
interaction with Oct4; Sox2 induction occurred independent of TEAD2 transcription
factor, which is the predominant mediator of YAP1 functions. The binding of Oct4 
to YAP1 could be detected in cell lines as well as tumor tissues; the interaction
was elevated in NSCLC samples compared to normal tissue as seen by proximity
ligation assays. YAP1 bound to Oct4 through the WW domain, and a peptide
corresponding to this region could disrupt the interaction. Delivery of the WW
domain peptide to stem-like cells disrupted the interaction and abrogated Sox2
expression, self-renewal, and vascular mimicry. Depleting YAP1 reduced the
expression of multiple epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes and prevented the 
growth and metastasis of tumor xenografts in mice; overexpression of Sox2 in YAP1
null cells rescued these functions. These results demonstrate a novel regulation 
of stem-like functions by YAP1, through the modulation of Sox2 expression.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4441573 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25754111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 27;458(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.077. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

YAP/TAZ enhance mammalian embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a
Tead-dependent manner.

Han D(1), Byun SH(1), Park S(1), Kim J(1), Kim I(1), Ha S(1), Kwon M(1), Yoon
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. (2)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. Electronic
address: keejung@skku.edu.

Mammalian brain development is regulated by multiple signaling pathways
controlling cell proliferation, migration and differentiation. Here we show that 
YAP/TAZ enhance embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a cell autonomous
fashion using diverse experimental approaches. Introduction of retroviral vectors
expressing YAP or TAZ into the mouse embryonic brain induced cell localization in
the ventricular zone (VZ), which is the embryonic neural stem cell niche. This
change in cell distribution in the cortical layer is due to the increased
stemness of infected cells; YAP-expressing cells were colabeled with Sox2, a
neural stem cell marker, and YAP/TAZ increased the frequency and size of
neurospheres, indicating enhanced self-renewal- and proliferative ability of
neural stem cells. These effects appear to be TEA domain family transcription
factor (Tead)-dependent; a Tead binding-defective YAP mutant lost the ability to 
promote neural stem cell characteristics. Consistently, in utero gene transfer of
a constitutively active form of Tead2 (Tead2-VP16) recapitulated all the features
of YAP/TAZ overexpression, and dominant negative Tead2-EnR resulted in marked
cell exit from the VZ toward outer cortical layers. Taken together, these results
indicate that the Tead-dependent YAP/TAZ signaling pathway plays important roles 
in neural stem cell maintenance by enhancing stemness of neural stem cells during
mammalian brain development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25634692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Cancer. 2015 Aug 1;137(3):638-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29429. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Genetic variants in Hippo pathway genes YAP1, TEAD1 and TEAD4 are associated with
melanoma-specific survival.

Yuan H(1,)(2,)(3), Liu H(1,)(2), Liu Z(1,)(2), Zhu D(4), Amos CI(4), Fang S(5),
Lee JE(5), Wei Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Community and Family 
Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers. The Hippo
pathway controls cell migration, development and sizes of the organs in diverse
species, and deregulation of this pathway may affect CM progression and
prognosis. Therefore, we hypothesized that genetic variants of Hippo pathway
genes might predict survival of CM patients. We used the genotyping data of 1,115
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 12 pathway core genes (i.e.,
MST1, MST2, SAV1, LATS1, LATS2, MOB1A, MOB1B, YAP1, TEAD1, TEAD2, TEAD3 and
TEAD4) from the dataset of our previously published CM genome-wide association
study and comprehensively analyzed their associations with CM-specific survival
(CSS) in 858 CM patients by using the Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox proportional 
hazards regression models. We found a predictive role of YAP1 rs11225163 CC,
TEAD1 rs7944031 AG+GG and TEAD4 rs1990330 CA+AA in the prognosis of CM. In
addition, patients with an increasing number of unfavorable genotypes (NUG) had a
markedly increased risk of death. After incorporating NUG in the model with
clinical variables, the new model showed a significantly improved discriminatory 
ability to classify CSS (AUC increased from 82.03% to 84.56%). Our findings
suggest that genetic variants of Hippo pathway genes, particularly YAP1
rs11225163, TEAD1 rs7944031 and TEAD4 rs1990330, may independently or jointly
modulate survival of CM patients. Additional large, prospective studies are
needed to validate these findings.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4437894 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25628125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Cell Sci. 2015 Feb 15;128(4):790-803. doi: 10.1242/jcs.163675. Epub 2015 Jan
14.

Cell competition in mouse NIH3T3 embryonic fibroblasts is controlled by the
activity of Tead family proteins and Myc.

Mamada H(1), Sato T(1), Ota M(1), Sasaki H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (2)Department 
of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan sasaki@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Cell competition is a short-range communication originally observed in
Drosophila. Relatively little is known about cell competition in mammals or in
non-epithelial cells. Hippo signaling and its downstream transcription factors of
the Tead family, control cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, we established
an in vitro model system that shows cell competition in mouse NIH3T3 embryo
fibroblast cells. Co-culture of Tead-activity-manipulated cells with normal
(wild-type) cells caused cell competition. Cells with reduced Tead activity
became losers, whereas cells with increased Tead activity became
super-competitors. Tead directly regulated Myc RNA expression, and cells with
increased Myc expression also became super-competitors. At low cell density, cell
proliferation required both Tead activity and Myc. At high cell density, however,
reduction of either Tead activity or Myc was compensated for by an increase in
the other, and this increase was sufficient to confer 'winner' activity.
Collectively, NIH3T3 cells have cell competition mechanisms similar to those
regulated by Yki and Myc in Drosophila. Establishment of this in vitro model
system should be useful for analyses of the mechanisms of cell competition in
mammals and in fibroblasts.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25588835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. APMIS. 2015 Apr;123(4):359-60. doi: 10.1111/apm.12327. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

TEAD2, a Hippo pathway gene, is somatically mutated in gastric and colorectal
cancers with high microsatellite instability.

Je EM(1), Choi YJ, Chung YJ, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

PMID: 25557945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;289(48):33492-502. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.580076. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

Serum Inter-a-inhibitor activates the Yes tyrosine kinase and YAP/TEAD
transcriptional complex in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Pijuan-Galitó S(1), Tamm C(1), Annerén C(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala
University, SE-75 123 Uppsala, Sweden and. (2)From the Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, SE-75 123 Uppsala, Sweden and 
GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, SE-751 84 Uppsala, Sweden
cecilia.anneren@imbim.uu.se.

We have previously demonstrated that the Src family kinase Yes, the
Yes-associated protein (YAP) and TEA domain TEAD2 transcription factor pathway
are activated by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and contribute to mouse
embryonic stem (mES) cell maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal. In
addition, we have shown that fetal bovine serum (FBS) induces Yes
auto-phosphorylation and activation. In the present study we confirm that serum
also activates TEAD-dependent transcription in a time- and dose-dependent manner 
and we identify Inter-a-inhibitor (IaI) as a component in serum capable of
activating the Yes/YAP/TEAD pathway by inducing Yes auto-phosphorylation, YAP
nuclear localization and TEAD-dependent transcription. The cleaved heavy chain 2 
(HC2) sub-component of IaI, is demonstrated to be responsible for this effect.
Moreover, IaI is also shown to efficiently increase expression of TEAD-downstream
target genes including well-known stem cell factors Nanog and Oct 3/4. IaI is not
produced by the ES cells per se but is added to the cells via the cell culture
medium containing serum or serum-derived components such as bovine serum albumin 
(BSA). In conclusion, we describe a novel function of IaI in activating key
pluripotency pathways associated with ES cell maintenance and self-renewal.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4246103
PMID: 25301940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.046. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

Hippo signaling influences HNF4A and FOXA2 enhancer switching during hepatocyte
differentiation.

Alder O(1), Cullum R(1), Lee S(1), Kan AC(1), Wei W(1), Yi Y(1), Garside VC(1),
Bilenky M(2), Griffith M(2), Morrissy AS(2), Robertson GA(2), Thiessen N(2), Zhao
Y(2), Chen Q(3), Pan D(3), Jones SJ(4), Marra MA(5), Hoodless PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada.
(2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC
V5Z1L3, Canada. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (4)Canada's Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada;
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC V5A1S6, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (6)Terry 
Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada.
Electronic address: hoodless@bccrc.ca.

Cell fate acquisition is heavily influenced by direct interactions between master
regulators and tissue-specific enhancers. However, it remains unclear how
lineage-specifying transcription factors, which are often expressed in both
progenitor and mature cell populations, influence cell differentiation. Using in 
vivo mouse liver development as a model, we identified thousands of enhancers
that are bound by the master regulators HNF4A and FOXA2 in a
differentiation-dependent manner, subject to chromatin remodeling, and associated
with differentially expressed target genes. Enhancers exclusively occupied in the
embryo were found to be responsive to developmentally regulated TEAD2 and
coactivator YAP1. Our data suggest that Hippo signaling may affect hepatocyte
differentiation by influencing HNF4A and FOXA2 interactions with temporal
enhancers. In summary, transcription factor-enhancer interactions are not only
tissue specific but also differentiation dependent, which is an important
consideration for researchers studying cancer biology or mammalian development
and/or using transformed cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4612615
PMID: 25263553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Front Neurosci. 2014 Aug 21;8:257. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00257. eCollection
2014.

A multi-resource data integration approach: identification of candidate genes
regulating cell proliferation during neocortical development.

Vied CM(1), Freudenberg F(2), Wang Y(3), Raposo AA(4), Feng D(5), Nowakowski
RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University Tallahassee, FL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Frankfurt Frankfurt, Germany. (3)NUS
Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of 
Singapore Singapore, Singapore. (4)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto Gulbenkian
de Ciência Oeiras, Portugal. (5)Allen Institute for Brain Science Seattle, WA,
USA.

Neurons of the mammalian neocortex are produced by proliferating cells located in
the ventricular zone (VZ) lining the lateral ventricles. This is a complex and
sequential process, requiring precise control of cell cycle progression, fate
commitment and differentiation. We have analyzed publicly available databases
from mouse and human to identify candidate genes that are potentially involved in
regulating early neocortical development and neurogenesis. We used a mouse in
situ hybridization dataset (The Allen Institute for Brain Science) to identify 13
genes (Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, E2f5, Eomes, Hmgn2, Neurog2, Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Ssrp1,
Tead2, Tgif2) with high correlation of expression in the proliferating cells of
the VZ of the neocortex at early stages of development (E15.5). We generated a
similar human brain network using microarray and RNA-seq data (BrainSpan Atlas)
and identified 407 genes with high expression in the developing human VZ and
subventricular zone (SVZ) at 8-9 post-conception weeks. Seven of the human genes 
were also present in the mouse VZ network. The human and mouse networks were
extended using available genetic and proteomic datasets through GeneMANIA. A gene
ontology search of the mouse and human networks indicated that many of the genes 
are involved in the cell cycle, DNA replication, mitosis and transcriptional
regulation. The reported involvement of Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, Eomes, Neurog2,
Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Tead2, and Tgif2 in neural development or diseases resulting 
from the disruption of neurogenesis validates these candidate genes. Taken
together, our knowledge-based discovery method has validated the involvement of
many genes already known to be involved in neocortical development and extended
the potential number of genes by 100's, many of which are involved in functions
related to cell proliferation but others of which are potential candidates for
involvement in the regulation of neocortical development.

PMCID: PMC4139594
PMID: 25191221  [PubMed]


18. Cell. 2014 Jul 3;158(1):185-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.003. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Yap1 activation enables bypass of oncogenic Kras addiction in pancreatic cancer.

Kapoor A(1), Yao W(2), Ying H(3), Hua S(1), Liewen A(1), Wang Q(1), Zhong Y(4),
Wu CJ(1), Sadanandam A(5), Hu B(1), Chang Q(4), Chu GC(6), Al-Khalil R(1), Jiang 
S(1), Xia H(1), Fletcher-Sananikone E(1), Lim C(1), Horwitz GI(1), Viale A(2),
Pettazzoni P(2), Sanchez N(2), Wang H(7), Protopopov A(4), Zhang J(4), Heffernan 
T(4), Johnson RL(8), Chin L(9), Wang YA(1), Draetta G(10), DePinho RA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Genomic
Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (3)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular 
and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
hying@mdanderson.org. (4)Institute for Applied Cancer Science, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)The Institute of Cancer Research, 15 Cotswold Road, Belmont, Sutton, Surrey
SM2 5NG, UK; Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), The Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), Station 19, 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland. (6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(9)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Institute for Applied Cancer
Science, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (10)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Institute for
Applied Cancer Science, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (11)Department of Cancer Biology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: rdepinho@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    Cell. 2014 Jul 3;158(1):11-2.

Activating mutations in KRAS are among the most frequent events in diverse human 
carcinomas and are particularly prominent in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). An inducible Kras(G12D)-driven mouse model of PDAC has
established a critical role for sustained Kras(G12D) expression in tumor
maintenance, providing a model to determine the potential for and the underlying 
mechanisms of Kras(G12D)-independent PDAC recurrence. Here, we show that some
tumors undergo spontaneous relapse and are devoid of Kras(G12D) expression and
downstream canonical MAPK signaling and instead acquire amplification and
overexpression of the transcriptional coactivator Yap1. Functional studies
established the role of Yap1 and the transcriptional factor Tead2 in driving
Kras(G12D)-independent tumor maintenance. The Yap1/Tead2 complex acts
cooperatively with E2F transcription factors to activate a cell cycle and DNA
replication program. Our studies, along with corroborating evidence from human
PDAC models, portend a novel mechanism of escape from oncogenic Kras addiction in
PDAC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4109295
PMID: 24954535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cells. 2014 Oct;32(10):2780-93. doi: 10.1002/stem.1759.

The regulatory landscape of osteogenic differentiation.

Håkelien AM(1), Bryne JC, Harstad KG, Lorenz S, Paulsen J, Sun J, Mikkelsen TS,
Myklebost O, Meza-Zepeda LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital.

Differentiation of osteoblasts from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is an integral 
part of bone development and homeostasis, and may when improperly regulated cause
disease such as bone cancer or osteoporosis. Using unbiased high-throughput
methods we here characterize the landscape of global changes in gene expression, 
histone modifications, and DNA methylation upon differentiation of human MSCs to 
the osteogenic lineage. Furthermore, we provide a first genome-wide
characterization of DNA binding sites of the bone master regulatory transcription
factor Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) in human osteoblasts,
revealing target genes associated with regulation of proliferation, migration,
apoptosis, and with a significant overlap with p53 regulated genes. These
findings expand on emerging evidence of a role for RUNX2 in cancer, including
bone metastases, and the p53 regulatory network. We further demonstrate that
RUNX2 binds to distant regulatory elements, promoters, and with high frequency to
gene 3' ends. Finally, we identify TEAD2 and GTF2I as novel regulators of
osteogenesis.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24898411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Sci. 2014 Apr 1;127(Pt 7):1523-36. doi: 10.1242/jcs.139865. Epub 2014 Feb 
19.

Tead2 expression levels control the subcellular distribution of Yap and Taz,
zyxin expression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Diepenbruck M(1), Waldmeier L, Ivanek R, Berninger P, Arnold P, van Nimwegen E,
Christofori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

The cellular changes during an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) largely
rely on global changes in gene expression orchestrated by transcription factors. 
Tead transcription factors and their transcriptional co-activators Yap and Taz
have been previously implicated in promoting an EMT; however, their direct
transcriptional target genes and their functional role during EMT have remained
elusive. We have uncovered a previously unanticipated role of the transcription
factor Tead2 during EMT. During EMT in mammary gland epithelial cells and breast 
cancer cells, levels of Tead2 increase in the nucleus of cells, thereby directing
a predominant nuclear localization of its co-factors Yap and Taz via the
formation of Tead2-Yap-Taz complexes. Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation
and next generation sequencing in combination with gene expression profiling
revealed the transcriptional targets of Tead2 during EMT. Among these, zyxin
contributes to the migratory and invasive phenotype evoked by Tead2. The results 
demonstrate that Tead transcription factors are crucial regulators of the
cellular distribution of Yap and Taz, and together they control the expression of
genes critical for EMT and metastasis.

PMID: 24554433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2014 Feb;20(2):112-8. doi: 10.1111/cns.12171. Epub 2013 Nov
27.

Prognostic value of a nine-gene signature in glioma patients based on mRNA
expression profiling.

Bao ZS(1), Li MY, Wang JY, Zhang CB, Wang HJ, Yan W, Liu YW, Zhang W, Chen L,
Jiang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

INTRODUCTION: Gliomas are the most common primary brain tumors in adults and a
significant cause of cancer-related mortality. A 9-gene signature was identified 
as a novel prognostic model reflecting survival situation obviously in gliomas.
AIMS: To identify an mRNA expression signature to improve outcome prediction for 
patients with different glioma grades.
RESULTS: We used whole-genome mRNA expression microarray data of 220 glioma
samples of all grades from the Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) database
(http://www.cgga.org.cn) as a discovery set and data from Rembrandt and GSE16011 
for validation sets. Data from every single grade were analyzed by the
Kaplan-Meier method with a two-sided log-rank test. Univariate Cox regression and
linear risk score formula were applied to derive a gene signature with better
prognostic performance. We found that patients who had high risk score according 
to the signature had poor overall survival compared with patients who had low
risk score. Highly expressed genes in the high-risk group were analyzed by gene
ontology (GO) and gene set variation analysis (GSVA). As a result, the reason for
the divisibility of gliomas was likely due to cell life processes and adhesion.
CONCLUSION: This 9-gene-signature prediction model provided a more accurate
predictor of prognosis that denoted patients with high risk score have poor
outcome. Moreover, these risk models based on defined molecular profiles showed
the considerable prospect in personalized cancer management.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24279471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 30;288(35):25400-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413377. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

The transcription factor protein Sox11 enhances early osteoblast differentiation 
by facilitating proliferation and the survival of mesenchymal and osteoblast
progenitors.

Gadi J(1), Jung SH, Lee MJ, Jami A, Ruthala K, Kim KM, Cho NH, Jung HS, Kim CH,
Lim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Endocrine Research Institute, Department of
Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Sox11 deletion mice are known to exhibit developmental defects of craniofacial
skeletal malformations, asplenia, and hypoplasia of the lung, stomach, and
pancreas. Despite the importance of Sox11 in the developing skeleton, the role of
Sox11 in osteogenesis has not been studied yet. In this study, we identified that
Sox11 is an important transcription factor for regulating the proliferation and
survival of osteoblast precursor cells as well as the self-renewal potency of
mesenchymal progenitor cells via up-regulation of Tead2. Furthermore, Sox11 also 
plays an important role in the segregation of functional osteoblast lineage
progenitors from osteochondrogenic progenitors. Facilitation of osteoblast
differentiation from mesenchymal cells was achieved by enhanced expression of the
osteoblast lineage specific transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix.
Morpholino-targeted disruption of Sox11 in zebrafish impaired organogenesis,
including the bones, which were under mineralized. These results indicated that
Sox11 plays a crucial role in the proliferation and survival of mesenchymal and
osteoblast precursors by Tead2, and osteogenic differentiation by regulating
Runx2 and Osterix.

PMCID: PMC3757203
PMID: 23888050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Dev. 2012 Jun 15;26(12):1300-5. doi: 10.1101/gad.192856.112. Epub 2012 Jun 
7.

Genetic and pharmacological disruption of the TEAD-YAP complex suppresses the
oncogenic activity of YAP.

Liu-Chittenden Y(1), Huang B, Shim JS, Chen Q, Lee SJ, Anders RA, Liu JO, Pan D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Jun 15;26(12):1263-7.

The Drosophila TEAD ortholog Scalloped is required for Yki-mediated overgrowth
but is largely dispensable for normal tissue growth, suggesting that its
mammalian counterpart may be exploited for selective inhibition of oncogenic
growth driven by YAP hyperactivation. Here we test this hypothesis genetically
and pharmacologically. We show that a dominant-negative TEAD molecule does not
perturb normal liver growth but potently suppresses hepatomegaly/tumorigenesis
resulting from YAP overexpression or Neurofibromin 2 (NF2)/Merlin inactivation.
We further identify verteporfin as a small molecule that inhibits TEAD-YAP
association and YAP-induced liver overgrowth. These findings provide proof of
principle that inhibiting TEAD-YAP interactions is a pharmacologically viable
strategy against the YAP oncoprotein.

PMCID: PMC3387657
PMID: 22677547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):741-52. doi: 10.1002/stem.1030.

Genome-wide analysis of N1ICD/RBPJ targets in vivo reveals direct transcriptional
regulation of Wnt, SHH, and hippo pathway effectors by Notch1.

Li Y(1), Hibbs MA, Gard AL, Shylo NA, Yun K.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

The Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in regulating cell fate decisions in many 
stem cell systems. However, the full repertoire of Notch target genes in vivo and
the mechanisms through which this pathway activity is integrated with other
signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we report a transgenic mouse in
which the activation of the Notch pathway massively expands the neural stem cell 
(NSC) pool in a cell context-dependent manner. Using this in vivo system, we
identify direct targets of RBPJ/N1ICD in cortical NSCs at a genome-wide level
through combined ChIP-Seq and transcriptome analyses. Through a highly
conservative analysis of these datasets, we identified 98 genes that are directly
regulated by N1ICD/RPBJ in vivo. These include many transcription factors that
are known to be critical for NSC self-renewal (Sox2, Pax6, Tlx, and Id4) and the 
transcriptional effectors of the Wnt, SHH, and Hippo pathways, TCF4, Gli2, Gli3, 
Yap1, and Tead2. Since little is known about the function of the Hippo-Yap
pathway in NSCs, we analyzed Yap1 expression and function in NSCs. We show that
Yap1 expression is restricted to the stem cell compartment in the developing
forebrain and that its expression is sufficient to rescue Notch pathway
inhibition in NSC self-renewal assays. Together, results of this study reveal a
previously underappreciated complexity and breadth of Notch1 targets in vivo and 
show direct interaction between Notch and Hippo-Yap pathways in NSCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3734558
PMID: 22232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genes Dev. 2011 Dec 15;25(24):2594-609. doi: 10.1101/gad.176800.111.

The transcriptional coactivator TAZ regulates mesenchymal differentiation in
malignant glioma.

Bhat KP(1), Salazar KL, Balasubramaniyan V, Wani K, Heathcock L, Hollingsworth F,
James JD, Gumin J, Diefes KL, Kim SH, Turski A, Azodi Y, Yang Y, Doucette T,
Colman H, Sulman EP, Lang FF, Rao G, Copray S, Vaillant BD, Aldape KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. kbhat@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Feb;12(2):82-3.

Recent molecular classification of glioblastoma (GBM) has shown that patients
with a mesenchymal (MES) gene expression signature exhibit poor overall survival 
and treatment resistance. Using regulatory network analysis of available
expression microarray data sets of GBM, including The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA),
we identified the transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), to be
highly associated with the MES network. TAZ expression was lower in proneural
(PN) GBMs and lower-grade gliomas, which correlated with CpG island
hypermethylation of the TAZ promoter compared with MES GBMs. Silencing of TAZ in 
MES glioma stem cells (GSCs) decreased expression of MES markers, invasion,
self-renewal, and tumor formation. Conversely, overexpression of TAZ in PN GSCs
as well as murine neural stem cells (NSCs) induced MES marker expression and
aberrant osteoblastic and chondrocytic differentiation in a TEAD-dependent
fashion. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we show that TAZ is directly
recruited to a majority of MES gene promoters in a complex with TEAD2. The
coexpression of TAZ, but not a mutated form of TAZ that lacks TEAD binding, with 
platelet-derived growth factor-B (PDGF-B) resulted in high-grade tumors with MES 
features in a murine model of glioma. Our studies uncover a direct role for TAZ
and TEAD in driving the MES differentiation of malignant glioma.

© 2011 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

PMCID: PMC3248681
PMID: 22190458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):176-86. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3506. Epub
2011 Nov 14.

Novel transcriptional targets of the SRY-HMG box transcription factor SOX4 link
its expression to the development of small cell lung cancer.

Castillo SD(1), Matheu A, Mariani N, Carretero J, Lopez-Rios F, Lovell-Badge R,
Sanchez-Cespedes M.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Cancer Group, Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, PEBC,
Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

The HMG box transcription factor SOX4 involved in neuronal development is
amplified and overexpressed in a subset of lung cancers, suggesting that it may
be a driver oncogene. In this study, we sought to develop this hypothesis
including by defining targets of SOX4 that may mediate its involvement in lung
cancer. Ablating SOX4 expression in SOX4-amplified lung cancer cells revealed a
gene expression signature that included genes involved in neuronal development
such as PCDHB, MYB, RBP1, and TEAD2. Direct recruitment of SOX4 to gene promoters
was associated with their upregulation upon ectopic overexpression of SOX4. We
confirmed upregulation of the SOX4 expression signature in a panel of primary
lung tumors, validating their specific response by a comparison using embryonic
fibroblasts from Sox4-deficient mice. Interestingly, we found that small cell
lung cancer (SCLC), a subtype of lung cancer with neuroendocrine characteristics,
was generally characterized by high levels of SOX2, SOX4, and SOX11 along with
the SOX4-specific gene expression signature identified. Taken together, our
findings identify a functional role for SOX genes in SCLC, particularly for SOX4 
and several novel targets defined in this study.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 22084397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Sci. 2011 Apr 1;124(Pt 7):1136-44. doi: 10.1242/jcs.075796. Epub 2011 Mar 
8.

Regulation of mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal by a Yes-YAP-TEAD2 signaling
pathway downstream of LIF.

Tamm C(1), Böwer N, Annerén C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 75123
Uppsala, Sweden.

The cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase Yes has previously been shown to have an
important role in maintaining mouse and human embryonic stem (ES) self-renewal
through an unknown pathway downstream of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and one
or more factors in serum. Here, we show that TEAD2 and its transcriptional
co-activator, the Yes-associated protein YAP, co-operate in a signaling pathway
downstream of Yes. We show that YAP, TEAD2 and Yes are highly expressed in
self-renewing ES cells, are activated by LIF and serum, and are downregulated
when cells are induced to differentiate. We also demonstrate that kinase-active
Yes binds and phosphorylates YAP, and activates YAP-TEAD2-dependent
transcription. We found that TEAD2 associates directly with the Oct-3/4 promoter.
Moreover, activation of the Yes pathway induced activity of the Oct-3/4 and Nanog
promoters, whereas suppression of this pathway inhibited promoter activity.
Nanog, in turn, suppressed TEAD2-dependent promoter activity, whereas
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Nanog induced it, suggesting a negative regulatory
feedback loop. Episomal supertransfection of cells with inhibitory TEAD2-EnR
induced endodermal differentiation, which suggests that this pathway is necessary
for ES cell maintenance.

PMID: 21385842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Protein Cell. 2010 Sep;1(9):811-9. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0105-z. Epub 2010 Oct 
7.

Snapshots of a hybrid transcription factor in the Hippo pathway.

Luo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. xuelian.luo@utsouthwestern.edu

The Hippo pathway plays key roles in animal development. It suppresses
tumorigenesis by controlling the transcription of the target genes that are
critical for cell proliferation and apoptosis. The transcriptional coactivator
YAP is the major downstream effector of the Hippo signaling. Upon extracellular
stimulation, a kinase cascade in the Hippo pathway phosphorylates YAP and
promotes its cytoplasmic sequestration by 14-3-3 and ubiquitin-dependent
degradation. When the Hippo pathway is turned off, YAP (which lacks a DNA-binding
domain) is dephosphorylated and translocates to the nucleus, where it associates 
with the transcription factor TEAD to form a functional heterodimeric
transcription factor and to promote the expression of the Hippo-responsive genes.
Recently, structures of the YAP-binding domain of TEAD alone or in complex with
YAP have revealed the atomic details of the TEAD-YAP interaction. Here, I review 
these exciting advances, propose a strategy for targeting the TEAD-YAP
interaction using small molecules, and suggest potential mechanisms by which
phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding regulate the cytoplasmic retention of YAP.

PMID: 21203923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Aug;45(2):393-402. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0342OC.
Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Novel regulators of the systemic response to lipopolysaccharide.

Yang IV(1), Alper S, Lackford B, Rutledge H, Warg LA, Burch LH, Schwartz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genes, Environment and Health, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO
80206, USA. yangi@njhealth.org

Our understanding of the role that host genetic factors play in the initiation
and severity of infections caused by gram-negative bacteria is incomplete. To
identify novel regulators of the host response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 11
inbred murine strains were challenged with LPS systemically. In addition to two
strains lacking functional TLR4 (C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6J(TLR4-/-)), three murine
strains with functional TLR4 (C57BL/6J, 129/SvImJ, and NZW/LacJ) were found to be
relatively resistant to systemic LPS challenge; the other six strains were
classified as sensitive. RNA from lung, liver, and spleen tissue was profiled on 
oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if unique transcripts differentiate
susceptible and resistant strains. Gene expression analysis identified the
Hedgehog signaling pathway and a number of transcription factors (TFs) involved
in the response to LPS. RNA interference-mediated inhibition of six TFs (C/EBP,
Cdx-2, E2F1, Hoxa4, Nhlh1, and Tead2) was found to diminish IL-6 and TNF-a
production by murine macrophages. Mouse lines with targeted mutations were used
to verify the involvement of two novel genes in innate immunity. Compared with
wild-type control mice, mice deficient in the E2F1 transcription factor were
found to have a reduced inflammatory response to systemic LPS, and mice
heterozygote for Ptch, a gene involved in Hedgehog signaling, were found to be
more responsive to systemic LPS. Our analysis of gene expression data identified 
novel pathways and transcription factors that regulate the host response to
systemic LPS. Our results provide potential sepsis biomarkers and therapeutic
targets that should be further investigated in human populations.

PMCID: PMC3175565
PMID: 21131441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 22;5(11):e14085. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014085.

Gene expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation identify DBN1, SETMAR
and HIG2 as direct targets of SOX11 in mantle cell lymphoma.

Wang X(1), Björklund S, Wasik AM, Grandien A, Andersson P, Kimby E,
Dahlman-Wright K, Zhao C, Christensson B, Sander B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

The SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 11 (SOX11) gene, located on chromosome
2p25, encodes for a transcription factor that is involved in tissue remodeling
during embryogenesis and is crucial for neurogenesis. The role for SOX11 in
hematopoiesis has not yet been defined. Two genes under direct control of SOX11
are the class- III ß-tubulin gene (TUBB3) in neural cells and the transcription
factor TEA domain family member 2 (TEAD2) in neural and mesenchymal progenitor
cells. Normal, mature lymphocytes lack SOX11 but express SOX4, another member of 
the same group of SOX transcription factors. We and others recently identified
SOX11 as aberrantly expressed in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). Since SOX11 is
variably expressed in MCL it may not be essential for tumorigenesis, but may
carry prognostic information. Currently, no specific functional effects have been
linked to SOX11 expression in MCL and it is not known which genes are under
influence of SOX11 in lymphoma. In this study we found variable expression of
SOX11, SOX4 and SOX12 mRNA in mantle cell lymphoma cell lines. Downregulation of 
SOX11 expression by siRNA verified that SOX11 controlled the expression of the
gene TUBB3 in the MCL cell line Granta 519. Furthermore we identified, by global 
gene expression analysis, 26 new target genes influenced by siRNA SOX11
downmodulation. Among these genes, DBN1, SETMAR and HIG2 were found to be
significantly correlated to SOX11 expression in two cohorts of primary mantle
cell lymphomas. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that these
genes are direct targets of the SOX11 protein. In spite of almost complete
downregulation of the SOX11 protein no significant effects on Granta 519 cell
proliferation or survival in short term in vitro experiments was found. In
summary we have identified a number of genes influenced by SOX11 expression in
MCL cell lines and primary MCL. Among these genes, DBN1, SETMAR and HIG2 are
direct transcriptional targets of the SOX11 protein.

PMCID: PMC2989913
PMID: 21124928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hepatology. 2010 Dec;52(6):2127-36. doi: 10.1002/hep.23930. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Transcription factors ETF, E2F, and SP-1 are involved in cytokine-independent
proliferation of murine hepatocytes.

Zellmer S(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Godoy P, Weng H, Meyer C, Lehmann T, Sparna T,
Schormann W, Hammad S, Kreutz C, Timmer J, von Weizsäcker F, Thürmann PA, Merfort
I, Guthke R, Dooley S, Hengstler JG, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany. sebastian.zellmer@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

The cellular basis of liver regeneration has been intensely investigated for many
years. However, the mechanisms initiating hepatocyte "plasticity" and priming for
proliferation are not yet fully clear. We investigated alterations in gene
expression patterns during the first 72 hours of C57BL/6N mouse hepatocyte
culture on collagen monolayers (CM), which display a high basal frequency of
proliferation in the absence of cytokines. Although many metabolic genes were
down-regulated, genes related to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling and cell cycle were up-regulated. The latter genes showed an
overrepresentation of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) for ETF (TEA
domain family member 2), E2F1 (E2F transcription factor 1), and SP-1 (Sp1
transcription factor) (P < 0.001), all depending on MAPK signaling.
Time-dependent increase of ERK1/2 phosphorylation occurred during the first 48
hours (and beyond) in the absence of cytokines, accompanied by an enhanced
bromodeoxyuridine labeling index of 20%. The MEK inhibitor PD98059 blunted these 
effects indicating MAPK signaling as major trigger for this cytokine-independent 
proliferative response. In line with these in vitro findings, liver tissue of
mice challenged with CCl(4) displayed hepatocytes with intense p-ERK1/2 staining 
and nuclear SP-1 and E2F1 expression. Furthermore, differentially expressed genes
in mice after partial hepatectomy contained overrepresented TFBS for ETF, E2F1,
and SP-1 and displayed increased expression of E2F1.CONCLUSION: Cultivation of
murine hepatocytes on CM primes cells for proliferation through
cytokine-independent activation of MAPK signaling. The transcription factors ETF,
E2F1, and SP-1 seem to play a pronounced role in mediating
proliferation-dependent differential gene expression. Similar events, but on a
shorter time-scale, occur very early after liver damage in vivo.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 20979052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Commun. 2010 Apr 12;1:9. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1008.

Organogenesis relies on SoxC transcription factors for the survival of neural and
mesenchymal progenitors.

Bhattaram P(1), Penzo-Méndez A, Sock E, Colmenares C, Kaneko KJ, Vassilev A,
Depamphilis ML, Wegner M, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, and Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic Research Center,
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

During organogenesis, neural and mesenchymal progenitor cells give rise to many
cell lineages, but their molecular requirements for self-renewal and lineage
decisions are incompletely understood. In this study, we show that their survival
critically relies on the redundantly acting SoxC transcription factors Sox4,
Sox11 and Sox12. The more SoxC alleles that are deleted in mouse embryos, the
more severe and widespread organ hypoplasia is. SoxC triple-null embryos die at
midgestation unturned and tiny, with normal patterning and lineage specification,
but with massively dying neural and mesenchymal progenitor cells. Specific
inactivation of SoxC genes in neural and mesenchymal cells leads to selective
apoptosis of these cells, suggesting SoxC cell-autonomous roles. Tead2
functionally interacts with SoxC genes in embryonic development, and is a direct 
target of SoxC proteins. SoxC genes therefore ensure neural and mesenchymal
progenitor cell survival, and function in part by activating this transcriptional
mediator of the Hippo signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2892298
PMID: 20596238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 20;107(16):7293-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000293107. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Structural and functional analysis of the YAP-binding domain of human TEAD2.

Tian W(1), Yu J, Tomchick DR, Pan D, Luo X.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentsof Pharmacology and Biochemistry, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hippo pathway controls organ size and suppresses tumorigenesis in metazoans
by blocking cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. The TEAD1-4 proteins
(which contain a DNA-binding domain but lack an activation domain) interact with 
YAP (which lacks a DNA-binding domain but contains an activation domain) to form 
functional heterodimeric transcription factors that activate proliferative and
prosurvival gene expression programs. The Hippo pathway inhibits the YAP-TEAD
hybrid transcription factors by phosphorylating and promoting cytoplasmic
retention of YAP. Here we report the crystal structure of the YAP-binding domain 
(YBD) of human TEAD2. TEAD2 YBD adopts an immunoglobulin-like beta-sandwich fold 
with two extra helix-turn-helix inserts. NMR studies reveal that the TEAD-binding
domain of YAP is natively unfolded and that TEAD binding causes localized
conformational changes in YAP. In vitro binding and in vivo functional assays
define an extensive conserved surface of TEAD2 YBD as the YAP-binding site.
Therefore, our studies suggest that a short segment of YAP adopts an extended
conformation and forms extensive contacts with a rigid surface of TEAD. Targeting
a surface-exposed pocket of TEAD might be an effective strategy to disrupt the
YAP-TEAD interaction and to reduce the oncogenic potential of YAP.

PMCID: PMC2867681
PMID: 20368466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2009 May 29;4(5):e5722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005722.

Molecular signatures of prostate stem cells reveal novel signaling pathways and
provide insights into prostate cancer.

Blum R(1), Gupta R, Burger PE, Ontiveros CS, Salm SN, Xiong X, Kamb A, Wesche H, 
Marshall L, Cutler G, Wang X, Zavadil J, Moscatelli D, Wilson EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The global gene expression profiles of adult and fetal murine
prostate stem cells were determined to define common and unique regulators whose 
misexpression might play a role in the development of prostate cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A distinctive core of transcriptional regulators 
common to both fetal and adult primitive prostate cells was identified as well as
molecules that are exclusive to each population. Elements common to fetal and
adult prostate stem cells include expression profiles of Wnt, Shh and other
pathways identified in stem cells of other organs, signatures of the
aryl-hydrocarbon receptor, and up-regulation of components of the aldehyde
dehydrogenase/retinoic acid receptor axis. There is also a significant lipid
metabolism signature, marked by overexpression of lipid metabolizing enzymes and 
the presence of the binding motif for Srebp1. The fetal stem cell population,
characterized by more rapid proliferation and self-renewal, expresses regulators 
of the cell cycle, such as E2f, Nfy, Tead2 and Ap2, at elevated levels, while
adult stem cells show a signature in which TGF-beta has a prominent role.
Finally, comparison of the signatures of primitive prostate cells with previously
described profiles of human prostate tumors identified stem cell molecules and
pathways with deregulated expression in prostate tumors including chromatin
modifiers and the oncogene, Erg.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data indicate that adult prostate stem or
progenitor cells may acquire characteristics of self-renewing primitive fetal
prostate cells during oncogenesis and suggest that aberrant activation of
components of prostate stem cell pathways may contribute to the development of
prostate tumors.

PMCID: PMC2684642
PMID: 19478945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4059-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.027151. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as
transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling.

Ota M(1), Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Regulation of organ size is important for development and tissue homeostasis. In 
Drosophila, Hippo signaling controls organ size by regulating the activity of a
TEAD transcription factor, Scalloped, through modulation of its co-activator
protein Yki. Here, we show that mouse Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation
by mediating Hippo signaling. In NIH3T3 cells, cell density and Hippo signaling
regulated the activity of endogenous Tead proteins by modulating nuclear
localization of a Yki homolog, Yap1, and the resulting change in Tead activity
altered cell proliferation. Tead2-VP16 mimicked Yap1 overexpression, including
increased cell proliferation, reduced cell death, promotion of EMT, lack of cell 
contact inhibition and promotion of tumor formation. Growth-promoting activities 
of various Yap1 mutants correlated with their Tead-co-activator activities.
Tead2-VP16 and Yap1 regulated largely overlapping sets of genes. However, only a 
few of the Tead/Yap1-regulated genes in NIH3T3 cells were affected in
Tead1(-/-);Tead2(-/-) or Yap1(-/-) embryos. Most of the previously identified
Yap1-regulated genes were not affected in NIH3T3 cells or mutant mice. In
embryos, levels of nuclear Yap1 and Tead1 varied depending on cell type. Strong
nuclear accumulation of Yap1 and Tead1 were seen in myocardium, correlating with 
requirements of Tead1 for proliferation. However, their distribution did not
always correlate with proliferation. Taken together, mammalian Tead proteins
regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as a transcriptional mediator 
of Hippo signaling, but the mechanisms by which Tead/Yap1 regulate cell
proliferation differ depending on the cell type, and Tead, Yap1 and Hippo
signaling may play multiple roles in mouse embryos.

PMID: 19004856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3177-89. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01759-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of
cell proliferation and survival.

Sawada A(1), Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Four members of the TEAD/TEF family of transcription factors are expressed widely
in mouse embryos and adult tissues. Although in vitro studies have suggested
various roles for TEAD proteins, their in vivo functions remain poorly
understood. Here we examined the role of Tead genes by generating mouse mutants
for Tead1 and Tead2. Tead2(-/-) mice appeared normal, but Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) 
embryos died at embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) with severe growth defects and
morphological abnormalities. At E8.5, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) embryos were already
small and lacked characteristic structures such as a closed neural tube, a
notochord, and somites. Despite these overt abnormalities, differentiation and
patterning of the neural plate and endoderm were relatively normal. In contrast, 
the paraxial mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm were displaced laterally, and a 
differentiated notochord was not maintained. These abnormalities and defects in
yolk sac vasculature organization resemble those of mutants for Yap, which
encodes a coactivator of TEAD proteins. Moreover, we demonstrated genetic
interactions between Tead1 and Tead2 and Yap. Finally, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-)
embryos showed reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. These results 
suggest that Tead1 and Tead2 are functionally redundant, use YAP as a major
coactivator, and support notochord maintenance as well as cell proliferation and 
survival in mouse development.

PMCID: PMC2423158
PMID: 18332127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):270-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Tead4 is required for specification of trophectoderm in pre-implantation mouse
embryos.

Nishioka N(1), Yamamoto S, Kiyonari H, Sato H, Sawada A, Ota M, Nakao K, Sasaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

During pre-implantation mouse development, embryos form blastocysts with
establishment of the first two cell lineages: the trophectoderm (TE) which gives 
rise to the placenta, and the inner cell mass (ICM) which will form the embryo
proper. Differentiation of TE is regulated by the transcription factor
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2), but the mechanisms which act upstream of Cdx2
expression remain unknown. Here we show that the TEA domain family transcription 
factor, Tead4, is required for TE development. Tead1, Tead2 and Tead4 were
expressed in pre-implantation embryos, and at least Tead1 and Tead4 were
expressed widely in both TE and ICM lineages. Tead4-/- embryos died at
pre-implantation stages without forming the blastocoel. The mutant embryos
continued cell proliferation, and adherens junction and cell polarity were not
significantly affected. In Tead4-/- embryos, Cdx2 was weakly expressed at the
morula stage but was not expressed in later stages. None of the TE specific
genes, including Eomes and a Cdx2 independent gene, Fgfr2, was detected in
Tead4-/- embryos. Instead, the ICM specific transcription factors, Oct3/4 and
Nanog, were expressed in all the blastomeres. Tead4-/- embryos also failed to
differentiate trophoblast giant cells when they were cultured in vitro. ES cells 
with normal in vitro differentiation abilities were established from Tead4-/-
embryos. These results suggest that Tead4 has a distinct role from Tead1 and
Tead2 in trophectoderm specification of pre-implantation embryos, and that Tead4 
is an early transcription factor required for specification and development of
the trophectoderm lineage, which includes expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18083014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genesis. 2007 Sep;45(9):577-87.

Transcription factor TEAD2 is involved in neural tube closure.

Kaneko KJ(1), Kohn MJ, Liu C, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

TEAD2, one of the first transcription factors expressed at the beginning of
mammalian development, appears to be required during neural development. For
example, Tead2 expression is greatest in the dorsal neural crest where it appears
to regulate expression of Pax3, a gene essential for brain development.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that inactivation of the Tead2 gene in 
mice significantly increased the risk of exencephaly (a defect in neural tube
closure). However, none of the embryos exhibited spina bifida, the major
phenotype of Pax3 nullizygous embryos, and expression of Pax3 in E11.5 Tead2
nullizygous embryos was normal. Thus, Tead2 plays a role in neural tube closure
that is independent of its putative role in Pax3 regulation. In addition, the
risk of exencephaly was greatest with Tead2 nullizygous females, and could be
suppressed either by folic acid or pifithrin-alpha. These results reveal a
maternal genetic contribution to neural tube closure, and suggest that
Tead2-deficient mice provide a model for anencephaly, a common human birth defect
that can be prevented by folic acid.

PMCID: PMC2765819
PMID: 17868131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):583-600.

Transcriptional changes during neuronal death and replacement in the olfactory
epithelium.

Shetty RS(1), Bose SC, Nickell MD, McIntyre JC, Hardin DH, Harris AM, McClintock 
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience of Sensory
Systems Training Program, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0298, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Sep;30(1):90-107.

The olfactory epithelium has the unusual ability to replace its neurons.We forced
replacement of mouse olfactory sensory neurons by bulbectomy. Microarray,
bioinformatics, and in situ hybridization techniques detected a rapid shift in
favor of pro-apoptotic proteins, a progressive immune response by macrophages and
dendritic cells, and identified or predicted 439 mRNAs enriched in olfactory
sensory neurons, including gene silencing factors and sperm flagellar proteins.
Transcripts encoding cell cycle regulators, axonogenesis proteins, and
transcription factors and signaling proteins that promote proliferation and
differentiation were increased at 5-7 days after bulbectomy and were expressed by
basal progenitor cells or immature neurons. The transcription factors included
Nhlhl, Hes6, Lmycl, c-Myc, Mxd4, Idl,Nmycl, Cited2, c-Myb, Mybll, Tead2, Dpl,
Gata2, Lmol, and Soxll. The data reveal significant similarities with embryonic
neurogenesis and make several mechanistic predictions, including the roles of the
transcription factors in the olfactory sensory neuron lineage.

PMID: 16456926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):429-38. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Fgfr4 is required for effective muscle regeneration in vivo. Delineation of a
MyoD-Tead2-Fgfr4 transcriptional pathway.

Zhao P(1), Caretti G, Mitchell S, McKeehan WL, Boskey AL, Pachman LM, Sartorelli 
V, Hoffman EP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Fgfr4 has been shown to be important for appropriate muscle development in chick 
limb buds; however, Fgfr4 null mice show no phenotype. Here, we show that staged 
induction of muscle regeneration in Fgfr4 null mice becomes highly abnormal at
the time point when Fgfr4 is normally expressed. By 7 days of regeneration,
differentiation of myotubes became poorly coordinated and delayed by both
histology and embryonic myosin heavy chain staining. By 14 days much of the
muscle was replaced by fat and calcifications. To begin to dissect the molecular 
pathways involving Fgfr4, we queried the promoter sequences for transcriptional
factor binding sites and tested candidate regulators in a 27-time point
regeneration series. The Fgfr4 promoter region contained a Tead protein binding
site (M-CAT 5'-CATTCCT-3'), and Tead2 showed induction during regeneration
commensurate with Fgfr4 regulation. Co-transfection of Tead2 and Fgfr4 promoter
reporter constructs into C2C12 myotubes showed Tead2 to activate Fgfr4, and
mutation of the M-CAT motif in the Fgfr4 promoter abolished these effects.
Immunostaining for Tead2 showed timed expression in myotube nuclei consistent
with the mRNA data. Query of the expression timing and genomic sequences of Tead2
suggested direct regulation by MyoD, and consistent with this, MyoD directly
bound to two strong E-boxes in the first intron of Tead2 by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover, co-transfection of MyoD and Tead2 intron
reporter constructs into 10T1/2 cells activated reporter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. This activation was greatly reduced when the two E-boxes
were mutated. Our data suggest a novel MyoD-Tead2-Fgfr4 pathway important for
effective muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC1892582
PMID: 16267055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1968-82.

DNA methylation may restrict but does not determine differential gene expression 
at the Sgy/Tead2 locus during mouse development.

Kaneko KJ(1), Rein T, Guo ZS, Latham K, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2753, USA.

Soggy (Sgy) and Tead2, two closely linked genes with CpG islands, were
coordinately expressed in mouse preimplantation embryos and embryonic stem (ES)
cells but were differentially expressed in differentiated cells. Analysis of
established cell lines revealed that Sgy gene expression could be fully repressed
by methylation of the Sgy promoter and that DNA methylation acted synergistically
with chromatin deacetylation. Differential gene expression correlated with
differential DNA methylation, resulting in sharp transitions from methylated to
unmethylated DNA at the open promoter in both normal cells and tissues, as well
as in established cell lines. However, neither promoter was methylated in normal 
cells and tissues even when its transcripts were undetectable. Moreover, the Sgy 
promoter remained unmethylated as Sgy expression was repressed during ES cell
differentiation. Therefore, DNA methylation was not the primary determinant of
Sgy/Tead2 expression. Nevertheless, Sgy expression was consistently restricted to
basal levels whenever downstream regulatory sequences were methylated, suggesting
that DNA methylation restricts but does not regulate differential gene expression
during mouse development.

PMCID: PMC350557
PMID: 14966277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1701-9. Epub 2004 Feb 11.

Transcription factor expression patterns in bovine in vitro-derived embryos prior
to maternal-zygotic transition.

Vigneault C(1), McGraw S, Massicotte L, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Département des Sciences
Animales, Université Laval,Québec, Canada G1K 7P4.

Maternal-zygotic transition (MZT) is a complex phenomenon characterized by the
initiation of transcription in the embryo and the replacement of maternal mRNA
with embryonic mRNA. In order for this to occur, transcriptional activation
requires various factors and conditions. Our hypothesis is that the lack of
transcription in the bovine pre-MZT embryo is due, in part, to an incomplete or
dormant transcriptional apparatus. Therefore, in accordance with this hypothesis,
functioning transcriptional mechanisms should appear in the eight-cell bovine
embryo to facilitate embryonic transcription during the MZT. With this in mind,
we examined the presence of selected transcription factors during preimplantation
embryo development to establish how their transcript levels change in bovine
pre-MZT embryos. To achieve this goal, real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction was used to quantify the mRNA level of several different
transcription factors (YY1, HMGA1, RY-1, P300, CREB, YAP65, HMGN1, HMGB1, NFAR,
OCT-4, TEAD2, ATF-1, HMGN2, MSY2, and TBP) in germinal vesicle (GV) and metaphase
II (MII) bovine oocytes and in two-, four-, eight-cell, and blastocyst stage
embryos produced in vitro. Our results demonstrate that all genes examined can be
grouped into five different categories according to their mRNA expression
patterns at the developmental stages observed. To summarize, all transcription
factors studied were present in pre-MZT embryos and the expression pattern of
many of them suggest a potential role in MZT.

PMID: 14960490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):829-37. Epub 2004 Jan 21.

Identification of minimal enhancer elements sufficient for Pax3 expression in
neural crest and implication of Tead2 as a regulator of Pax3.

Milewski RC(1), Chi NC, Li J, Brown C, Lu MM, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1195.

Pax3 is a transcription factor that is required by pre-migratory neural crest
cells, which give rise to the peripheral nervous system, melanocytes, some
vascular smooth muscle, and numerous other derivatives [corrected]. Both mice and
humans with Pax3 deficiency exhibit neural crest-related developmental defects
[corrected]. Pax3 is also expressed in the dorsal neural tube, and by myogenic
progenitors in the presomitic mesoderm and the hypaxial somites. Molecular
pathways that regulate Pax3 expression in the roof plate probably represent early
upstream signals in neural crest induction. We have identified an enhancer region
in the Pax3 genomic locus that is sufficient to recapitulate expression in neural
crest precursors in transgenic mice. We show that Tead2, a member of the Tead box
family of transcription factors, binds to a neural crest enhancer and activates
Pax3 expression. Tead2, and its co-activator YAP65, are co-expressed with Pax3 in
the dorsal neural tube, and mutation of the Tead2 binding site in the context of 
Pax3 transgenic constructs abolishes neural expression. In addition, a
Tead2-Engrailed fusion protein is able to repress retinoic acid-induced Pax3
expression in P19 cells and in vivo. These results suggest that Tead2 is an
endogenous activator of Pax3 in neural crest.

PMID: 14736747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19716-22. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Identification of Ets-1 as an important transcriptional activator of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha in COS-7 cells and co-activation
with transcriptional enhancer factor-4.

Sugimoto H(1), Sugimoto S, Tatei K, Obinata H, Bakovic M, Izumi T, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

Phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway is primarily
regulated by CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT). Transcriptional
enhancer factor-4 (TEF-4) enhances the transcription of CTalpha in COS-7 cells by
interactions with the basal transcription machinery (Sugimoto, H., Bakovic, M.,
Yamashita, S., and Vance, D.E. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276,12338-12344). To
identify the most important transcription factor involved in basal CTalpha
transcription, we made CTalpha promoter-deletion and -mutated constructs linked
to a luciferase reporter and transfected them into COS-7 cells. The results
indicate that an important site regulating basal CTalpha transcription is -53/-47
(GACTTCC), which is a putative consensus-binding site of Ets transcription
factors (GGAA) in the opposite orientation. Gel shift analyses indicated the
existence of a binding protein for -53/-47 (GACTTCC) in nuclear extracts of COS-7
cells. When anti-Ets-1 antibody was incubated with the probe in gel shift
analyses, the intensity of the binding protein was decreased. The binding of
endogenous Ets-1 to the promoter probe was increased when TEF-4 was expressed;
however, the amount of Ets-1 detected by immunoblotting was unchanged. When cells
were transfected with Ets-1 cDNA, the luciferase activity of CTalpha promoter
constructs was greatly enhanced. Co-transfection experiments with Ets-1 and TEF-4
showed enhanced expression of reporter constructs as well as CTalpha mRNA. These 
results suggest that Ets-1 is an important transcriptional activator of the
CTalpha gene and that Ets-1 activity is enhanced by TEF-4.

PMID: 12642588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Dec 21;289(5):1010-8.

Identification and characterization of cell-specific enhancer elements for the
mouse ETF/Tead2 gene.

Tanoue Y(1), Yasunami M, Suzuki K, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kuhonji
4-24-1, Kumamoto, 862-0976, Japan.

We have identified and characterized by transient transfection assays the
cell-specific 117-bp enhancer sequence in the first intron of the mouse ETF
(Embryonic TEA domain-containing factor)/Tead2 gene required for transcriptional 
activation in ETF/Tead2 gene-expressing cells, such as P19 cells. The 117-bp
enhancer contains one GC-rich sequence (5'-GGGGCGGGG-3'), termed the GC box, and 
two tandemly repeated GA-rich sequences (5'-GGGGGAGGGG-3'), termed the proximal
and distal GA elements. Further analyses, including transfection studies and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using a series of deletion and mutation
constructs, indicated that Sp1, a putative activator, may be required to
predominate over its competition with another unknown putative repressor, termed 
the GA element-binding factor, for binding to both the GC box, which overlapped
with the proximal GA element, and the distal GA element in the 117-bp sequence in
order to achieve a full enhancer activity. We also discuss a possible mechanism
underlying the cell-specific enhancer activity of the 117-bp sequence.

PMID: 11741291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 2001 May 15;15(10):1229-41.

TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a
Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm.

Vassilev A(1), Kaneko KJ, Shu H, Zhao Y, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2753, USA.

Mammals express four highly conserved TEAD/TEF transcription factors that bind
the same DNA sequence, but serve different functions during development.
TEAD-2/TEF-4 protein purified from mouse cells was associated predominantly with 
a novel TEAD-binding domain at the amino terminus of YAP65, a powerful
transcriptional coactivator. YAP65 interacted specifically with the carboxyl
terminus of all four TEAD proteins. Both this interaction and sequence-specific
DNA binding by TEAD were required for transcriptional activation in mouse cells. 
Expression of YAP in lymphocytic cells that normally do not support
TEAD-dependent transcription (e.g., MPC11) resulted in up to 300-fold induction
of TEAD activity. Conversely, TEAD overexpression squelched YAP activity.
Therefore, the carboxy-terminal acidic activation domain in YAP is the
transcriptional activation domain for TEAD transcription factors. However,
whereas TEAD was concentrated in the nucleus, excess YAP65 accumulated in the
cytoplasm as a complex with the cytoplasmic localization protein, 14-3-3. Because
TEAD-dependent transcription was limited by YAP65, and YAP65 also binds Src/Yes
protein tyrosine kinases, we propose that YAP65 regulates TEAD-dependent
transcription in response to mitogenic signals.

PMCID: PMC313800
PMID: 11358867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):12338-44. Epub 2001 Jan 12.

Identification of transcriptional enhancer factor-4 as a transcriptional
modulator of CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha.

Sugimoto H(1), Bakovic M, Yamashita S, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) is the rate-limiting and regulated 
enzyme of mammalian phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. There are three isoforms,
CCTalpha, CCTbeta1, and CCTbeta2. The mouse CCTalpha gene promoter is regulated
by an enhancer element (Eb) located between -103 and -82 base pairs
(5'-GTTTTCAGGAATGCGGAGGTGG-3') upstream from the transcriptional start site
(Bakovic, M., Waite, K., Tang, W., Tabas, I., and Vance, D. E. (1999) Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1436, 147-165). To identify the Eb-binding protein(s), we screened 
a mouse embryo cDNA library by the yeast one-hybrid system and obtained 19
positive clones. Ten cDNA clones were identified as transcriptional enhancer
factor-4 (TEF-4). The TEF-binding consensus sequence,
5'-(A/T)(A/G)(A/G)(A/T)ATG(C/T)(G/A)-3', was identified within the Eb binding
region. Gel-shift analysis using radiolabeled Eb fragment as a probe showed that 
cell extracts from yeast expressing hemagglutinin-tagged TEF-4 caused a marked
band retardation that could be prevented with an anti-hemagglutinin antibody.
When COS-7 cells were transfected with TEF-4, CCTalpha promoter-luciferase
reporter activity and CCTalpha mRNA levels increased. A TEF-4 deletion mutant
containing a DNA-binding domain, mTEA(+), stimulated the CCTalpha promoter
activity, whereas protein lacking the DNA binding domain, mTEA(-), did not.
Unexpectedly, when the ATG core of the TEF-4 binding consensus within the Eb
region was mutated, promoter activity was enhanced rather than decreased. Thus,
TEF-4 might act as a dual transcriptional modulator as follows: as a suppressor
via its direct binding to the Eb element and as an activator via its interactions
with the basal transcriptional machinery. These results provide the first
evidence that TEF-4 is an important regulator of CCTalpha gene expression.

PMID: 11279002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Oct 15;28(20):3982-90.

Soggy, a spermatocyte-specific gene, lies 3.8 kb upstream of and antipodal to
TEAD-2, a transcription factor expressed at the beginning of mouse development.

Kaneko KJ(1), DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Building 6, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2753, USA. kjaneko@box-k.nih.gov

Investigation of the regulatory region of mTEAD-2, a gene expressed at the
beginning of mouse pre-implantation development, led to the surprising discovery 
of another gene only 3.8 kb upstream of mTEAD-2. Here we show that this new gene 
is a single copy, testis-specific gene called SOGGY: (mSgy) that produces a
single, dominant mRNA approximately 1.3 kb in length. It is transcribed in the
direction opposite to mTEAD-2, thus placing the regulatory elements of these two 
genes in close proximity. mSgy contains three methionine codons that could
potentially act as translation start sites, but most mSGY protein synthesis in
vitro was initiated from the first Met codon to produce a full-length protein,
suggesting that mSGY normally consists of 230 amino acids (26.7 kDa).
Transcription began at a cluster of nucleotides approximately 150 bp upstream of 
the first Met codon using a TATA-less promoter contained within the first 0.9 kb 
upstream. The activity of this promoter was repressed by upstream sequences
between -0.9 and -2.5 kb in cells that did not express mSgy, but this repression 
was relieved in cells that did express mSgy. mSgy mRNA was detected in embryos
only after day 15 and in adult tissues only in the developing spermatocytes of
seminiferous tubules, suggesting that mSgy is a spermatocyte-specific gene. Since
mTEAD-2 and mSgy were not expressed in the same cells, the mSgy/mTEAD-2 locus
provides a unique paradigm for differential regulation of gene expression during 
mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC110775
PMID: 11024178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30801-5.

Functional interaction between the p160 coactivator proteins and the
transcriptional enhancer factor family of transcription factors.

Belandia B(1), Parker MG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London WC2A
3PX, United Kingdom.

SRC1, initially identified as a nuclear receptor coactivator, was found to
interact with a member of the transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) family of
transcription factors, TEF-4. The interaction, which occurs in both intact cells 
and in a cell-free system, is mediated by the highly conserved basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain present in the N-terminal region 
of SRC1. Moreover, all three members of the p160 family of nuclear receptor
coactivators, SRC1, TIF2, and RAC3, are able to potentiate transcription from a
TEF response element in transient transfection experiments, and this activation
requires the presence of the bHLH-PAS domain. These results suggest that the p160
proteins could be bona fide coactivators of the TEF family of transcription
factors.

PMID: 10934189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biol Reprod. 2000 Apr;62(4):969-78.

Translation of maternal messenger ribonucleic acids encoding transcription
factors during genome activation in early mouse embryos.

Wang Q(1), Latham KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19140, USA.

Embryonic genome activation (EGA) in mice is sensitive to treatment with
cycloheximide, indicating that protein synthesis plays an important role in
mediating EGA. We hypothesized that regulated maternal mRNA recruitment may
control the time of EGA by controlling the time of appearance of certain
transcription factors (TFs). We also hypothesized that synthesis of other TFs may
contribute to EGA independently of controlling the timing of EGA. To test these
hypotheses, we used sucrose density gradient fractionation coupled to a
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction method to compare
polysomal mRNA abundances of specific TF mRNAs between metaphase II oocytes,
1-cell-stage embryos, and 2-cell-stage embryos. We observed a
2-cell-stage-specific increase in polysomal abundance of mouse TEA DNA binding
domain 2 (mTEAD-2) mRNA, coincident with the first appearance of mTEAD activity
in the early embryo. The mRNAs encoding Sp1, TATA binding protein, and cyclic AMP
response element binding protein did not undergo translational recruitment, but
exhibited differences in polysomal abundance. We also observed a continuous, high
proportion in the polysomal fraction for the mRNA encoding ribosomal protein L23 
mRNA, which contrasted with the patterns observed for other maternal transcripts.
These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that regulated recruitment 
of maternal TF mRNAs may control the time of activation of some genes during EGA,
and that continuous synthesis of other TFs, like Sp1, may facilitate EGA.

PMID: 10727266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):127-9.

Localization of human transcription factor TEF-4 and TEF-5 (TEAD2, TEAD3) genes
to chromosomes 19q13.3 and 6p21.2 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid analysis.

Jacquemin P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/, Illkirch Cédex, F-67404, France.

PMID: 9889009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Feb;17(2):187-96.

cDNA cloning and characterization of mouse DTEF-1 and ETF, members of the
TEA/ATTS family of transcription factors.

Yockey CE(1), Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of South Carolina School of Medicine,
Columbia 29208, USA.

Members of the TEA/ATTS family of transcription factors have been found in most
representative eukaryotic organisms. In vertebrates, the TEA family contains at
least four members, which share overlapping DNA-binding specificity and have
similar transcriptional activation properties. In this article, we describe the
cDNA cloning and characterization of the murine TEA proteins DTEF-1 (mDTEF-1) and
ETF. Using in situ hybridization analysis of mouse embryos, we found that mDTEF-1
and ETF transcript distributions substantially overlap. ETF is expressed
throughout the embryo except in the myocardium early in development, whereas late
in development, it is enriched in lung and neuroectoderm. Mouse DTEF-1 is
expressed at a much lower level throughout development and is substantially
enriched in ectoderm and skin, as well as in the developing pituitary at
midgestation. Northern blot analysis of adult mouse tissue total RNA showed that 
both ETF and mDTEF-1 are abundant in uterus and lung relative to other tissues.
Using gel mobility shift assays and GAL4-fusion protein analysis, we demonstrated
that the full coding sequences of ETF and mDTEF-1 encode M-CAT/GT-IIC-binding
proteins containing activation domains.

PMID: 9502435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21775-85.

A novel family of developmentally regulated mammalian transcription factors
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain.

Jacquemin P(1), Hwang JJ, Martial JA, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of two novel human and murine transcription
factors containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). These factors bind to the consensus TEA/ATTS cognate
binding site exemplified by the GT-IIC and Sph enhansons of the SV40 enhancer but
differ in their ability to bind cooperatively to tandemly repeated sites. The
human TEFs are differentially expressed in cultured cell lines and the mouse
(m)TEFs are differentially expressed in embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues in 
early post-implantation embryos. Strikingly, at later stages of embryogenesis,
mTEF-3 is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle precursors, whereas mTEF-1 is
expressed not only in developing skeletal muscle but also in the myocardium.
Together with previous data, these results point to important, partially
redundant, roles for these TEF proteins in myogenesis and cardiogenesis. In
addition, mTEF-1 is strongly coexpressed with mTEF-4 in mitotic neuroblasts,
while accentuated mTEF-4 expression is also observed in the gut and the
nephrogenic region of the kidney. These observations suggest additional roles for
the TEF proteins in central nervous system development and organogenesis.

PMID: 8702974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):263-70.

Structural organization and chromosomal assignment of the mouse embryonic TEA
domain-containing factor (ETF) gene.

Suzuki K(1), Yasunami M, Matsuda Y, Maeda T, Kobayashi H, Terasaki H, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Kumamoto, 862, Japan.

Embryonic TEA domain-containing factor (ETF) belongs to the family of proteins
structurally related to transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) and is
implicated in neural development. Isolation and characterization of the cosmid
clones encoding the mouse ETF gene (Etdf) revealed that Etdf spans approximately 
17.9 kb and consists of 12 exons. The exon-intron structure of Etdf closely
resembles that of the Drosophila scalloped gene, indicating that these genes may 
have evolved from a common ancestor. The multiple transcription initiation sites 
revealed by S1 protection and primer extension analyses are consistent with the
absence of the canonical TATA and CAAT boxes in the 5'-flanking region, which
contains many potential regulatory sequences, such as the E-box, N-box, Sp1
element, GATA-1 element, TAATGARAT element, and B2 short interspersed element
(SINE) as well as several direct and inverted repeat sequences. The Etdf locus
was assigned to the proximal region of mouse chromosome 7 using fluorescence in
situ hybridization and linkage mapping analyses. These results provide the
molecular basis for studying the regulation, in vivo function, and evolution of
Etdf.

PMID: 8812452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 4;270(31):18649-54.

Molecular characterization of cDNA encoding a novel protein related to
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 from neural precursor cells.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Houtani T, Sugimoto T, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We identified a novel cDNA related to that of transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) during the course of isolation and characterization of cDNAs, whose mRNAs
are preferentially expressed in the mouse neural precursor cells. The putative
polypeptide, termed embryonic TEA domain-containing factor (ETF), deduced from
the nucleotide sequence contains 445 amino acids and shares 66% amino acid
identity with mouse and human TEF-1 proteins. The primary structure of the TEA
domain, a probable DNA-binding domain, and the specific DNA binding activity to
the GT-IIC motif of ETF are indistinguishable from those of the known vertebrate 
TEF-1 proteins. However, the expression of the ETF gene is strictly regulated in 
developing embryos and is limited to certain tissues, such as the hindbrain of a 
10-day-old mouse embryo, in contrast to the ubiquitous expression pattern of the 
TEF-1 gene. These results suggest that ETF is a novel mammalian member of the TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family and may be involved in the gene
regulation of the neural development. We have discussed the possible existence of
multiple subtypes of the mammalian TEF-1 family proteins, which may play
different roles in cellular and development gene regulation.

PMID: 7629195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


