
1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2016 Mar 3:jap.01076.2015. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01076.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

The Hippo signal transduction network for exercise physiologists.

Gabriel BM(1), Hamilton DL(2), Tremblay AM(3), Wackerhage H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet. (2)University of Stirling. (3)Children's Hospital.
(4)Technical University Munich henning.wackerhage@tum.de.

The ubiquitous transcriptional co-activators Yap (gene symbol Yap1) and Taz (gene
symbol Wwtr1) regulate gene expression mainly by co-activating the Tead
transcription factors. Yap and Taz lie at the centre of the Hippo signalling
network and are not only regulated by the Hippo kinase cassette itself but also
by a plethora of exercise-associated signals and signalling modules. These
include mechanotransduction, the AKT-mTORC1 network, SMAD transcription factors, 
hypoxia, glucose, AMPK, adrenaline/epinephrine and angiotensin II through G
protein-coupled receptors, and interleukin 6 (Il-6). Consequently exercise should
alter Hippo signalling in several organs to mediate at least some aspects of
organ-specific adaptations to exercise. Consistent with this idea Tead1 over
expression in muscle fibres has been shown to promote a fast-to-slow fibre type
switch whereas Yap in muscle fibres and cardiomyocytes promotes skeletal muscle
and cardiac hypertrophy, respectively. Finally TEAD1, YAP1, VGLL2, VGLL3 and
VGLL4 have all been linked in genome wide-association studies to body height, a
key factor in sports.

Copyright © 2015, Journal of Applied Physiology.

PMID: 26940657  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec 8;95(46):3766-9.

[Expressions of Notch3, Notch4, Frizzled2 and Tead1 in rats with focal cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang H(1), Hu J, Wang J, Wang X, Xu W, Tan H, Wang L, Lü L, Wen A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Anhui University of Chinese 
Medicine, Hefei 230038, China; Email: zhhm050518@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of Notch3, Notch4, Frizzled2 and Tead1 
at protein levels in the cortex of frontal and parietal lobes after focal
cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) in rats.
METHODS: The focal cerebral I/R model was established by intraluminal thread
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAO). The animals were divided into
sham operation group (sham group) and I/R group. The infarct area of the brain
was measured by 2, 3, 5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining technique
after 1 week. Protein expression levels of Notch3 and Frizzled2 in the cortex of 
frontal and parietal lobes were detected by immunohistochemical staining, and
protein expression levels of Notch4 and Tead1 were detected by Western blot
analysis.
RESULTS: The infarct area of rats in I/R group was very obvious. The protein
expressions of Notch3 and Frizzled2 in I/R group were higher than those in sham
group (P<0.05, P<0.01). The protein expression of Notch4 in I/R group was
significantly higher than that in sham group (P<0.01), but the protein expression
level of Tead1 in I/R group was significantly lower than that in sham
group(P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Notch signal transduction pathway was activated after focal cerebral 
ischemia/reperfusion in MCAO rats.

PMID: 26850019  [PubMed - in process]


3. Structure. 2015 Nov 3;23(11):2076-86. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.09.009. Epub 2015
Oct 22.

Targeting the Central Pocket in Human Transcription Factor TEAD as a Potential
Cancer Therapeutic Strategy.

Pobbati AV(1), Han X(2), Hung AW(3), Weiguang S(3), Huda N(3), Chen GY(3), Kang
C(3), Chia CS(3), Luo X(4), Hong W(5), Poulsen A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A(*)STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore 138673, Singapore. Electronic address: ajaybabuvp@imcb.a-star.edu.sg.
(2)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology & Engineering, the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China;
Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6001
Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Experimental Therapeutics Centre,
A(*)STAR, 31 Biopolis Way, #3-01, Singapore 138669, Singapore. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6001 Forest Park
Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: xuelian.luo@utsouthwestern.edu. 
(5)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A(*)STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore 138673, Singapore. (6)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, A(*)STAR, 31
Biopolis Way, #3-01, Singapore 138669, Singapore. Electronic address:
apoulsen@etc.a-star.edu.sg.

The human TEAD family of transcription factors (TEAD1-4) is required for
YAP-mediated transcription in the Hippo pathway. Hyperactivation of TEAD's
co-activator YAP contributes to tissue overgrowth and human cancers, suggesting
that pharmacological interference of TEAD-YAP activity may be an effective
strategy for anticancer therapy. Here we report the discovery of a central pocket
in the YAP-binding domain (YBD) of TEAD that is targetable by small-molecule
inhibitors. Our X-ray crystallography studies reveal that flufenamic acid, a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), binds to the central pocket of
TEAD2 YBD. Our biochemical and functional analyses further demonstrate that
binding of NSAIDs to TEAD inhibits TEAD-YAP-dependent transcription, cell
migration, and proliferation, indicating that the central pocket is important for
TEAD function. Therefore, our studies discover a novel way of targeting TEAD
transcription factors and set the stage for therapeutic development of specific
TEAD-YAP inhibitors against human cancers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4660270 [Available on 2016-11-03]
PMID: 26592798  [PubMed - in process]


4. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016 Feb;9(1):45-54. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001142.
Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Novel Genetic Loci Associated With Retinal Microvascular Diameter.

Jensen RA, Sim X, Smith AV, Li X, Jakobsdóttir J, Cheng CY, Brody JA, Cotch MF,
Mcknight B, Klein R, Wang JJ, Kifley A, Harris TB, Launer LJ, Taylor KD, Klein
BE, Raffel LJ, Li X, Ikram MA, Klaver CC, van der Lee SJ, Mutlu U, Hofman A,
Uitterlinden AG, Liu C, Kraja AT; CHARGE Exome Chip Blood Pressure Consortium,
Mitchell P, Gudnason V, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, van Duijn CM, Psaty BM, Wong TY.

BACKGROUND: There is increasing evidence that retinal microvascular diameters are
associated with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular conditions. The shared genetic
effects of these associations are currently unknown. The aim of this study was to
increase our understanding of the genetic factors that mediate retinal vessel
size.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study extends previous genome-wide association study
results using 24 000+ multiethnic participants from 7 discovery cohorts and 5000+
subjects of European ancestry from 2 replication cohorts. Using the Illumina
HumanExome BeadChip, we investigate the association of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and variants collectively across genes with summary measures of
retinal vessel diameters, referred to as the central retinal venule equivalent
and the central retinal arteriole equivalent. We report 4 new loci associated
with central retinal venule equivalent, one of which is also associated with
central retinal arteriole equivalent. The 4 single-nucleotide polymorphisms are
rs7926971 in TEAD1 (P=3.1×10(-) (11); minor allele frequency=0.43), rs201259422
in TSPAN10 (P=4.4×10(-9); minor allele frequency=0.27), rs5442 in GNB3
(P=7.0×10(-10); minor allele frequency=0.05), and rs1800407 in OCA2
(P=3.4×10(-8); minor allele frequency=0.05). The latter single-nucleotide
polymorphism, rs1800407, was also associated with central retinal arteriole
equivalent (P=6.5×10(-12)). Results from the gene-based burden tests were null.
In phenotype look-ups, single-nucleotide polymorphism rs201255422 was associated 
with both systolic (P=0.001) and diastolic blood pressures (P=8.3×10(-04)).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study expands the understanding of genetic factors influencing
the size of the retinal microvasculature. These findings may also provide insight
into the relationship between retinal and systemic microvascular disease.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4758888 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26567291  [PubMed - in process]


5. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb;40(2):224-35. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000538.

A Molecular Study of Pediatric Spindle and Sclerosing Rhabdomyosarcoma:
Identification of Novel and Recurrent VGLL2-related Fusions in Infantile Cases.

Alaggio R(1), Zhang L, Sung YS, Huang SC, Chen CL, Bisogno G, Zin A, Agaram NP,
LaQuaglia MP, Wexler LH, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology‡Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of
Padova§Institute of Pediatric Research Città della Speranza, Padova,
ItalyDepartments of †Pathology<U+2225>Surgery¶Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma (ScRMS) and spindle cell rhabdomyosarcoma (SRMS) have
been recently reclassified as a stand-alone pathologic entity, separate from
embryonal RMS. Genetically, a subset of the congenital cases display NCOA2 gene
rearrangements, whereas tumors occurring in older children or adults harbor MYOD1
gene mutations with or without coexisting PIK3CA mutations. Despite these recent 
advances, a significant number of tumors lack known genetic alterations. In this 
study we sought to investigate a large group of pediatric SRMS/ScRMS, spanning a 
diverse clinical and pathologic spectrum, by using a combined fluorescence in
situ hybridization, targeted DNA, and whole-transcriptome sequencing methodology 
for a more definitive molecular classification. A total of 26 SRMS and ScRMS
cases were selected from the 2 participating institutions for the molecular
analysis. Ten of the 11 congenital/infantile SRMS showed recurrent fusion genes: 
with novel VGLL2 rearrangements seen in 7 (63%), including VGLL2-CITED2 fusion in
4 and VGLL2-NCOA2 in 2 cases. Three (27%) cases harbored the previously described
NCOA2 gene fusions, including TEAD1-NCOA2 in 2 and SRF-NCOA2 in 1. All
fusion-positive congenital/infantile SRMS patients with available long-term
follow-up were alive and well, none developing distant metastases. Among the
remaining 15 SRMS patients older than 1 year, 10 (67%) showed MYOD1 L122R
mutations, most of them following a fatal outcome despite an aggressive
multimodality treatment. All 4 cases harboring coexisting MYOD1/PIK3CA mutations 
shared sclerosing morphology. All 5 fusion/mutation-negative SRMS cases presented
as intra-abdominal or paratesticular lesions.

PMCID: PMC4712098 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26501226  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Clin Invest. 2015 Oct 1;125(10):3981-91. doi: 10.1172/JCI82416. Epub 2015 Sep
21.

Isolation of neoantigen-specific T cells from tumor and peripheral lymphocytes.

Cohen CJ, Gartner JJ, Horovitz-Fried M, Shamalov K, Trebska-McGowan K, Bliskovsky
VV, Parkhurst MR, Ankri C, Prickett TD, Crystal JS, Li YF, El-Gamil M, Rosenberg 
SA, Robbins PF.

Adoptively transferred tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes (TILs) that mediate
complete regression of metastatic melanoma have been shown to recognize mutated
epitopes expressed by autologous tumors. Here, in an attempt to develop a
strategy for facilitating the isolation, expansion, and study of mutated
antigen-specific T cells, we performed whole-exome sequencing on matched tumor
and normal DNA isolated from 8 patients with metastatic melanoma. Candidate
mutated epitopes were identified using a peptide-MHC-binding algorithm, and these
epitopes were synthesized and used to generate panels of MHC tetramers that were 
evaluated for binding to tumor digests and cultured TILs used for the treatment
of patients. This strategy resulted in the identification of 9 mutated epitopes
from 5 of the 8 patients tested. Cells reactive with 8 of the 9 epitopes could be
isolated from autologous peripheral blood, where they were detected at
frequencies that were estimated to range between 0.4% and 0.002%. To the best of 
our knowledge, this represents the first demonstration of the successful
isolation of mutation-reactive T cells from patients' peripheral blood prior to
immune therapy, potentially providing the basis for designing personalized
immunotherapies to treat patients with advanced cancer.

PMCID: PMC4607110
PMID: 26389673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Discov. 2015 Nov;5(11):1178-93. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0330. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

NF2 Loss Promotes Oncogenic RAS-Induced Thyroid Cancers via YAP-Dependent
Transactivation of RAS Proteins and Sensitizes Them to MEK Inhibition.

Garcia-Rendueles ME(1), Ricarte-Filho JC(1), Untch BR(2), Landa I(1), Knauf
JA(3), Voza F(1), Smith VE(1), Ganly I(4), Taylor BS(5), Persaud Y(1), Oler G(1),
Fang Y(6), Jhanwar SC(6), Viale A(7), Heguy A(1), Huberman KH(7), Giancotti F(8),
Ghossein R(6), Fagin JA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (3)Human Oncology and
Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York. (5)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (6)Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(7)Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (8)Cell Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Medicine, Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. (9)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department
of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Cell
Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
faginj@mskcc.org.

Ch22q LOH is preferentially associated with RAS mutations in papillary and in
poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC). The 22q tumor suppressor NF2,
encoding merlin, is implicated in this interaction because of its frequent loss
of function in human thyroid cancer cell lines. Nf2 deletion or Hras mutation is 
insufficient for transformation, whereas their combined disruption leads to
murine PDTC with increased MAPK signaling. Merlin loss induces RAS signaling in
part through inactivation of Hippo, which activates a YAP-TEAD transcriptional
program. We find that the three RAS genes are themselves YAP-TEAD1
transcriptional targets, providing a novel mechanism of promotion of RAS-induced 
tumorigenesis. Moreover, pharmacologic disruption of YAP-TEAD with verteporfin
blocks RAS transcription and signaling and inhibits cell growth. The increased
MAPK output generated by NF2 loss in RAS-mutant cancers may inform therapeutic
strategies, as it generates greater dependency on the MAPK pathway for
viability.SIGNIFICANCE: Intensification of mutant RAS signaling through
copy-number imbalances is commonly associated with transformation. We show that
NF2/merlin inactivation augments mutant RAS signaling by promoting
YAP/TEAD-driven transcription of oncogenic and wild-type RAS, resulting in
greater MAPK output and increased sensitivity to MEK inhibitors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4642441 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26359368  [PubMed - in process]


8. Development. 2015 Sep 1;142(17):2962-71. doi: 10.1242/dev.125807. Epub 2015 Aug
7.

Hippo signaling is required for Notch-dependent smooth muscle differentiation of 
neural crest.

Manderfield LJ(1), Aghajanian H(1), Engleka KA(1), Lim LY(1), Liu F(1), Jain
R(1), Li L(1), Olson EN(2), Epstein JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, The Cardiovascular Institute and
the Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, The Cardiovascular
Institute and the Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
epsteinj@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Notch signaling has well-defined roles in the assembly of arterial walls and in
the development of the endothelium and smooth muscle of the vasculature. Hippo
signaling regulates cellular growth in many tissues, and contributes to
regulation of organ size, in addition to other functions. Here, we show that the 
Notch and Hippo pathways converge to regulate smooth muscle differentiation of
the neural crest, which is crucial for normal development of the aortic arch
arteries and cranial vasculature during embryonic development. Neural
crest-specific deletion of the Hippo effectors Yap and Taz produces neural crest 
precursors that migrate normally, but fail to produce vascular smooth muscle, and
Notch target genes such as Jagged1 fail to activate normally. We show that Yap is
normally recruited to a tissue-specific Jagged1 enhancer by directly interacting 
with the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). The Yap-NICD complex is recruited to 
chromatin by the DNA-binding protein Rbp-J in a Tead-independent fashion. Thus,
Hippo signaling can modulate Notch signaling outputs, and components of the Hippo
and Notch pathways physically interact. Convergence of Hippo and Notch pathways
by the mechanisms described here might be relevant for the function of these
signaling cascades in many tissues and in diseases such as cancer.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582185 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26253400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2015 Sep 1;142(17):3021-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.119008. Epub 2015 Jul
24.

Yap and Taz regulate retinal pigment epithelial cell fate.

Miesfeld JB(1), Gestri G(2), Clark BS(1), Flinn MA(1), Poole RJ(2), Bader JR(1), 
Besharse JC(1), Wilson SW(2), Link BA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, UCL, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology
and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA
blink@mcw.edu.

The optic vesicle comprises a pool of bi-potential progenitor cells from which
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and neural retina fates segregate during
ocular morphogenesis. Several transcription factors and signaling pathways have
been shown to be important for RPE maintenance and differentiation, but an
understanding of the initial fate specification and determination of this ocular 
cell type is lacking. We show that Yap/Taz-Tead activity is necessary and
sufficient for optic vesicle progenitors to adopt RPE identity in zebrafish. A
Tead-responsive transgene is expressed within the domain of the optic cup from
which RPE arises, and Yap immunoreactivity localizes to the nuclei of prospective
RPE cells. yap (yap1) mutants lack a subset of RPE cells and/or exhibit coloboma.
Loss of RPE in yap mutants is exacerbated in combination with taz (wwtr1) mutant 
alleles such that, when Yap and Taz are both absent, optic vesicle progenitor
cells completely lose their ability to form RPE. The mechanism of Yap-dependent
RPE cell type determination is reliant on both nuclear localization of Yap and
interaction with a Tead co-factor. In contrast to loss of Yap and Taz,
overexpression of either protein within optic vesicle progenitors leads to
ectopic pigmentation in a dosage-dependent manner. Overall, this study identifies
Yap and Taz as key early regulators of RPE genesis and provides a mechanistic
framework for understanding the congenital ocular defects of Sveinsson's
chorioretinal atrophy and congenital retinal coloboma.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582179
PMID: 26209646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hepatology. 2015 Nov;62(5):1497-510. doi: 10.1002/hep.27992. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

YAP promotes proliferation, chemoresistance, and angiogenesis in human
cholangiocarcinoma through TEAD transcription factors.

Marti P(1), Stein C(1), Blumer T(2), Abraham Y(1), Dill MT(2), Pikiolek M(1),
Orsini V(1), Jurisic G(1), Megel P(3), Makowska Z(2), Agarinis C(1), Tornillo
L(4), Bouwmeester T(1), Ruffner H(1), Bauer A(1), Parker CN(1), Schmelzle T(3),
Terracciano LM(4), Heim MH(2), Tchorz JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Developmental and Molecular
Pathways, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. (2)Division of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Novartis
Institutes for Biomedical Research, Oncology, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland. (4)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

The Yes-associated protein (YAP)/Hippo pathway has been implicated in tissue
development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. However, its role in
cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is not established. We show that YAP activation is a
common feature in CC patient biopsies and human CC cell lines. Using microarray
expression profiling of CC cells with overexpressed or down-regulated YAP, we
show that YAP regulates genes involved in proliferation, apoptosis, and
angiogenesis. YAP activity promotes CC growth in vitro and in vivo by
functionally interacting with TEAD transcription factors (TEADs). YAP activity
together with TEADs prevents apoptosis induced by cytotoxic drugs, whereas YAP
knockdown sensitizes CC cells to drug-induced apoptosis. We further show that the
proangiogenic microfibrillar-associated protein 5 (MFAP5) is a direct
transcriptional target of YAP/TEAD in CC cells and that secreted MFAP5 promotes
tube formation of human microvascular endothelial cells. High YAP activity in
human CC xenografts and clinical samples correlates with increased MFAP5
expression and CD31(+) vasculature.CONCLUSIONS: These findings establish YAP as a
key regulator of proliferation and antiapoptotic mechanisms in CC and provide
first evidence that YAP promotes angiogenesis by regulating the expression of
secreted proangiogenic proteins.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26173433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jun;56(6):3896-904. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16261.

A De Novo Mutation in TEAD1 Causes Non-X-Linked Aicardi Syndrome.

Schrauwen I(1), Szelinger S(2), Siniard AL(2), Corneveaux JJ(2), Kurdoglu A(2),
Richholt R(2), De Both M(2), Malenica I(2), Swaminathan S(2), Rangasamy S(2),
Kulkarni N(3), Bernes S(3), Buchhalter J(4), Ramsey K(2), Craig DW(2), Narayanan 
V(2), Huentelman MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dorrance Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Translational Genomics Research 
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States 2Neurogenomics Division, Translational
Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States 3Department of
Medical Genetics, U. (2)Dorrance Center for Rare Childhood Disorders,
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States
2Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix,
Arizona, United States. (3)Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, United 
States. (4)Alberta Children's Hospital, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

PURPOSE: Aicardi syndrome (AIC) is a congenital neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by infantile spasms, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and
chorioretinal lacunae. Variation in phenotype and disease severity is well
documented, but chorioretinal lacunae represent the most constant pathological
feature. Aicardi syndrome is believed to be an X-linked-dominant disorder
occurring almost exclusively in females, although 46, XY males with AIC have been
described. The purpose of this study is to identify genetic factors and pathways 
involved in AIC.
METHODS: We performed exome/genome sequencing of 10 children diagnosed with AIC
and their parents and performed RNA sequencing on blood samples from nine cases, 
their parents, and unrelated controls.
RESULTS: We identified a de novo mutation in autosomal gene TEAD1, expressed in
the retina and brain, in a patient with AIC. Mutations in TEAD1 have previously
been associated with Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy, characterized by
chorioretinal degeneration. This demonstrates that TEAD1 mutations can lead to
different chorioretinal complications. In addition, we found that altered
expression of genes associated with synaptic plasticity, neuronal development,
retinal development, and cell cycle control/apoptosis is an important underlying 
potential pathogenic mechanism shared among cases. Last, we found a case with
skewed X inactivation, supporting the idea that nonrandom X inactivation might be
important in AIC.
CONCLUSIONS: We expand the phenotype of TEAD1 mutations, demonstrate its
importance in chorioretinal complications, and propose the first putative
pathogenic mechanisms underlying AIC. Our data suggest that AIC is a genetically 
heterogeneous disease and is not restricted to the X chromosome, and that TEAD1
mutations may be present in male patients.

PMID: 26091538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 30;112(26):E3402-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1420005112. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Deregulation of the Hippo pathway in soft-tissue sarcoma promotes FOXM1
expression and tumorigenesis.

Eisinger-Mathason TS(1), Mucaj V(1), Biju KM(1), Nakazawa MS(1), Gohil M(1), Cash
TP(1), Yoon SS(2), Skuli N(3), Park KM(4), Gerecht S(5), Simon MC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (2)Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065; (3)INSERM U1037,
Institut Claudius Regaud, 31052 Toulouse, France; (4)Department of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins Physical Sciences-Oncology Center, and
the Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
21218; (5)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins
Physical Sciences-Oncology Center, and the Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; (6)Abramson Family
Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
celeste2@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Genetic aberrations responsible for soft-tissue sarcoma formation in adults are
largely unknown, with targeted therapies sorely needed for this complex and
heterogeneous family of diseases. Here we report that that the Hippo pathway is
deregulated in many soft-tissue sarcomas, resulting in elevated expression of the
effector molecule Yes-Associated Protein (YAP). Based on data gathered from human
sarcoma patients, a novel autochthonous mouse model, and mechanistic analyses, we
determined that YAP-dependent expression of the transcription factor forkhead box
M1 (FOXM1) is necessary for cell proliferation/tumorigenesis in a subset of
soft-tissue sarcomas. Notably, FOXM1 directly interacts with the YAP
transcriptional complex via TEAD1, resulting in coregulation of numerous critical
pro-proliferation targets that enhance sarcoma progression. Finally,
pharmacologic inhibition of FOXM1 decreases tumor size in vivo, making FOXM1 an
attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of some sarcoma subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4491775
PMID: 26080399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;5(3):1158-68. eCollection 2015.

miR-222/VGLL4/YAP-TEAD1 regulatory loop promotes proliferation and invasion of
gastric cancer cells.

Li N(1), Yu N(1), Wang J(1), Xi H(1), Lu W(1), Xu H(1), Deng M(2), Zheng G(2),
Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Neoplasms Surgery Hengzhigang Road 78#,
Guangzhou 510095, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Cancer Research Institute of
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University Hengzhigang Road 78#, 
Guangzhou 510095, Guangdong, China.

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignant tumors and recent data
demonstrates the tumor suppressor role of VGLL4 in GC, but the mechanisms for
VGLL4 downregulation in GC remain to be elucidated. Here, we confirmed the
suppressor role of VGLL4 on proliferation and invasion in GC cells with
over-activated YAP-TEAD signal, and indicated the reverse correlation between
expression patters of VGLL4 and miR-222. Bioinformatics analysis combined with
experimental confirmation revealed VGLL4 is a direct target of miR-222 in GC
cells. Functionally, miR-222 inhibitor significantly inhibited GC cells
proliferation and invasion and VGLL4 knockdown abolished the effects of miR-222
inhibitor. Moreover, TEAD1 knockdown resulted in decrease of miR-222 expression
and increase of VGLL4 expression, and also resulted in reduction of luciferase
activity driven by miR-222 promoter in GC cells, suggesting over-activated TEAD1 
positively feedback transcriptionally regulates miR-222 expression via physically
binding to the miR-222 promoter indicated by ChIP assay. Collectively, our
findings implied the important role of miR-222/VGLL4/YAP-TEAD1 regulatory loop
maintaining over-activated YAP-TEAD1 signal in GC cells, and enriched the
rationale of VGLL4 in GC based on which a promising therapeutic strategy will be 
developed.

PMCID: PMC4449443
PMID: 26045994  [PubMed]


14. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16906-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642363. Epub 2015
May 20.

Hippo Component TAZ Functions as a Co-repressor and Negatively Regulates <U+0394>Np63
Transcription through TEA Domain (TEAD) Transcription Factor.

Valencia-Sama I(1), Zhao Y(1), Lai D(1), Janse van Rensburg HJ(1), Hao Y(1), Yang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
yang@path.queensu.ca.

Transcriptional co-activator with a PDZ binding domain (TAZ) is a WW
domain-containing transcriptional co-activator and a core component of an
emerging Hippo signaling pathway that regulates organ size, tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. TAZ regulates these biological functions by
up-regulating downstream cellular genes through transactivation of transcription 
factors such as TEAD and TTF1. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TAZ-induced tumorigenesis, we have recently performed a gene expression profile
analysis by overexpressing TAZ in mammary cells. In addition to the
TAZ-up-regulated genes that were confirmed in our previous studies, we identified
a large number of cellular genes that were down-regulated by TAZ. In this study, 
we have confirmed these down-regulated genes (including cytokines, chemokines,
and p53 gene family members) as bona fide downstream transcriptional targets of
TAZ. By using human breast and lung epithelial cells, we have further
characterized <U+0394>Np63, a p53 gene family member, and shown that TAZ suppresses
<U+0394>Np63 mRNA, protein expression, and promoter activity through interaction with
the transcription factor TEAD. We also show that TEAD can inhibit <U+0394>Np63 promoter 
activity and that TAZ can directly interact with <U+0394>Np63 promoter-containing TEAD
binding sites. Finally, we provide functional evidence that down-regulation of
<U+0394>Np63 by TAZ may play a role in regulating cell migration. Altogether, this study
provides novel evidence that the Hippo component TAZ can function as a
co-repressor and regulate biological functions by negatively regulating
downstream cellular genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505436 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 25995450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 May;17(5):615-26. doi: 10.1038/ncb3160. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

TEAD and YAP regulate the enhancer network of human embryonic pancreatic
progenitors.

Cebola I(1), Rodríguez-Seguí SA(2), Cho CH(3), Bessa J(4), Rovira M(5), Luengo
M(6), Chhatriwala M(7), Berry A(8), Ponsa-Cobas J(1), Maestro MA(5), Jennings
RE(8), Pasquali L(5), Morán I(1), Castro N(5), Hanley NA(9), Gomez-Skarmeta
JL(6), Vallier L(10), Ferrer J(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK. (2)1]
Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions August Pi
i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain [2] CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 08036 Barcelona, Spain [3] Laboratorio de
Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y
Celular, IFIBYNE-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad
de Buenos Aires, C1428EGA Buenos Aires, Argentina. (3)Wellcome Trust and MRC Stem
Cells Centre, Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Surgery and Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK. (4)1] Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), 4150-180 Porto, Portugal [2] Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto,
Portugal. (5)1] Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut
d'Investigacions August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain [2] CIBER
de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 08036 Barcelona,
Spain. (6)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(7)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (8)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of
Human Development, Faculty of Medical &Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. (9)1] Centre
for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of Human Development, Faculty of
Medical &Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University
of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK [2] Endocrinology Department, Central
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M13 9WU, UK.
(10)1] Wellcome Trust and MRC Stem Cells Centre, Anne McLaren Laboratory for
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery and Wellcome Trust-Medical Research 
Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2
0SZ, UK [2] Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (11)1] Department of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London W12 0NN, UK [2] Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory,
Institut d'Investigacions August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain
[3] CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

The genomic regulatory programmes that underlie human organogenesis are poorly
understood. Pancreas development, in particular, has pivotal implications for
pancreatic regeneration, cancer and diabetes. We have now characterized the
regulatory landscape of embryonic multipotent progenitor cells that give rise to 
all pancreatic epithelial lineages. Using human embryonic pancreas and
embryonic-stem-cell-derived progenitors we identify stage-specific transcripts
and associated enhancers, many of which are co-occupied by transcription factors 
that are essential for pancreas development. We further show that TEAD1, a Hippo 
signalling effector, is an integral component of the transcription factor
combinatorial code of pancreatic progenitor enhancers. TEAD and its coactivator
YAP activate key pancreatic signalling mediators and transcription factors, and
regulate the expansion of pancreatic progenitors. This work therefore uncovers a 
central role for TEAD and YAP as signal-responsive regulators of multipotent
pancreatic progenitors, and provides a resource for the study of embryonic
development of the human pancreas.

PMCID: PMC4434585
PMID: 25915126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Mar 7;16:74. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0460-0.

Inferring dynamic gene regulatory networks in cardiac differentiation through the
integration of multi-dimensional data.

Gong W(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N(2), Li T(3), Garry DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165
CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114, USA. gongx030@umn.edu. (2)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. koyano@umn.edu. (3)AccuraScience LLC, 5721 Merle Hay Road, Suite #16B,
Johnston, IA, 50131, USA. toli@us.accurascience.com. (4)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. garry@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Decoding the temporal control of gene expression patterns is key to
the understanding of the complex mechanisms that govern developmental decisions
during heart development. High-throughput methods have been employed to
systematically study the dynamic and coordinated nature of cardiac
differentiation at the global level with multiple dimensions. Therefore, there is
a pressing need to develop a systems approach to integrate these data from
individual studies and infer the dynamic regulatory networks in an unbiased
fashion.
RESULTS: We developed a two-step strategy to integrate data from (1) temporal
RNA-seq, (2) temporal histone modification ChIP-seq, (3) transcription factor
(TF) ChIP-seq and (4) gene perturbation experiments to reconstruct the dynamic
network during heart development. First, we trained a logistic regression model
to predict the probability (LR score) of any base being bound by 543 TFs with
known positional weight matrices. Second, four dimensions of data were combined
using a time-varying dynamic Bayesian network model to infer the dynamic networks
at four developmental stages in the mouse [mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs),
mesoderm (MES), cardiac progenitors (CP) and cardiomyocytes (CM)]. Our method not
only infers the time-varying networks between different stages of heart
development, but it also identifies the TF binding sites associated with promoter
or enhancers of downstream genes. The LR scores of experimentally verified ESCs
and heart enhancers were significantly higher than random regions (p <10(-100)), 
suggesting that a high LR score is a reliable indicator for functional TF binding
sites. Our network inference model identified a region with an elevated LR score 
approximately -9400 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site of Nkx2-5,
which overlapped with a previously reported enhancer region (-9435 to -8922 bp). 
TFs such as Tead1, Gata4, Msx2, and Tgif1 were predicted to bind to this region
and participate in the regulation of Nkx2-5 gene expression. Our model also
predicted the key regulatory networks for the ESC-MES, MES-CP and CP-CM
transitions.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel method to systematically integrate
multi-dimensional -omics data and reconstruct the gene regulatory networks. This 
method will allow one to rapidly determine the cis-modules that regulate key
genes during cardiac differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4359553
PMID: 25887857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 9;6:6683. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7683.

Decoding the regulatory landscape of melanoma reveals TEADS as regulators of the 
invasive cell state.

Verfaillie A(1), Imrichova H(1), Atak ZK(1), Dewaele M(2), Rambow F(2),
Hulselmans G(1), Christiaens V(1), Svetlichnyy D(1), Luciani F(2), Van den Mooter
L(3), Claerhout S(3), Fiers M(4), Journe F(5), Ghanem GE(5), Herrmann C(6),
Halder G(3), Marine JC(2), Aerts S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Center for Human Genetics, University of 
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (2)1] Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology,
Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] VIB
Center for the Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)1] VIB Center for the
Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] Laboratory of Growth Control and
Cancer Research, Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (4)VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Medical Oncology Clinic, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
1000 Brussels, Belgium. (6)Department of Theoretical Bioinformatics, DKFZ
Heidelberg, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Transcriptional reprogramming of proliferative melanoma cells into a
phenotypically distinct invasive cell subpopulation is a critical event at the
origin of metastatic spreading. Here we generate transcriptome, open chromatin
and histone modification maps of melanoma cultures; and integrate this data with 
existing transcriptome and DNA methylation profiles from tumour biopsies to gain 
insight into the mechanisms underlying this key reprogramming event. This shows
thousands of genomic regulatory regions underlying the proliferative and invasive
states, identifying SOX10/MITF and AP-1/TEAD as regulators, respectively.
Knockdown of TEADs shows a previously unrecognized role in the invasive gene
network and establishes a causative link between these transcription factors,
cell invasion and sensitivity to MAPK inhibitors. Using regulatory landscapes and
in silico analysis, we show that transcriptional reprogramming underlies the
distinct cellular states present in melanoma. Furthermore, it reveals an
essential role for the TEADs, linking it to clinically relevant mechanisms such
as invasion and resistance.

PMCID: PMC4403341
PMID: 25865119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;17(4):500-10. doi: 10.1038/ncb3111. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Cellular energy stress induces AMPK-mediated regulation of YAP and the Hippo
pathway.

Mo JS(1), Meng Z(1), Kim YC(2), Park HW(1), Hansen CG(1), Kim S(1), Lim DS(3),
Guan KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. (2)Department of Cardiology, Veterans
Medical Research Foundation, 3350 La Jolla Village Dr., San Diego, California
92161, USA. (3)National Creative Research Initiatives Center, Department of
Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 
305-701, Republic of Korea.

YAP (Yes-associated protein) is a transcription co-activator in the Hippo tumour 
suppressor pathway and controls cell growth, tissue homeostasis and organ size.
YAP is inhibited by the kinase Lats, which phosphorylates YAP to induce its
cytoplasmic localization and proteasomal degradation. YAP induces gene expression
by binding to the TEAD family transcription factors. Dysregulation of the
Hippo-YAP pathway is frequently observed in human cancers. Here we show that
cellular energy stress induces YAP phosphorylation, in part due to AMPK-dependent
Lats activation, thereby inhibiting YAP activity. Moreover, AMPK directly
phosphorylates YAP Ser 94, a residue essential for the interaction with TEAD,
thus disrupting the YAP-TEAD interaction. AMPK-induced YAP inhibition can
suppress oncogenic transformation of Lats-null cells with high YAP activity. Our 
study establishes a molecular mechanism and functional significance of AMPK in
linking cellular energy status to the Hippo-YAP pathway.

PMCID: PMC4380774
PMID: 25751140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Med Chem. 2015 Jun 25;58(12):4857-73. doi: 10.1021/jm501615v. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

The Hippo Pathway and YAP/TAZ-TEAD Protein-Protein Interaction as Targets for
Regenerative Medicine and Cancer Treatment.

Santucci M(1), Vignudelli T(1), Ferrari S(1), Mor M(2), Scalvini L(2), Bolognesi 
ML(3), Uliassi E(3), Costi MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via
Giuseppe Campi 183, Modena 41125, Italy. (2)‡Department of Pharmacy, University
of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 27/A, Parma 43124, Italy. (3)§Department of
Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Via Belmeloro 6, Bologna
40126, Italy.

The Hippo pathway is an important organ size control signaling network and the
major regulatory mechanism of cell-contact inhibition. Yes associated protein
(YAP) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) are its
targets and terminal effectors: inhibition of the pathway promotes YAP/TAZ
translocation to the nucleus, where they interact with transcriptional enhancer
associate domain (TEAD) transcription factors and coactivate the expression of
target genes, promoting cell proliferation. Defects in the pathway can result in 
overgrowth phenotypes due to deregulation of stem-cell proliferation and
apoptosis; members of the pathway are directly involved in cancer development.
The pharmacological regulation of the pathway might be useful in cancer
prevention, treatment, and regenerative medicine applications; currently, a few
compounds can selectively modulate the pathway. In this review, we present an
overview of the Hippo pathway, the sequence and structural analysis of YAP/TAZ,
the known pharmacological modulators of the pathway, especially those targeting
YAP/TAZ-TEAD interaction.

PMID: 25719868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Sci Signal. 2015 Feb 10;8(363):ra14. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005735.

Ski regulates Hippo and TAZ signaling to suppress breast cancer progression.

Rashidian J(1), Le Scolan E(1), Ji X(1), Zhu Q(1), Mulvihill MM(2), Nomura D(2), 
Luo K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (2)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Life
Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA. kluo@berkeley.edu.

Ski, the transforming protein of the avian Sloan-Kettering retrovirus, inhibits
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)/Smad signaling and displays both
pro-oncogenic and anti-oncogenic activities in human cancer. Inhibition of TGF-ß 
signaling is likely responsible for the pro-oncogenic activity of Ski. We
investigated the mechanism(s) underlying the tumor suppressor activity of Ski and
found that Ski suppressed the activity of the Hippo signaling effectors TAZ and
YAP to inhibit breast cancer progression. TAZ and YAP are transcriptional
coactivators that can contribute to cancer by promoting proliferation,
tumorigenesis, and cancer stem cell expansion. Hippo signaling activates the the 
Lats family of kinases, which phosphorylate TAZ and YAP, resulting in cytoplasmic
retention and degradation and inhibition of their transcriptional activity. We
showed that Ski interacted with multiple components of the Hippo pathway to
facilitate activation of Lats2, resulting in increased phosphorylation and
subsequent degradation of TAZ. Ski also promoted the degradation of a
constitutively active TAZ mutant that is not phosphorylated by Lats, suggesting
the existence of a Lats2-independent degradation pathway. Finally, we showed that
Ski repressed the transcriptional activity of TAZ by binding to the TAZ partner
TEAD and recruiting the transcriptional co-repressor NCoR1 to the TEAD-TAZ
complex. Ski effectively reversed transformation and epithelial-to-mesenchyme
transition in cultured breast cancer cells and metastasis in TAZ-expressing
xenografted tumors. Thus, Ski inhibited the function of TAZ through multiple
mechanisms in human cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4457509
PMID: 25670202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Cancer. 2015 Aug 1;137(3):638-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29429. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Genetic variants in Hippo pathway genes YAP1, TEAD1 and TEAD4 are associated with
melanoma-specific survival.

Yuan H(1,)(2,)(3), Liu H(1,)(2), Liu Z(1,)(2), Zhu D(4), Amos CI(4), Fang S(5),
Lee JE(5), Wei Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Community and Family 
Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers. The Hippo
pathway controls cell migration, development and sizes of the organs in diverse
species, and deregulation of this pathway may affect CM progression and
prognosis. Therefore, we hypothesized that genetic variants of Hippo pathway
genes might predict survival of CM patients. We used the genotyping data of 1,115
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 12 pathway core genes (i.e.,
MST1, MST2, SAV1, LATS1, LATS2, MOB1A, MOB1B, YAP1, TEAD1, TEAD2, TEAD3 and
TEAD4) from the dataset of our previously published CM genome-wide association
study and comprehensively analyzed their associations with CM-specific survival
(CSS) in 858 CM patients by using the Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox proportional 
hazards regression models. We found a predictive role of YAP1 rs11225163 CC,
TEAD1 rs7944031 AG+GG and TEAD4 rs1990330 CA+AA in the prognosis of CM. In
addition, patients with an increasing number of unfavorable genotypes (NUG) had a
markedly increased risk of death. After incorporating NUG in the model with
clinical variables, the new model showed a significantly improved discriminatory 
ability to classify CSS (AUC increased from 82.03% to 84.56%). Our findings
suggest that genetic variants of Hippo pathway genes, particularly YAP1
rs11225163, TEAD1 rs7944031 and TEAD4 rs1990330, may independently or jointly
modulate survival of CM patients. Additional large, prospective studies are
needed to validate these findings.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4437894 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25628125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(1):146-56. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.967106.

Characterization of TAZ domains important for the induction of breast cancer stem
cell properties and tumorigenesis.

Li YW(1), Shen H, Frangou C, Yang N, Guo J, Xu B, Bshara W, Shepherd L, Zhu Q,
Wang J, Hu Q, Liu S, Morrison CD, Sun P, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cancer Genetics; Roswell Park Cancer Institute ; Buffalo , NY 
USA.

The Hippo pathway is an evolutionarily conserved regulator of tissue growth and
cell fate during development and regeneration. Conversely, deregulation of the
Hippo pathway has been reported in several malignancies. Here, we used
integrative functional genomics approaches to identify TAZ, a transcription
co-activator and key downstream effector of the Hippo pathway, as an essential
driver for the propagation of TNBC malignant phenotype. We further showed in
non-transformed human mammary basal epithelial cells that expression of
constitutively active TAZ confers cancer stem cell (CSC) traits that are
dependent on the TAZ and TEAD interacting domains. In addition, to gain a better 
understanding of how TAZ functions, we performed genetic-function analysis of
TAZ. Significantly, we identified that both the WW and transcriptional activation
domains of TAZ are critical for the induced CSC properties as well as tumorigenic
potential as manifested in vitro and in human breast cancer xenograft in vivo.
Collectively, our data suggest that pharmacological inhibition of TAZ activity
may provide a novel means of targeting and eliminating breast CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4352971
PMID: 25602524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Cell Sci. 2015 Feb 15;128(4):790-803. doi: 10.1242/jcs.163675. Epub 2015 Jan
14.

Cell competition in mouse NIH3T3 embryonic fibroblasts is controlled by the
activity of Tead family proteins and Myc.

Mamada H(1), Sato T(1), Ota M(1), Sasaki H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (2)Department 
of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan sasaki@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Cell competition is a short-range communication originally observed in
Drosophila. Relatively little is known about cell competition in mammals or in
non-epithelial cells. Hippo signaling and its downstream transcription factors of
the Tead family, control cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, we established
an in vitro model system that shows cell competition in mouse NIH3T3 embryo
fibroblast cells. Co-culture of Tead-activity-manipulated cells with normal
(wild-type) cells caused cell competition. Cells with reduced Tead activity
became losers, whereas cells with increased Tead activity became
super-competitors. Tead directly regulated Myc RNA expression, and cells with
increased Myc expression also became super-competitors. At low cell density, cell
proliferation required both Tead activity and Myc. At high cell density, however,
reduction of either Tead activity or Myc was compensated for by an increase in
the other, and this increase was sufficient to confer 'winner' activity.
Collectively, NIH3T3 cells have cell competition mechanisms similar to those
regulated by Yki and Myc in Drosophila. Establishment of this in vitro model
system should be useful for analyses of the mechanisms of cell competition in
mammals and in fibroblasts.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25588835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Biol. 2014 Dec 22;207(6):753-66. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201406068. Epub 2014 Dec
15.

Thyroid hormone regulates muscle fiber type conversion via miR-133a1.

Zhang D(1), Wang X(1), Li Y(1), Zhao L(2), Lu M(3), Yao X(1), Xia H(1), Wang
YC(4), Liu MF(3), Jiang J(5), Li X(2), Ying H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences; and
Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China Key Laboratory of Food Safety
Risk Assessment, Ministry of Health, Beijing 100021, China. (2)Department of
Neuromuscular Disease, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, 
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences; and Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
and Clinical Research Center of Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. (4)Department of Nutrition, Shanghai Xuhui Central Hospital, Shanghai
200031, China. (5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (6)Key Laboratory of Food Safety
Research, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences; and Center for RNA Research, State Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment, Ministry of
Health, Beijing 100021, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Andrology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, and Clinical Research Center of
Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China yinghao@sibs.ac.cn.

It is known that thyroid hormone (TH) is a major determinant of muscle fiber
composition, but the molecular mechanism by which it does so remains unclear.
Here, we demonstrated that miR-133a1 is a direct target gene of TH in muscle.
Intriguingly, miR-133a, which is enriched in fast-twitch muscle, regulates
slow-to-fast muscle fiber type conversion by targeting TEA domain family member 1
(TEAD1), a key regulator of slow muscle gene expression. Inhibition of miR-133a
in vivo abrogated TH action on muscle fiber type conversion. Moreover, TEAD1
overexpression antagonized the effect of miR-133a as well as TH on muscle fiber
type switch. Additionally, we demonstrate that TH negatively regulates the
transcription of myosin heavy chain I indirectly via miR-133a/TEAD1.
Collectively, we propose that TH inhibits the slow muscle phenotype through a
novel epigenetic mechanism involving repression of TEAD1 expression via targeting
by miR-133a1. This identification of a TH-regulated microRNA therefore sheds new 
light on how TH achieves its diverse biological activities.

© 2014 Zhang et al.

PMCID: PMC4274265
PMID: 25512392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Jan;24(1):268-75. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-0377. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Identification and diagnostic performance of a small RNA within the PCA3 and
BMCC1 gene locus that potentially targets mRNA.

Drayton RM(1), Rehman I(1), Clarke R(2), Zhao Z(3), Pang K(1), Miah S(1), Stoehr 
R(4), Hartmann A(4), Blizard S(1), Lavin M(2), Bryant HE(1), Martens-Uzunova
ES(5), Jenster G(5), Hamdy FC(6), Gardiner RA(2), Catto JW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Urology Unit and Academic Unit of Molecular Oncology, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Urology, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. (6)Nuffield Department of Surgery, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (7)Academic Urology Unit and Academic Unit of Molecular Oncology,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. j.catto@sheffield.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: PCA3 is a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) with unknown function,
upregulated in prostate cancer. LncRNAs may be processed into smaller active
species. We hypothesized this for PCA3.
METHODS: We computed feasible RNA hairpins within the BMCC1 gene (encompassing
PCA3) and searched a prostate transcriptome for these. We measured expression
using qRT-PCR in three cohorts of prostate cancer tissues (n = 60), exfoliated
urinary cells (n = 484 with cancer and n = 166 controls), and in cell lines (n = 
22). We used in silico predictions and RNA knockup to identify potential mRNA
targets of short transcribed RNAs.
RESULTS: We predicted 13 hairpins, of which PCA3-shRNA2 was most abundant within 
the prostate transcriptome. PCA3-shRNA2 is located within intron 1 of PCA3 and
appears regulated by androgens. Expression of PCA3-shRNA2 was upregulated in
malignant prostatic tissues, exfoliated urinary cells from men with prostate
cancer (13-273 fold change; t test P < 0.003), and closely correlated to PCA3
expression (r = 0.84-0.93; P < 0.001). Urinary PCA3-shRNA2 (C-index, 0.75-0.81)
and PCA3 (C-index, 0.78) could predict the presence of cancer in most men.
PCA3-shRNA2 knockup altered the expression of predicted target mRNAs, including
COPS2, SOX11, WDR48, TEAD1, and Noggin. PCA3-shRNA2 expression was negatively
correlated with COPS2 in patient samples (r = -0.32; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: We identified a short RNA within PCA3, whose expression is correlated
to PCA3, which may target mRNAs implicated in prostate biology.
IMPACT: This short RNA is stable ex vivo, suggesting a role as a robust
biomarker. We identify cytoplasmic enrichment of this RNA and potential targeting
of mRNAs implicated in prostate carcinogenesis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25392181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. FASEB J. 2015 Feb;29(2):724-32. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-262980. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Targeting Hippo pathway by specific interruption of YAP-TEAD interaction using
cyclic YAP-like peptides.

Zhou Z(1), Hu T(2), Xu Z(2), Lin Z(2), Zhang Z(2), Feng T(2), Zhu L(2), Rong
Y(2), Shen H(2), Luk JM(2), Zhang X(2), Qin N(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Discovery Technology, Medicinal Chemistry, and Discovery Oncology, Roche
Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Shanghai, 
Shanghai, China joe.zhou.jz2@roche.com. (2)*Discovery Technology, Medicinal
Chemistry, and Discovery Oncology, Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early
Development, Roche Innovation Center Shanghai, Shanghai, China.

Hippo signaling pathway is emerging as a novel target for anticancer therapy
because it plays key roles in organ size control and tumorigenesis. As the
downstream effectors, Yes-associated protein (YAP)-transcriptional enhancer
activation domain family member (TEAD) association is essential for YAP-driven
oncogenic activity, while TEAD is largely dispensable for normal tissue growth.
We present the design of YAP-like peptides (17mer) to occupy the interface 3 on
TEAD. Introducing cysteines at YAP sites 87 and 96 can induce disulfide
formation, as confirmed by crystallography. The engineered peptide significantly 
improves the potency in disrupting YAP-TEAD interaction in vitro. To confirm that
blocking YAP-TEAD complex formation by directly targeting on TEAD is a valid
approach, we report a significant reduction in tumor growth rate in a
hepatocellular carcinoma xenograft model after introducing the dominant-negative 
mutation (Y406H) of TEAD1 to abolish YAP-TEAD interaction. Our results suggest
that targeting TEAD is a promising strategy against YAP-induced oncogenesis.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25384421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e109575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109575.
eCollection 2014.

YAP/TEAD co-activator regulated pluripotency and chemoresistance in ovarian
cancer initiated cells.

Xia Y(1), Zhang YL(2), Yu C(2), Chang T(3), Fan HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Assisted Reproductive Centre, Shaanxi Maternal and Child Care Service
Hospital, Xi'an, China; Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (2)Life Sciences Institute and
Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Recent evidence suggests that some solid tumors, including ovarian cancer,
contain distinct populations of stem cells that are responsible for tumor
initiation, growth, chemo-resistance, and recurrence. The Hippo pathway has
attracted considerable attention and some investigators have focused on YAP
functions for maintaining stemness and cell differentiation. In this study, we
successfully isolated the ovarian cancer initiating cells (OCICs) and
demonstrated YAP promoted self-renewal of ovarian cancer initiated cell (OCIC)
through its downstream co-activator TEAD. YAP and TEAD families were required for
maintaining the expression of specific genes that may be involved in OCICs'
stemness and chemoresistance. Taken together, our data first indicate that
YAP/TEAD co-activator regulated ovarian cancer initiated cell pluripotency and
chemo-resistance. It proposed a new mechanism on the drug resistance in cancer
stem cell that Hippo-YAP signal pathway might serve as therapeutic targets for
ovarian cancer treatment in clinical.

PMCID: PMC4219672
PMID: 25369529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jun;22(6):935-45. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.182. Epub 2014
Oct 31.

c-Abl antagonizes the YAP oncogenic function.

Keshet R(1), Adler J(1), Ricardo Lax I(1), Shanzer M(1), Porat Z(2), Reuven N(1),
Shaul Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. (2)Biological Services Unit, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

YES-associated protein (YAP) is a central transcription coactivator that
functions as an oncogene in a number of experimental systems. However, under DNA 
damage, YAP activates pro-apoptotic genes in conjunction with p73. This program
switching is mediated by c-Abl (Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene) via
phosphorylation of YAP at the Y357 residue (pY357). YAP as an oncogene
coactivates the TEAD (transcriptional enhancer activator domain) family
transcription factors. Here we asked whether c-Abl regulates the YAP-TEAD
functional module. We found that DNA damage, through c-Abl activation,
specifically depressed YAP-TEAD-induced transcription. Remarkably, c-Abl
counteracts YAP-induced transformation by interfering with the YAP-TEAD
transcriptional program. c-Abl induced TEAD1 phosphorylation, but the YAP-TEAD
complex remained unaffected. In contrast, TEAD coactivation was compromised by
phosphomimetic YAP Y357E mutation but not Y357F, as demonstrated at the level of 
reporter genes and endogenous TEAD target genes. Furthermore, YAP Y357E also
severely compromised the role of YAP in cell transformation, migration,
anchorage-independent growth, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
human mammary MCF10A cells. These results suggest that YAP pY357 lost TEAD
transcription activation function. Our results demonstrate that YAP pY357
inactivates YAP oncogenic function and establish a role for YAP Y357
phosphorylation in cell-fate decision.

PMCID: PMC4423178 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25361080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Drugs R D. 2014 Dec;14(4):253-64. doi: 10.1007/s40268-014-0064-6.

Hsa-miR-520d converts fibroblasts into CD105+ populations.

Ishihara Y(1), Tsuno S, Kuwamoto S, Yamashita T, Endo Y, Hasegawa J, Miura N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapeutics, Department of Pathophysiological and
Therapeutic Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Tottori, 683-8503, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that hsa-miR-520d-5p can convert cancer
cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) or mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) via a dedifferentiation by a demethylation mechanism.
METHODS: We tested the effect of miR-520d-5p on human fibroblasts to determine
whether it could be safely used in normal cells for future clinical therapeutic
applications. After we transfected the microRNA into fibroblasts, we analyzed the
phenotypic changes, gene expression levels, and stemness induction in vitro, and 
we evaluated tumor formation in an in vivo xenograft model.
RESULTS: The transfected fibroblasts turned into CD105+ cell populations,
survived approximately 24 weeks, and exhibited increases in both the
collagen-producing ability and in differentiation. Combinatorial transfection of 
small interfering RNAs for miR-520d-5p target genes (ELAVL2, GATAD2B, and TEAD1) 
produced similar results to miR-520d-5p transfection. These molecules converted
normal cells into MSCs and not iPSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: In vitro data indicate the potent usefulness of this small molecule 
as a therapeutic biomaterial in normal cells and cancer cells because CD105+
cells never converted to iPSCs despite repeated transfections and all types of
transfectants lost their tumorigenicity. This maintenance of a benign state
following miR-520d-5p transfection appears to be caused by p53 upregulation. We
conclude that miR-520d-5p may be a useful biomaterial at an in vitro level.

PMCID: PMC4269822
PMID: 25303886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jul 14;5(9):993-8. doi: 10.1021/ml500160m. eCollection
2014.

Structure-Based Design and Synthesis of Potent Cyclic Peptides Inhibiting the
YAP-TEAD Protein-Protein Interaction.

Zhang Z(1), Lin Z(1), Zhou Z(1), Shen HC(1), Yan SF(1), Mayweg AV(1), Xu Z(1),
Qin N(1), Wong JC(1), Zhang Z(1), Rong Y(1), Fry DC(2), Hu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Medicinal Chemistry, Discovery 
Technology, Molecular Design and Chemical Biology, Discovery Oncology, Roche
Innovation Center Shanghai , Building 5, Lane 720, Cai Lun Road, Shanghai 201203,
China ; Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Medicinal Chemistry,
Discovery Technology, Molecular Design and Chemical Biology, Discovery Oncology, 
Roche Innovation Center Shanghai , Building 5, Lane 720, Cai Lun Road, Shanghai
201203, China. (2)Roche Research Center, Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. , 340 Kingsland
Street, Nutley, New Jersey 07110, United States.

The YAP-TEAD protein-protein interaction (PPI) mediates the oncogenic function of
YAP, and inhibitors of this PPI have potential usage in treatment of YAP-involved
cancers. Here we report the design and synthesis of potent cyclic peptide
inhibitors of the YAP-TEAD interaction. A truncation study of YAP interface 3
peptide identified YAP(84-100) as a weak peptide inhibitor (IC50 = 37 µM), and an
alanine scan revealed a beneficial mutation, D94A. Subsequent replacement of a
native cation-p interaction with an optimized disulfide bridge for conformational
constraint and synergistic effect between macrocyclization and modification at
positions 91 and 93 greatly boosted inhibitory activity. Peptide 17 was
identified with an IC50 of 25 nM, and the binding affinity (K d = 15 nM) of this 
17mer peptide to TEAD1 proved to be stronger than YAP(50-171) (K d = 40 nM).

PMCID: PMC4160762
PMID: 25221655  [PubMed]


31. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 3;34(36):12039-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0486-14.2014.

BMP2-SMAD signaling represses the proliferation of embryonic neural stem cells
through YAP.

Yao M(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang P(3), Chen H(3), Xu Z(4), Jiao J(5), Yuan Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics,
State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetic and
Developmental Biology, and. (2)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Institute of Biophysics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Institute of Biophysics. (4)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology,
Institute of Genetic and Developmental Biology, and. (5)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China, and. (6)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Institute of Biophysics, zqyuan@ibp.ac.cn.

Previous studies have shown that the Hippo pathway effector yes-associated
protein (YAP) plays an important role in maintaining stem cell proliferation.
However, the precise molecular mechanism of YAP in regulating murine embryonic
neural stem cells (NSCs) remains largely unknown. Here, we show that bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) treatment inhibited the proliferation of mouse
embryonic NSCs, that YAP was critical for mouse NSC proliferation, and that BMP2 
treatment-induced inhibition of mouse NSC proliferation was abrogated by YAP
knockdown, indicating that the YAP protein mediates the inhibitory effect of BMP2
signaling. Additionally, we found that BMP2 treatment reduced YAP nuclear
translocation, YAP-TEAD interaction, and YAP-mediated transactivation. BMP2
treatment inhibited YAP/TEAD-mediated Cyclin D1 (ccnd1) expression, and knockdown
of ccnd1 abrogated the BMP2-mediated inhibition of mouse NSC proliferation.
Mechanistically, we found that Smad1/4, effectors of BMP2 signaling, competed
with YAP for the interaction with TAED1 and inhibited YAP's cotranscriptional
activity. Our data reveal mechanistic cross talk between BMP2 signaling and the
Hippo-YAP pathway in murine NSC proliferation, which may be exploited as a
therapeutic target in neurodegenerative diseases and aging.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412039-10$15.00/0.

PMID: 25186749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1594-600. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3349. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

YAP is overexpressed in clear cell renal cell carcinoma and its knockdown reduces
cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.

Cao JJ(1), Zhao XM(1), Wang DL(1), Chen KH(1), Sheng X(1), Li WB(1), Li MC(1),
Liu WJ(2), He J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, P.R. China. (2)Institute of Urology, First Hospital of
Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China. (3)Gastroenterology and Neurology Center,
University-Town Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P.R. China.

Yes-associated protein (YAP) has been reported to be an oncogene in a number of
malignancies. It constitutes an important regulatory mechanism for the Hippo
pathway, a key regulator of cell growth and apoptosis. The present study aimed to
investigate the clinical significance and the role of YAP in the development of
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). YAP expression levels were compared
between ccRCC and adjacent normal renal tissues by RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry, respectively. YAP expression levels were then detected in
ccRCC cell lines 786-0 and ACHN, as well as in human embryonic kidney 293 cells
(HEK-293) using western blotting. Three specific YAP-shRNA lentiviral vectors
were constructed and transfected into 786-0 cells, and then the mRNA and protein 
levels of YAP and downstream transcription factor TEAD1 were detected. Finally,
the effects of YAP silencing on proliferation and the cell cycle distribution of 
786-0 cells were detected by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and flow cytometry
(FCM), respectively. The apoptosis rate was also analyzed by FCM. It was observed
that the expression levels of YAP mRNA and protein in ccRCC tissues were higher
than these levels in the adjacent normal renal tissues. The expression of YAP
protein in ccRCC tissues was significantly correlated with clinical stage and
differentiation. The YAP protein levels in the two ccRCC cell lines 786-0 and
ACHN were significantly higher than that in the HEK-293 cells. Additionally,
treatment of 786-0 cells with YAP-shRNA lentiviral vectors significantly reduced 
the expression levels of YAP and TEAD1 mRNA and protein. Further analyses in
786-0 cells in which YAP was decreased, revealed that cell proliferation was
inhibited, cell cycle was arrested at the G1 phase and apoptosis was increased.
These results indicate that YAP is an underlying oncogene in ccRCC and it may be 
a promising biomarker and therapeutic target of ccRCC.

PMID: 25175178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):273-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.029. Epub 2014 
Jul 31.

The Hippo transducer YAP1 transforms activated satellite cells and is a potent
effector of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma formation.

Tremblay AM(1), Missiaglia E(2), Galli GG(1), Hettmer S(3), Urcia R(4), Carrara
M(5), Judson RN(6), Thway K(7), Nadal G(4), Selfe JL(8), Murray G(9), Calogero
RA(5), De Bari C(9), Zammit PS(10), Delorenzi M(11), Wagers AJ(12), Shipley J(8),
Wackerhage H(4), Camargo FD(13).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (2)SIB
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Sarcoma Molecular 
Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK. (3)Department of Stem
Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division
of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD
Scotland, UK. (5)Molecular Biotechnology Center, Department of Biotechnology and 
Health Sciences, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy. (6)School of Medical 
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD Scotland, UK; Biomedical
Research Centre, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. (7)Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of
Molecular Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK; Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London SW3 6JJ, UK. (8)Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team,
Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK. (9)School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, Scotland, UK. (10)Randall Division of 
Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, New Hunt's House, Guy's
Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. (11)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland; Ludwig Center for Cancer Research and Oncology Department,
University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (12)Department of Stem Cell
and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard
Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute
and Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (13)Stem Cell Program, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard Stem 
Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
fernando.camargo@childrens.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):154-5.

The role of the Hippo pathway effector YAP1 in soft tissue sarcomas is poorly
defined. Here we report that YAP1 activity is elevated in human embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS). In mice, sustained YAP1 hyperactivity in activated, but 
not quiescent, satellite cells induces ERMS with high penetrance and short
latency. Via its transcriptional program with TEAD1, YAP1 directly regulates
several major hallmarks of ERMS. YAP1-TEAD1 upregulate pro-proliferative and
oncogenic genes and maintain the ERMS differentiation block by interfering with
MYOD1 and MEF2 pro-differentiation activities. Normalization of YAP1 expression
reduces tumor burden in human ERMS xenografts and allows YAP1-driven ERMS to
differentiate in situ. Collectively, our results identify YAP1 as a potent ERMS
oncogenic driver and a promising target for differentiation therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25087979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2014 May-Jun;20(3):188-94. doi: 10.4103/1319-3767.133025.

Expression of hippo pathway in colorectal cancer.

Liang K, Zhou G, Zhang Q, Li J, Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hippo pathway plays a crucial role in cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. This study aimed to investigate the expression of
Hippo pathway components in the progression and metastasis of colorectal cancer
(CRC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
was used to examine the mRNA expression levels of MST1, LATS2, YAP, TAZ, TEAD1,
CDX2, and OCT4, and western blot (WB) was used to examine the protein expression 
levels of MST1, YAP, TEAD1, and CDX2 in 30 specimens of human colorectal
adenomas, 50 pairs of human CRC tissues, and adjacent nontumorous tissues from
CRC patients. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as the
housekeeping gene in qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression levels of MST1 and LATS2 showed an increasing
tendency from CRC to adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001). Conversely, the
mRNA expression levels of YAP, TAZ, TEAD, and OCT4 showed a decreasing tendency
from CRC to adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001). MST1 protein was
downregulated and YAP and TEAD1 proteins were upregulated in CRC (all P < 0.001).
The mRNA and protein expression levels of CDX2 in CRC were significantly lower
than those in colorectal adenomas and adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001),
but there was no significant difference between the latter two groups (qRT-PCR, P
= 0.113; WB, P = 0.151). Furthermore, statistical analysis showed that the
expression levels of Hippo signal pathway components were associated with tumor
differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and TNM stage.
CONCLUSION: Hippo pathway is suppressed in the progression from colorectal
adenomas to CRC and is associated with CRC progression and metastasis. This study
suggests the components of Hippo pathway might be prognostic indicators for CRC
patients.

PMCID: PMC4067916
PMID: 24976283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 23;34(17):2204-14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.168. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

MicroRNA-124 expression counteracts pro-survival stress responses in
glioblastoma.

Mucaj V(1), Lee SS(2), Skuli N(3), Giannoukos DN(2), Qiu B(1), Eisinger-Mathason 
TS(1), Nakazawa MS(1), Shay JE(1), Gopal PP(4), Venneti S(4), Lal P(4), Minn
AJ(1), Simon MC(2), Mathew LK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)1] Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)1] Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] INSERM U1037, Institute Claudius Regaud, Toulouse,
France. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Glioblastomas are aggressive adult brain tumors, characterized by inadequately
organized vasculature and consequent nutrient and oxygen (O2)-depleted areas.
Adaptation to low nutrients and hypoxia supports glioblastoma cell survival,
progression and therapeutic resistance. However, specific mechanisms promoting
cellular survival under nutrient and O2 deprivation remain incompletely
understood. Here, we show that miR-124 expression is negatively correlated with a
hypoxic gene signature in glioblastoma patient samples, suggesting that low
miR-124 levels contribute to pro-survival adaptive pathways in this disease. As
miR-124 expression is repressed in various cancer types (including glioblastoma),
we quantified miR-124 abundance in normoxic and hypoxic regions in glioblastoma
patient tissue, and investigated whether ectopic miR-124 expression compromises
cell survival during tumor ischemia. Our results indicate that miR-124 levels are
further diminished in hypoxic/ischemic regions within individual glioblastoma
patient samples, compared with regions replete in O2 and nutrients. Importantly, 
we also show that increased miR-124 expression affects the ability of tumor cells
to survive under O2 and/or nutrient deprivation. Moreover, miR-124 re-expression 
increases cell death in vivo and enhances the survival of mice bearing
intracranial xenograft tumors. miR-124 exerts this phenotype in part by directly 
regulating TEAD1, MAPK14/p38a and SERP1, factors involved in cell proliferation
and survival under stress. Simultaneous suppression of these miR-124 targets
results in similar levels of cell death as caused by miR-124 restoration.
Importantly, we further demonstrate that SERP1 reintroduction reverses the
hypoxic cell death elicited by miR-124, indicating the importance of SERP1 in
promoting tumor cell survival. In support of our experimental data, we observed a
significant correlation between high SERP1 levels and poor patient outcome in
glioblastoma patients. Collectively, among the many pro-tumorigeneic properties
of miR-124 repression in glioblastoma, we delineated a novel role in promoting
tumor cell survival under stressful microenvironments, thereby supporting tumor
progression.

PMCID: PMC4275412
PMID: 24954504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1839(11):1205-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.012. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

A TEAD1/p65 complex regulates the eutherian-conserved MnSOD intronic enhancer,
eRNA transcription and the innate immune response.

Chokas AL(1), Bickford JS(2), Barilovits SJ(3), Rogers RJ(4), Qiu X(3), Newsom
KJ(5), Beachy DE(2), Nick HS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (2)Departments of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; 
McKnight Brain Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (3)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (4)Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610, USA; Anesthesiology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (5)Departments of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. 
(6)Departments of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; McKnight Brain
Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610,
USA. Electronic address: hnick@ufl.edu.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), a critical anti-oxidant enzyme,
detoxifies the mitochondrial-derived reactive oxygen species, superoxide,
elicited through normal respiration or the inflammatory response. Proinflammatory
stimuli induce MnSOD gene expression through a eutherian-conserved, intronic
enhancer element. We identified two prototypic enhancer binding proteins, TEAD1
and p65, that when co-expressed induce MnSOD expression comparable to
pro-inflammatory stimuli. TEAD1 causes the nuclear sequestration of p65 leading
to a novel TEAD1/p65 complex that associates with the intronic enhancer and is
necessary for cytokine induction of MnSOD. Unlike typical NF-<U+03BA>B-responsive genes,
the induction of MnSOD does not involve p50. Beyond MnSOD, the TEAD1/p65 complex 
regulates a subset of genes controlling the innate immune response that were
previously viewed as solely NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent. We also identified an
enhancer-derived RNA (eRNA) that is induced by either proinflammatory stimuli or 
the TEAD1/p65 complex, potentially linking the intronic enhancer to intra- and
interchromosomal gene regulation through the inducible eRNA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252815
PMID: 24953189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 17;443(3):917-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.100. Epub 2013 Dec 28.

The PDZ-binding motif of Yes-associated protein is required for its co-activation
of TEAD-mediated CTGF transcription and oncogenic cell transforming activity.

Shimomura T(1), Miyamura N(1), Hata S(1), Miura R(1), Hirayama J(2), Nishina
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113-8510, Japan. (2)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. Electronic address:
hirayama.dbio@mri.tmd.ac.jp. (3)Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. Electronic address:
nishina.dbio@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

YAP is a transcriptional co-activator that acts downstream of the Hippo signaling
pathway and regulates multiple cellular processes, including proliferation. Hippo
pathway-dependent phosphorylation of YAP negatively regulates its function.
Conversely, attenuation of Hippo-mediated phosphorylation of YAP increases its
ability to stimulate proliferation and eventually induces oncogenic
transformation. The C-terminus of YAP contains a highly conserved PDZ-binding
motif that regulates YAP's functions in multiple ways. However, to date, the
importance of the PDZ-binding motif to the oncogenic cell transforming activity
of YAP has not been determined. In this study, we disrupted the PDZ-binding motif
in the YAP (5SA) protein, in which the sites normally targeted by Hippo
pathway-dependent phosphorylation are mutated. We found that loss of the
PDZ-binding motif significantly inhibited the oncogenic transformation of
cultured cells induced by YAP (5SA). In addition, the increased nuclear
localization of YAP (5SA) and its enhanced activation of TEAD-dependent
transcription of the cell proliferation gene CTGF were strongly reduced when the 
PDZ-binding motif was deleted. Similarly, in mouse liver, deletion of the
PDZ-binding motif suppressed nuclear localization of YAP (5SA) and YAP
(5SA)-induced CTGF expression. Taken together, our results indicate that the
PDZ-binding motif of YAP is critical for YAP-mediated oncogenesis, and that this 
effect is mediated by YAP's co-activation of TEAD-mediated CTGF transcription.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24380865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3308-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.515817. Epub 2013
Dec 16.

The transcription factor TEAD1 represses smooth muscle-specific gene expression
by abolishing myocardin function.

Liu F(1), Wang X, Hu G, Wang Y, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia 30912 and.

The TEAD (transcriptional enhancer activator domain) proteins share an
evolutionarily conserved DNA-binding TEA domain, which binds to the MCAT
cis-acting regulatory element. Previous studies have shown that TEAD proteins are
involved in regulating the expression of smooth muscle a-actin. However, it
remains undetermined whether TEAD proteins play a broader role in regulating
expression of other genes in vascular smooth muscle cells. In this study, we show
that the expression of TEAD1 is significantly induced during smooth muscle cell
phenotypic modulation and negatively correlates with smooth muscle-specific gene 
expression. We further demonstrate that TEAD1 plays a novel role in suppressing
expression of smooth muscle-specific genes, including smooth muscle a-actin, by
abolishing the promyogenic function of myocardin, a key mediator of smooth muscle
differentiation. Mechanistically, we found that TEAD1 competes with myocardin for
binding to serum response factor (SRF), resulting in disruption of myocardin and 
SRF interactions and thereby attenuating expression of smooth muscle-specific
genes. This study provides the first evidence demonstrating that TEAD1 is a novel
general repressor of smooth muscle-specific gene expression through interfering
with myocardin binding to SRF.

PMCID: PMC3916534
PMID: 24344135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 Jul 11;1:35. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-35.

Identification of a neuronal transcription factor network involved in
medulloblastoma development.

Lastowska M(1), Al-Afghani H, Al-Balool HH, Sheth H, Mercer E, Coxhead JM,
Redfern CP, Peters H, Burt AD, Santibanez-Koref M, Bacon CM, Chesler L, Rust AG, 
Adams DJ, Williamson D, Clifford SC, Jackson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Central Parkway,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. michael.jackson@newcastle.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Medulloblastomas, the most frequent malignant brain tumours affecting
children, comprise at least 4 distinct clinicogenetic subgroups. Aberrant sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signalling is observed in approximately 25% of tumours and defines
one subgroup. Although alterations in SHH pathway genes (e.g. PTCH1, SUFU) are
observed in many of these tumours, high throughput genomic analyses have
identified few other recurring mutations. Here, we have mutagenised the Ptch+/-
murine tumour model using the Sleeping Beauty transposon system to identify
additional genes and pathways involved in SHH subgroup medulloblastoma
development.
RESULTS: Mutagenesis significantly increased medulloblastoma frequency and
identified 17 candidate cancer genes, including orthologs of genes somatically
mutated (PTEN, CREBBP) or associated with poor outcome (PTEN, MYT1L) in the human
disease. Strikingly, these candidate genes were enriched for transcription
factors (p=2x10-5), the majority of which (6/7; Crebbp, Myt1L, Nfia, Nfib, Tead1 
and Tgif2) were linked within a single regulatory network enriched for genes
associated with a differentiated neuronal phenotype. Furthermore, activity of
this network varied significantly between the human subgroups, was associated
with metastatic disease, and predicted poor survival specifically within the SHH 
subgroup of tumours. Igf2, previously implicated in medulloblastoma, was the most
differentially expressed gene in murine tumours with network perturbation, and
network activity in both mouse and human tumours was characterised by enrichment 
for multiple gene-sets indicating increased cell proliferation, IGF signalling,
MYC target upregulation, and decreased neuronal differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our data support a model of medulloblastoma
development in SB-mutagenised Ptch+/- mice which involves disruption of a novel
transcription factor network leading to Igf2 upregulation, proliferation of GNPs,
and tumour formation. Moreover, our results identify rational therapeutic targets
for SHH subgroup tumours, alongside prognostic biomarkers for the identification 
of poor-risk SHH patients.

PMCID: PMC3893591
PMID: 24252690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(9):5199-205.

Effects of the hippo signaling pathway in human gastric cancer.

Zhou GX(1), Li XY, Zhang Q, Zhao K, Zhang CP, Xue CH, Yang K, Tian ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University 
Medical College, Qingdao, China E-mail : rose201001@126.com.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The Hippo signaling pathway is a newly discovered and conserved
signaling cascade, which regulates organ size control by governing cell
proliferation and apoptosis. This study aimed to investigate its effects in human
gastric cancer.
METHODS: Tumor tissues (n=60), adjacent non-tumor tissues (n=60) and normal
tissues (n=60) were obtained from the same patients with primary gastric cancer
(GC). In addition, 70 samples of chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) tissues were
obtained from patients with intestinal metaplasia (IM) by endoscopic biopsy.
Hippo signaling molecules, including Mst1, Lats1, YAP1, TAZ, TEAD1, Oct4 and
CDX2, were determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Protein
expression of Mst1, Lats1, YAP1, TEAD1 and CDX2 was assessed by
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Mst1, Lats1 and Oct4 mRNA expression showed an increasing tendency from 
GC tissues to normal gastric tissues, while the mRNA expression of YAP1, TAZ and 
TEAD1 was up-regulated (all P<0.01). Mst1 and Lats1 protein expression presented 
a similar trend with their mRNA expression. In addition, YAP1 and TEAD1 protein
expression in GC was significantly higher than in the other groups (all P<0.01). 
CDX2 mRNA and protein expression in the CAG group were higher than in the other
groups (all P<0.01). In GC, mRNA expression of Mst1, Lats1, Oct4, YAP1, TAZ,
TEAD1 and CDX2 had a close correlation with lymphatic metastasis and tumor TNM
stage (all P<0.01). Furthermore, protein expression of Mst1, Lats1 ,YAP1, TAZ,
TEAD1 and CDX2 had a close correlation between each other (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Hippo signaling pathway is involved in the development,
progression and metastasis of human gastric cancer. Therefore, manipulation of
Hippo signaling molecules may be a potential therapeutic strategy for gastric
cancer.

PMID: 24175801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. FEBS Lett. 2013 Oct 1;587(19):3216-23. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.08.013. Epub
2013 Aug 28.

Interaction with the Yes-associated protein (YAP) allows TEAD1 to positively
regulate NAIP expression.

Landin Malt A(1), Georges A, Silber J, Zider A, Flagiello D.

Author information: 
(1)Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Equipe de Génétique Moléculaire de la
Différenciation, IJM, UMR 7592 CNRS, Paris, France. Electronic address:
alm14@nyu.edu.

Although the expression of the neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP) gene 
is considered involved in apoptosis suppression as well as in inflammatory
response, the molecular basis of the NAIP gene expression is poorly understood.
Here we show that the TEA domain protein 1 (TEAD1) is able to positively activate
the transcription of NAIP. We further demonstrate that this regulation is
mediated by the presence of the endogenous Yes associated protein (YAP) cofactor,
and requires the interaction with YAP. We finally identified an intronic region
of the NAIP gene responding to TEAD1/YAP activity, suggesting that regulation of 
NAIP by TEAD1/YAP is at the transcriptional level.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23994529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jul;14(7):756-63. doi: 10.1038/ni.2615. Epub 2013 May 26.

The transcriptional architecture of early human hematopoiesis identifies
multilevel control of lymphoid commitment.

Laurenti E(1), Doulatov S, Zandi S, Plumb I, Chen J, April C, Fan JB, Dick JE.

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Understanding how differentiation programs originate from the gene-expression
'landscape' of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is crucial for the development of 
new clinical therapies. We mapped the transcriptional dynamics underlying the
first steps of commitment by tracking transcriptome changes in human HSCs and
eight early progenitor populations. We found that transcriptional programs were
extensively shared, extended across lineage-potential boundaries and were not
strictly lineage affiliated. Elements of stem, lymphoid and myeloid programs were
retained in multilymphoid progenitors (MLPs), which reflected a hybrid
transcriptional state. By functional single cell analysis, we found that the
transcription factors Bcl-11A, Sox4 and TEAD1 (TEF1) governed transcriptional
networks in MLPs, which led to B cell specification. Overall, we found that
integrated transcriptome approaches can be used to identify previously unknown
regulators of multipotency and show additional complexity in lymphoid commitment.

PMID: 23708252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Signal. 2013 Aug;25(8):1720-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.002. Epub 2013
May 11.

BMP4 is a novel transcriptional target and mediator of mammary cell migration
downstream of the Hippo pathway component TAZ.

Lai D(1), Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
ON K7L 3N6, Canada.

Since the metastatic progression of cancers is often fatal with limited treatment
options, understanding the mechanism of metastasis is imperative for designing
novel and targeted therapies. TAZ has been identified as a novel oncogene in both
breast and lung cancers and is inhibited by the Hippo signaling pathway. In this 
study we provide convincing evidence that overexpression of TAZ in a mammary
epithelial cell line, MCF10A, leads to enhanced cell migration - a fundamental
characteristic of the metastatic progression of cancers. In addition, we
identified the secreted growth factor BMP4 as a mediator of TAZ-induced cell
migration. TAZ induces BMP4 transcription through the TEAD family of
transcription factors, which mediate BMP4 promoter activation through binding to 
TEAD response element 1 (TRE1). Importantly, BMP4 activation by TAZ also enhances
signaling downstream of TAZ, in particular, promoting Smad1/5 intracellular
signaling. Functionally, short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of BMP4 rescued
TAZ-induced cell migration. Our findings have identified a novel TAZ/TEAD/BMP4
signaling axis responsible for cell migration, with future implications in the
development of targeted therapeutics for metastatic breast cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23673366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3615-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3793. Epub 
2013 Apr 10.

YAP/TEAD-mediated transcription controls cellular senescence.

Xie Q(1), Chen J, Feng H, Peng S, Adams U, Bai Y, Huang L, Li J, Huang J, Meng S,
Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Transcription coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) plays an important role in
the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, we identify a new role 
of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence. We find that the expression
levels of YAP proteins decrease following the replication-induced cellular
senescence in IMR90 cells. Silencing of YAP inhibits cell proliferation and
induces premature senescence. In additional experiments, we observe that cellular
senescence induced by YAP deficiency is TEAD- and Rb/p16/p53-dependent.
Furthermore, we show that Cdk6 is a direct downstream target gene of YAP in the
regulation of cellular senescence, and the expression of Cdk6 is through the
YAP-TEAD complex. Ectopic expression of Cdk6 rescued YAP knockdown-induced
senescence. Finally, we find that downregulation of YAP in tumor cells increases 
senescence in response to chemotherapeutic agents, and YAP or Cdk6 expression
rescues cellular senescence. Taken together, our findings define the critical
role of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence and provide a novel insight 
into a potential chemotherapeutic avenue for tumor suppression.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23576552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Genomics. 2013 Mar 19;14:194. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-194.

Functional effect of mir-27b on myostatin expression: a relationship in
Piedmontese cattle with double-muscled phenotype.

Miretti S(1), Martignani E, Accornero P, Baratta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Torino, via Leonardo da Vinci 
44, Grugliasco, 10095, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In Piedmontese cattle the double-muscled phenotype is an inherited
condition associated to a point mutation in the myostatin (MSTN) gene. The
Piedmontese MSTN missense mutation G938A is translated to C313Y myostatin
protein. This mutation alters MSTN function as a negative regulator of muscle
growth, thereby inducing muscle hypertrophy. MiRNAs could play a role in skeletal
muscle hypertrophy modulation by down-regulating gene expression.
RESULTS: After identifying a 3'-UTR consensus sequence of several negative and
positive modulator genes involved in the skeletal muscle hypertrophy pathway,
such as IGF1, IGF1R, PPP3CA, NFATc1, MEF2C, GSK3b, TEAD1 and MSTN, we screened
miRNAs matching to it. This analysis led to the identification of miR-27b,
miR-132, miR-186 and miR-199b-5p as possible candidates. We collected samples of 
longissimus thoracis from twenty Piedmontese and twenty Friesian male bovines. In
Piedmontese group miR-27b was up-regulated 7.4-fold (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Further, we
report that the level of MSTN mRNA was about 5-fold lower in Piedmontese cattle
vs Friesian cattle (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001) and that less mature MSTN protein was detected in
the Piedmontese one (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Cotransfection of miR-27b and psi-check2 vector
with the luciferase reporter gene linked to the bovine wild-type 3'-UTR of MSTN
strongly inhibited the luciferase activity (79%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that bovine MSTN is a specific target of
miR-27b and that miRNAs contribute to explain additive phenotypic hypertrophy in 
Piedmontese cattle selected for the MSTN gene mutation, possibly outlining a more
precise genetic signature able to elucidate differences in muscle conformation.

PMCID: PMC3605361
PMID: 23510267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jun;52(6):538-50. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22050. Epub
2013 Mar 5.

Recurrent NCOA2 gene rearrangements in congenital/infantile spindle cell
rhabdomyosarcoma.

Mosquera JM(1), Sboner A, Zhang L, Kitabayashi N, Chen CL, Sung YS, Wexler LH,
LaQuaglia MP, Edelman M, Sreekantaiah C, Rubin MA, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA.
jmm9018@med.cornell.edu

Spindle cell rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a rare form of RMS with different clinical
characteristics between children and adult patients. Its genetic hallmark remains
unknown and it remains debatable if there is pathogenetic relationship between
the spindle cell and the so-called sclerosing RMS. We studied two pediatric and
one adult spindle cell RMS by next generation RNA sequencing and FusionSeq data
analysis to detect novel fusions. An SRF-NCOA2 fusion was detected in a spindle
cell RMS from the posterior neck in a 7-month-old child. The fusion matched the
tumor karyotype and was confirmed by FISH and RT-PCR, which showed fusion of SRF 
exon 6 to NCOA2 exon 12. Additional 14 spindle cell (from 8 children and 6
adults) and 4 sclerosing (from 2 children and 2 adults) RMS were tested by FISH
for the presence of abnormalities in NCOA2, SRF, as well as for PAX3 and NCOA1.
NCOA2 rearrangements were found in two additional spindle cell RMS from a
3-month-old and a 4-week-old child. In the latter tumor, TEAD1 was identified by 
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) to be the NCOA2 gene fusion partner. None
of the adult tumors were positive for NCOA2 rearrangement. Despite similar
histomorphology in adults and young children, these results suggest that spindle 
cell RMS is a heterogeneous disease genetically as well as clinically. Our
findings also support a relationship between NCOA2-rearranged spindle cell RMS
occurring in young childhood and the so-called congenital RMS, which often
displays rearrangements at 8q13 locus (NCOA2).

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3734530
PMID: 23463663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 May-Jun;134(5-6):225-33. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.01.001.
Epub 2013 Jan 28.

What role (if any) does the highly conserved CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein play in
Cockayne syndrome?

Weiner AM(1), Gray LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-7350, USA. amweiner@uw.edu

The PGBD3 piggyBac transposon inserted into CSB intron 5 early in the primate
lineage. As a result of alternative splicing, the human CSB gene now encodes
three proteins: CSB, a CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein that joins the N-terminal CSB
domain to the C-terminal PGBD3 transposase domain, and PGBD3 transposase. The
fusion protein is as highly conserved as CSB, suggesting that it is advantageous 
in health; however, expression of the fusion protein in CSB-null cells induces a 
constitutive interferon (IFN) response. The fusion protein binds in vivo to
PGBD3-related MER85 elements, but is also tethered to c-Jun, TEAD1, and CTCF
motifs by interactions with the cognate transcription factors. The fusion protein
regulates nearby genes from the c-Jun (and to a lesser extent TEAD1 and CTCF)
motifs, but not from MER85 elements. We speculate that the fusion protein
interferes with CSB-dependent chromatin remodeling, generating double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) that induces an IFN response through endosomal TLR or cytoplasmic
RIG-I and/or MDA5 RNA sensors. We suggest that the fusion protein was fixed in
primates because an elevated IFN response may help to fight viral infection. We
also speculate that an inappropriate IFN response may contribute to the clinical 
presentation of CS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3654029
PMID: 23369858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Signal. 2013 Mar;25(3):674-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.11.027. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

TEAD1 controls C2C12 cell proliferation and differentiation and regulates three
novel target genes.

Wang F(1), Wang H, Wu H, Qiu H, Zeng C, Sun L, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

TEAD1 is a transcription factor involved in activation of muscle specific genes, 
such as the cardiac muscle troponin T gene, skeletal muscle actin, myosin heavy
chains genes. Here, we reported that TEAD1 was expressed ubiquitously in
different mouse tissues and was up-regulated in differentiation process of the
mouse myoblast cell line C2C12. Functional assay revealed that overexpression of 
TEAD1 gene can arrest the C2C12 cell cycle and promote C2C12 cell
differentiation. To understand the physiological role of TEAD1 in muscle
development, three new regulated genes of TEAD1, Mrpl21, Ndufa6 and Ccne1, were
identified by expression analysis, promoter activity measurement assay. The
expression patterns of target genes were detected in the cell differentiation
process. The Mrpl21 and Ndufa6 genes were up-regulated in cell differentiation
while Ccne1 gene was significantly down-regulated. Overexpression of Mrpl21 and
Ndufa6 in C2C12 can up-regulate Myh4 gene expression thus promote C2C12
differentiation, but did not affect cell cycle. Co-overexpression of Ccne1 with
Ndufa6 resulted in Myh4 expression decrease and the number of S-phase cells
slight increase. Together, our results suggested that TEAD1 may mediate muscle
development through its target genes, Mrpl21, Ndufa6 and Ccne1.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23220227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045498. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Alteration of TEAD1 expression levels confers apoptotic resistance through the
transcriptional up-regulation of Livin.

Landin Malt A(1), Cagliero J, Legent K, Silber J, Zider A, Flagiello D.

Author information: 
(1)Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Equipe de Génétique Moléculaire de la
Différenciation, IJM, UMR 7592 CNRS, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: TEA domain (TEAD) proteins are highly conserved transcription factors
involved in embryonic development and differentiation of various tissues. More
recently, emerging evidences for a contribution of these proteins towards
apoptosis and cell proliferation regulation have also been proposed. These
effects appear to be mediated by the interaction between TEAD and its
co-activator Yes-Associated Protein (YAP), the downstream effector of the Hippo
tumour suppressor pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We further investigated the mechanisms underlying
TEAD-mediated apoptosis regulation and showed that overexpression or
RNAi-mediated silencing of the TEAD1 protein is sufficient to protect mammalian
cell lines from induced apoptosis, suggesting a proapoptotic function for TEAD1
and a non physiological cytoprotective effect for overexpressed TEAD1. Moreover
we show that the apoptotic resistance conferred by altered TEAD1 expression is
mediated by the transcriptional up-regulation of Livin, a member of the Inhibitor
of Apoptosis Protein (IAP) family. In addition, we show that overexpression of a 
repressive form of TEAD1 can induce Livin up-regulation, indicating that the
effect of TEAD1 on Livin expression is indirect and favoring a model in which
TEAD1 activates a repressor of Livin by interacting with a limiting cofactor that
gets titrated upon TEAD1 up-regulation. Interestingly, we show that
overexpression of a mutated form of TEAD1 (Y421H) implicated in Sveinsson's
chorioretinal atrophy that strongly reduces its interaction with YAP as well as
its activation, can induce Livin expression and protect cells from induced
apoptosis, suggesting that YAP is not the cofactor involved in this process.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together our data reveal a new, Livin-dependent, 
apoptotic role for TEAD1 in mammals and provide mechanistic insight downstream of
TEAD1 deregulation in cancers.

PMCID: PMC3454436
PMID: 23029054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002972. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

Tethering of the conserved piggyBac transposase fusion protein CSB-PGBD3 to
chromosomal AP-1 proteins regulates expression of nearby genes in humans.

Gray LT(1), Fong KK, Pavelitz T, Weiner AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

The CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein arose more than 43 million years ago when a 2.5-kb
piggyBac 3 (PGBD3) transposon inserted into intron 5 of the Cockayne syndrome
Group B (CSB) gene in the common ancestor of all higher primates. As a result,
full-length CSB is now coexpressed with an abundant CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein by
alternative splicing of CSB exons 1-5 to the PGBD3 transposase. An internal
deletion of the piggyBac transposase ORF also gave rise to 889 dispersed, 140-bp 
MER85 elements that were mobilized in trans by PGBD3 transposase. The CSB-PGBD3
fusion protein binds MER85s in vitro and induces a strong interferon-like innate 
antiviral immune response when expressed in CSB-null UVSS1KO cells. To explore
the connection between DNA binding and gene expression changes induced by
CSB-PGBD3, we investigated the genome-wide DNA binding profile of the fusion
protein. CSB-PGBD3 binds to 363 MER85 elements in vivo, but these sites do not
correlate with gene expression changes induced by the fusion protein. Instead,
CSB-PGBD3 is enriched at AP-1, TEAD1, and CTCF motifs, presumably through
protein-protein interactions with the cognate transcription factors; moreover,
recruitment of CSB-PGBD3 to AP-1 and TEAD1 motifs correlates with nearby genes
regulated by CSB-PGBD3 expression in UVSS1KO cells and downregulated by CSB
rescue of mutant CS1AN cells. Consistent with these data, the N-terminal CSB
domain of the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein interacts with the AP-1 transcription
factor c-Jun and with RNA polymerase II, and a chimeric CSB-LacI construct
containing only the N-terminus of CSB upregulates many of the genes induced by
CSB-PGBD3. We conclude that the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein substantially reshapes
the transcriptome in CS patient CS1AN and that continued expression of the
CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein in the absence of functional CSB may affect the clinical
presentation of CS patients by directly altering the transcriptional program.

PMCID: PMC3459987
PMID: 23028371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 11;109(37):E2441-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212021109. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

The Hippo pathway target, YAP, promotes metastasis through its TEAD-interaction
domain.

Lamar JM(1), Stern P, Liu H, Schindler JW, Jiang ZG, Hynes RO.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) is a major regulator
of organ size and proliferation in vertebrates. As such, YAP can act as an
oncogene in several tissue types if its activity is increased aberrantly.
Although no activating mutations in the yap1 gene have been identified in human
cancer, yap1 is located on the 11q22 amplicon, which is amplified in several
human tumors. In addition, mutations or epigenetic silencing of members of the
Hippo pathway, which represses YAP function, have been identified in human
cancers. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to increasing tumor growth,
increased YAP activity is potently prometastatic in breast cancer and melanoma
cells. Using a Luminex-based approach to multiplex in vivo assays, we determined 
that the domain of YAP that interacts with the TEAD/TEF family of transcription
factors but not the WW domains or PDZ-binding motif, is essential for
YAP-mediated tumor growth and metastasis. We further demonstrate that, through
its TEAD-interaction domain, YAP enhances multiple processes known to be
important for tumor progression and metastasis, including cellular proliferation,
transformation, migration, and invasion. Finally, we found that the metastatic
potential of breast cancer and melanoma cells is strongly correlated with
increased TEAD transcriptional activity. Together, our results suggest that
increased YAP/TEAD activity plays a causal role in cancer progression and
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3443162
PMID: 22891335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Jul;10(7):904-13. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0116. Epub
2012 May 22.

Yes-associated protein 1 is activated and functions as an oncogene in
meningiomas.

Baia GS(1), Caballero OL, Orr BA, Lal A, Ho JS, Cowdrey C, Tihan T, Mawrin C,
Riggins GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory, Neurosurgery Department, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. gbaia1@jhmi.edu

The Hippo signaling pathway is functionally conserved in Drosophila melanogaster 
and mammals, and its proposed function is to control tissue homeostasis by
regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis. The core components are composed of 
a kinase cascade that culminates with the phosphorylation and inhibition of
Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1). Phospho-YAP1 is retained in the cytoplasm. In
the absence of Hippo signaling, YAP1 translocates to the nucleus, associates with
co-activators TEAD1-4, and functions as a transcriptional factor promoting the
expression of key target genes. Components of the Hippo pathway are mutated in
human cancers, and deregulation of this pathway plays a role in tumorigenesis.
Loss of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene is the most common genetic alteration in
meningiomas, and the NF2 gene product, Merlin, acts upstream of the Hippo
pathway. Here, we show that primary meningioma tumors have high nuclear
expression of YAP1. In meningioma cells, Merlin expression is associated with
phosphorylation of YAP1. Using an siRNA transient knockdown of YAP1 in NF2-mutant
meningioma cells, we show that suppression of YAP1 impaired cell proliferation
and migration. Conversely, YAP1 overexpression led to a strong augment of cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth and restriction of
cisplatin-induced apoptosis. In addition, expression of YAP1 in nontransformed
arachnoidal cells led to the development of tumors in nude mice. Together, these 
findings suggest that in meningiomas, deregulation of the Hippo pathway is
largely observed in primary tumors and that YAP1 functions as an oncogene
promoting meningioma tumorigenesis.

Mol Cancer Res; 10(7); 904-13. ©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4703097
PMID: 22618028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Rep. 2012 Feb 23;1(2):110-7.

Oncogenic splicing factor SRSF1 is a critical transcriptional target of MYC.

Das S(1), Anczuków O, Akerman M, Krainer AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The SR protein splicing factor SRSF1 is a potent proto-oncogene that is
frequently upregulated in cancer. Here, we show that SRSF1 is a direct target of 
the transcription factor oncoprotein MYC. These two oncogenes are significantly
coexpressed in lung carcinomas, and MYC knockdown downregulates SRSF1 expression 
in lung-cancer cell lines. MYC directly activates transcription of SRSF1 through 
two noncanonical E-boxes in its promoter. The resulting increase in SRSF1 protein
is sufficient to modulate alternative splicing of a subset of transcripts. In
particular, MYC induction leads to SRSF1-mediated alternative splicing of the
signaling kinase MKNK2 and the transcription factor TEAD1. SRSF1 knockdown
reduces MYC's oncogenic activity, decreasing proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth. These results suggest a mechanism for SRSF1
upregulation in tumors with elevated MYC and identify SRSF1 as a critical MYC
target that contributes to its oncogenic potential by enabling MYC to regulate
the expression of specific protein isoforms through alternative splicing.

PMCID: PMC3334311
PMID: 22545246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031994. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Control of tissue growth and cell transformation by the Salvador/Warts/Hippo
pathway.

Zhang X(1), Grusche FA, Harvey KF.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The Salvador-Warts-Hippo (SWH) pathway is an important regulator of tissue growth
that is frequently subverted in human cancer. The key oncoprotein of the SWH
pathway is the transcriptional co-activator, Yes-associated protein (YAP). YAP
promotes tissue growth and transformation of cultured cells by interacting with
transcriptional regulatory proteins via its WW domains, or, in the case of the
TEAD1-4 transcription factors, an N-terminal binding domain. YAP possesses a
putative transactivation domain in its C-terminus that is necessary to stimulate 
transcription factors in vitro, but its requirement for YAP function has not been
investigated in detail. Interestingly, whilst the WW domains and TEAD-binding
domain are highly conserved in the Drosophila melanogaster YAP orthologue,
Yorkie, the majority of the C-terminal region of YAP is not present in Yorkie. To
investigate this apparent conundrum, we assessed the functional roles of the YAP 
and Yorkie C-termini. We found that these regions were not required for Yorkie's 
ability to drive tissue growth in vivo, or YAP's ability to promote
anchorage-independent growth or resistance to contact inhibition. However, the
YAP transactivation domain was required for YAP's ability to induce cell
migration and invasion. Moreover, a role for the YAP transactivation domain in
cell transformation was uncovered when the YAP WW domains were mutated together
with the transactivation domain. This shows that YAP can promote cell
transformation in a flexible manner, presumably by contacting transcriptional
regulatory proteins either via its WW domains or its transactivation domain.

PMCID: PMC3281119
PMID: 22359650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 16;287(12):9568-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.296954. Epub 2012
Feb 3.

Identification of mechanism that couples multisite phosphorylation of
Yes-associated protein (YAP) with transcriptional coactivation and regulation of 
apoptosis.

Lee KK(1), Yonehara S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. kklee@lif.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 26;291(9):4844-5.

The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) has been implicated 
in tumorigenesis by regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis. YAP interacts
with the transcription factor TEAD and is essential in mediating TEAD-dependent
gene expression. Here we show that YAP is hyperphosphorylated and activated in
response to genotoxic stress such as UV irradiation and cisplatin treatment.
Using high resolution mobility shift assay for phosphorylated proteins, we
identified multiple sites of phosphorylation induced by UV irradiation.
Pretreatment with p38 and JNK inhibitors completely suppressed the mobility
retardation of phosphorylated YAP in UV-irradiated cells. Co-immunoprecipitation 
experiments showed that the physical interaction of YAP with TEAD was markedly
enhanced by UV irradiation or CDDP treatment but suppressed by pretreatment with 
p38 and JNK inhibitors. Similarly, pretreatment with p38 and JNK inhibitors
suppressed the expression of YAP/TEAD target genes, which were elevated on
exposure to genotoxic stress. Using phosphomimetic and phosphorylation-deficient 
YAP mutants, we showed that the coactivator activity of YAP correlated with its
state of phosphorylation and sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Our
results demonstrate that multisite phosphorylation of YAP induces
YAP/TEAD-dependent gene expression and provides a mechanism by which YAP
regulates apoptosis differently depending on cellular context.

PMCID: PMC3308740
PMID: 22308035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 6;31(49):5117-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.5. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

YAP induces malignant mesothelioma cell proliferation by upregulating
transcription of cell cycle-promoting genes.

Mizuno T(1), Murakami H, Fujii M, Ishiguro F, Tanaka I, Kondo Y, Akatsuka S,
Toyokuni S, Yokoi K, Osada H, Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) shows frequent inactivation of the neurofibromatosis 
type 2 (NF2) -tumor-suppressor gene. Recent studies have documented that the
Hippo signaling pathway, a downstream cascade of Merlin (a product of NF2), has a
key role in organ size control and carcinogenesis by regulating cell
proliferation and apoptosis. We previously reported that MMs show overexpression 
of Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional coactivator, the main downstream 
effector of the Hippo signaling pathway, which results from the inactivation of
NF2, LATS2 and/or SAV1 genes (the latter two encoding core components of the
mammalian Hippo pathway) or amplification of YAP itself. However, the detailed
roles of YAP remain unclear, especially the target genes of YAP that enhance MM
cell growth and survival. Here, we demonstrated that YAP-knockdown inhibited cell
motility, invasion and anchorage-independent growth as well as cell proliferation
of MM cells in vitro. We analyzed genes commonly regulated by YAP in three MM
cell lines with constitutive YAP-activation, and found that the major subsets of 
YAP-upregulating genes encode cell cycle regulators. Among them, YAP directly
induced the transcription of CCND1 and FOXM1, in cooperation with TEAD
transcription factor. We also found that knockdown of CCND1 and FOXM1 suppressed 
MM cell proliferation, although the inhibitory effects were less evident than
those of YAP knockdown. These results indicate that constitutive YAP activation
in MM cells promotes cell cycle progression giving more aggressive phenotypes to 
MM cells.

PMID: 22286761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cells. 2012 Oct 19;1(4):886-904. doi: 10.3390/cells1040886.

Effects of mTOR Inhibitors on Components of the Salvador-Warts-Hippo Pathway.

Chiang J(1), Martinez-Agosto JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. jchiang@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
julianmartinez@mednet.ucla.edu.

The MST/Salvador-Warts-Hippo and mTOR/Akt/PI3K growth signaling pathways have
been established as important modulators of cell growth, proliferation and cell
survival in controlling organ size in Drosophila and mammals. Here, we sought to 
determine the role of the MST family of kinases, some of which are components of 
the Hippo pathway, and their closely related Sterile 20-like kinases (STK) as
candidates for mediating cross-talk between the Hippo and mTOR pathways.
Expression analysis in the HepG2 and MCF7 cell lines demonstrated common
expression of MST1/2/4, MAP4K3/4/5, STK 24 (MST3), STK25, STK39, Pak1, SLK,
Strada/ß and TAO2. All components of the Hippo signaling pathway are present in
both cell lines except for YAP1 in MCF7 cells. mTOR inhibition via rapamycin
decreases TAZ levels in HepG2 but not MCF7 cells and increases TEAD1 levels in
MCF7 but not HepG2 cells, suggesting a selective role of the mTOR pathway in
regulating these Hippo targets in a cell type-specific manner. Furthermore, the
cellular localization of TAZ changes in response to mTORC1/2 inhibitors and Akt
inhibition. These findings demonstrate the mTOR-dependent regulation of Hippo
signaling at the level of the transcriptional regulators TAZ and TEAD1 and
highlight the potential role for mTOR inhibitors in regulating Hippo-signaling
dependent tumors.

PMCID: PMC3901137
PMID: 24710534  [PubMed]


58. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020309. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Yes-associated protein 65 (YAP) expands neural progenitors and regulates Pax3
expression in the neural plate border zone.

Gee ST(1), Milgram SL, Kramer KL, Conlon FL, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America.

Yes-associated protein 65 (YAP) contains multiple protein-protein interaction
domains and functions as both a transcriptional co-activator and as a scaffolding
protein. Mouse embryos lacking YAP did not survive past embryonic day 8.5 and
showed signs of defective yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and
anterior-posterior (A-P) axis elongation. Given that the YAP knockout mouse
defects might be due in part to nutritional deficiencies, we sought to better
characterize a role for YAP during early development using embryos that develop
externally. YAP morpholino (MO)-mediated loss-of-function in both frog and fish
resulted in incomplete epiboly at gastrulation and impaired axis formation,
similar to the mouse phenotype. In frog, germ layer specific genes were
expressed, but they were temporally delayed. YAP MO-mediated partial knockdown in
frog allowed a shortened axis to form. YAP gain-of-function in Xenopus expanded
the progenitor populations in the neural plate (sox2(+)) and neural plate border 
zone (pax3(+)), while inhibiting the expression of later markers of tissues
derived from the neural plate border zone (neural crest, pre-placodal ectoderm,
hatching gland), as well as epidermis and somitic muscle. YAP directly regulates 
pax3 expression via association with TEAD1 (N-TEF) at a highly conserved,
previously undescribed, TEAD-binding site within the 5' regulatory region of
pax3. Structure/function analyses revealed that the PDZ-binding motif of YAP
contributes to the inhibition of epidermal and somitic muscle differentiation,
but a complete, intact YAP protein is required for expansion of the neural plate 
and neural plate border zone progenitor pools. These results provide a thorough
analysis of YAP mediated gene expression changes in loss- and gain-of-function
experiments. Furthermore, this is the first report to use YAP structure-function 
analyzes to determine which portion of YAP is involved in specific gene
expression changes and the first to show direct in vivo evidence of YAP's role in
regulating pax3 neural crest expression.

PMCID: PMC3110623
PMID: 21687713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 15;355(2):372-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.005. Epub 2011 
Apr 17.

Members of the TEAD family of transcription factors regulate the expression of
Myf5 in ventral somitic compartments.

Ribas R(1), Moncaut N, Siligan C, Taylor K, Cross JW, Rigby PW, Carvajal JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, The Institute of Cancer Research,
Chester Beatty Laboratories, 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB, UK.

The transcriptional regulation of the Mrf4/Myf5 locus depends on a multitude of
enhancers that, in equilibria with transcription balancing sequences and the
promoters, regulate the expression of the two genes throughout embryonic
development and in the adult. Transcription in a particular set of muscle
progenitors can be driven by the combined outputs of several enhancers that are
not able to recapitulate the entire expression pattern in isolation, or by the
action of a single enhancer the activity of which in isolation is equivalent to
that within the context of the locus. We identified a new enhancer element of
this second class, ECR111, which is highly conserved in all vertebrate species
and is necessary and sufficient to drive Myf5 expression in ventro-caudal and
ventro-rostral somitic compartments in the mouse embryo. EMSA analyses and data
obtained from binding-site mutations in transgenic embryos show that a binding
site for a TEA Domain (TEAD) transcription factor is essential for the function
of this new enhancer, while ChIP assays show that at least two members of the
family of transcription factors bind to it in vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3123743
PMID: 21527258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Signal. 2011 Aug;23(8):1387-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.03.021. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

Toward a comprehensive characterization of the phosphotyrosine proteome.

Bergström Lind S(1), Artemenko KA, Elfineh L, Mayrhofer C, Zubarev RA, Bergquist 
J, Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden. sara.lind@igp.uu.se

Tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) regulates important cell functions and plays a
key role in carcinogenesis. The purpose of this study was to perform a
comprehensive study of the phosphotyrosine proteome. Immunoaffinity enriched pTyr
proteins and peptides from K562 leukemia cells were analyzed with high-resolving 
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Two different antibodies selective for
the pTyr modification were used in repeated enrichments to identify as many pTyr 
peptides as possible. Stringent verification of putative pTyr sites was performed
to assure high reliability in the subsequent biological interpretation of the
data. Identified pTyr proteins were subjected to pathway analysis by using
different analytical tools. In total, 294 pTyr peptides belonging to 217 pTyr
proteins were identified, 15 of which had not previously been reported to be
modified by pTyr. The pTyr proteins were clustered in six major groups based on
the biological functions "cellular signaling", "cell motility and shape", "cell
cycle process", "transport", "RNA processing" and "protein processing". The pTyr 
proteins were mainly positioned in the following cellular compartments:
cytoplasm, cytoskeleton, nucleus and ribonucleoprotein complexes. An interesting 
finding was that many proteins were related to RNA processing and were found to
be heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins. Also, more than half of the novel
pTyr proteins were localized to the nucleus, of which three (PBX2, TEAD1 and
DIDO1) were classified as transcription factors and two (CENPC1 and MAD2L1) are
associated with cell division control.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21447384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):11960-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.193458. Epub 2011 
Feb 2.

Structural analysis of the cancer-specific promoter in mesothelin and in other
genes overexpressed in cancers.

Ren YR(1), Patel K, Paun BC, Kern SE.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Mesothelin (MSLN) may be the most "dramatic" of the tumor markers, being strongly
overexpressed in nearly one-third of human malignancies. The biochemical cause is
unclear. We previously ascribed this cancer-specific overexpression to an
element, Canscript, residing around 50 bp 5' of the transcription start site in
cancer (Hucl, T., Brody, J. R., Gallmeier, E., Iacobuzio-Donahue, C. A.,
Farrance, I. K., and Kern, S. E. (2007) Cancer Res. 67, 9055-9065). Herein, we
found a Canscript promoter activity elevated over 100-fold in cancer cells. In
addition to a highly conserved TEAD1 (TEA domain family member 1)-binding MCAT
motif, nucleotide substitution revealed the consensus core sequence (WCYCCACCC)
of an SP1-like motif in Canscript. The unknown transcription factor binding to
the SP1-like motif may hold the key for the cancer specificity of Canscript. SP1,
GLI1, and RUNX1, -2, and -3 appeared unlikely to be the direct transcription
factors acting at the SP1-like motif, but KLF6 had some features of such a
candidate. YAP1, a TEAD1-binding protein, appeared necessary, but not sufficient,
for Canscript activity; knockdown of YAP1 by small interfering RNAs greatly
reduced MSLN levels in MSLN-overexpressing cells, but overexpressing YAP1 in
MSLN-negative cells did not induce MSLN expression. Cansript-like sequences were 
found in other genes up-regulated in pancreatic cancer; reporters driven by the
sequences from FXYD3, MUC1, and TIMP1 had activities more than 2 times that of
the control. This suggested that the cause of MSLN overexpression might also
contribute mechanistically to the overexpression of other tumor markers.

PMCID: PMC3069398
PMID: 21288909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Mol Biol. 2011 Jan 7;12:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-12-1.

TEAD1-dependent expression of the FoxO3a gene in mouse skeletal muscle.

Qiu H(1), Wang F, Liu C, Xu X, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

BACKGROUND: TEAD1 (TEA domain family member 1) is constitutively expressed in
cardiac and skeletal muscles. It acts as a key molecule of muscle development,
and trans-activates multiple target genes involved in cell proliferation and
differentiation pathways. However, its target genes in skeletal muscles,
regulatory mechanisms and networks are unknown.
RESULTS: In this paper, we have identified 136 target genes regulated directly by
TEAD1 in skeletal muscle using integrated analyses of ChIP-on-chip. Most of the
targets take part in the cell process, physiology process, biological regulation 
metabolism and development process. The targets also play an important role in
MAPK, mTOR, T cell receptor, JAK-STAT, calcineurin and insulin signaling
pathways. TEAD1 regulates foxo3a transcription through binding to the M-CAT
element in foxo3a promoter, demonstrated with independent ChIP-PCR, EMSA and
luciferase reporter system assay. In addition, results of over-expression and
inhibition experiments suggest that foxo3a is positively regulated by TEAD1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present data suggests that TEAD1 plays an important role in the 
regulation of gene expression and different signaling pathways may co-operate
with each other mediated by TEAD1. We have preliminarily concluded that TEAD1 may
regulate FoxO3a expression through calcineurin/MEF2/NFAT and IGF-1/PI3K/AKT
signaling pathways in skeletal muscles. These findings provide important clues
for further analysis of the role of FoxO3a gene in the formation and
transformation of skeletal muscle fiber types.

PMCID: PMC3025863
PMID: 21211055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. FASEB J. 2010 Dec;24(12):4825-34. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-167049. Epub 2010 Aug 11.

IRF2BP2 is a skeletal and cardiac muscle-enriched ischemia-inducible activator of
VEGFA expression.

Teng AC(1), Kuraitis D, Deeke SA, Ahmadi A, Dugan SG, Cheng BL, Crowson MG,
Burgon PG, Suuronen EJ, Chen HH, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We sought to identify an essential component of the TEAD4/VGLL4 transcription
factor complex that controls vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA)
expression in muscle. A yeast 2-hybrid screen was used to clone a novel component
of the TEAD4 complex from a human heart cDNA library. We identified interferon
response factor 2 binding protein 2 (IRF2BP2) and confirmed its presence in the
TEAD4/VGLL4 complex in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation and mammalian 2-hybrid
assays. Coexpression of IRF2BP2 with TEAD4/VGLL4 or TEAD1 alone potently
activated, whereas knockdown of IRF2BP2 reduced, VEGFA expression in C(2)C(12)
muscle cells. Thus, IRF2BP2 is required to activate VEGFA expression. In mouse
embryos, IRF2BP2 was ubiquitously expressed but became progressively enriched in 
the fetal heart, skeletal muscles, and lung. Northern blot analysis revealed high
levels of IRF2BP2 mRNA in adult human heart and skeletal muscles, but immunoblot 
analysis showed low levels of IRF2BP2 protein in skeletal muscle, indicating
post-transcriptional regulation of IRF2BP2 expression. IRF2BP2 protein levels are
markedly increased by ischemia in skeletal and cardiac muscle compared to
normoxic controls. IRF2BP2 is a novel ischemia-induced coactivator of VEGFA
expression that may contribute to revascularization of ischemic cardiac and
skeletal muscles.

PMID: 20702774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 20;107(16):7293-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000293107. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Structural and functional analysis of the YAP-binding domain of human TEAD2.

Tian W(1), Yu J, Tomchick DR, Pan D, Luo X.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentsof Pharmacology and Biochemistry, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hippo pathway controls organ size and suppresses tumorigenesis in metazoans
by blocking cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. The TEAD1-4 proteins
(which contain a DNA-binding domain but lack an activation domain) interact with 
YAP (which lacks a DNA-binding domain but contains an activation domain) to form 
functional heterodimeric transcription factors that activate proliferative and
prosurvival gene expression programs. The Hippo pathway inhibits the YAP-TEAD
hybrid transcription factors by phosphorylating and promoting cytoplasmic
retention of YAP. Here we report the crystal structure of the YAP-binding domain 
(YBD) of human TEAD2. TEAD2 YBD adopts an immunoglobulin-like beta-sandwich fold 
with two extra helix-turn-helix inserts. NMR studies reveal that the TEAD-binding
domain of YAP is natively unfolded and that TEAD binding causes localized
conformational changes in YAP. In vitro binding and in vivo functional assays
define an extensive conserved surface of TEAD2 YBD as the YAP-binding site.
Therefore, our studies suggest that a short segment of YAP adopts an extended
conformation and forms extensive contacts with a rigid surface of TEAD. Targeting
a surface-exposed pocket of TEAD might be an effective strategy to disrupt the
YAP-TEAD interaction and to reduce the oncogenic potential of YAP.

PMCID: PMC2867681
PMID: 20368466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jul;51(7):3372-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4321. Epub
2010 Mar 5.

Taz-tead1 links cell-cell contact to zeb1 expression, proliferation, and
dedifferentiation in retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Liu Y(1), Xin Y, Ye F, Wang W, Lu Q, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

PURPOSE. The Hippo signaling pathway imposes the cell contact inhibition that
establishes organ size and tissue topology from Drosophila to mammals. This
pathway regulates activity of the Yap and Taz transcription factors, which link
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to cell proliferation. Here, the authors 
provide evidence that Taz and its coactivator, Tead1, regulate expression of the 
EMT transcription factor Zeb1 to control RPE cell proliferation and
differentiation. METHODS. Real-time PCR was used to examine mRNA expression
during RPE dedifferentiation in primary cultures of RPE cells and after knockdown
of Yap and Taz by lentivirus shRNA. Immunofluorescence was used to follow
subcellular localization of proteins in cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was 
used to detect Taz at the Zeb1 promoter in vivo. RESULTS. Zeb1 is overexpressed
during RPE dedifferentiation, leading to cell proliferation, EMT, and repression 
of the RPE specification transcription factor gene Mitf. Taz-TEAD1 translocation 
to the nucleus coincides with loss of cell-cell contact and with onset of Zeb1
expression in the nucleus. shRNA knockdown of Taz prevented the overexpression of
Zeb1 and, in turn, prevented proliferation, repression of Mitf and Mitf target
genes, and EMT when RPE cells were placed in primary culture. Taz binds to the
Zeb1 promoter in vivo, suggesting that it directly induces Zeb1 transcription.
CONCLUSIONS. These results provide evidence of a molecular mechanism linking
cell-cell contact to cell proliferation and dedifferentiation in RPE cells.

PMCID: PMC2904003
PMID: 20207963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):13721-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063057. Epub
2010 Mar 1.

TEAD-1 overexpression in the mouse heart promotes an age-dependent heart
dysfunction.

Tsika RW(1), Ma L, Kehat I, Schramm C, Simmer G, Morgan B, Fine DM, Hanft LM,
McDonald KS, Molkentin JD, Krenz M, Yang S, Ji J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

TEA domain transcription factor-1 (TEAD-1) is essential for proper heart
development and is implicated in cardiac specific gene expression and the
hypertrophic response of primary cardiomyocytes to hormonal and mechanical
stimuli, and its activity increases in the pressure-overloaded hypertrophied rat 
heart. To investigate whether TEAD-1 is an in vivo modulator of cardiac specific 
gene expression and hypertrophy, we developed transgenic mice expressing
hemagglutinin-tagged TEAD-1 under the control of the muscle creatine kinase
promoter. We show that a sustained increase in TEAD-1 protein leads to an
age-dependent dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed decreases in
cardiac output, stroke volume, ejection fraction, and fractional shortening.
Isolated TEAD-1 hearts revealed decreased left ventricular power output that
correlated with increased betaMyHC protein. Histological analysis showed altered 
alignment of cardiomyocytes, septal wall thickening, and fibrosis, although
electrocardiography displayed a left axis shift of mean electrical axis.
Transcripts representing most members of the fetal heart gene program remained
elevated from fetal to adult life. Western blot analyses revealed decreases in
p-phospholamban, SERCA2a, p-CX43, p-GSK-3alpha/beta, nuclear beta-catenin, GATA4,
NFATc3/c4, and increased NCX1, nuclear DYKR1A, and Pur alpha/beta protein. TEAD-1
mice did not display cardiac hypertrophy. TEAD-1 mice do not tolerate stress as
they die over a 4-day period after surgical induction of pressure overload. These
data provide the first in vivo evidence that increased TEAD-1 can induce
characteristics of cardiac remodeling associated with cardiomyopathy and heart
failure.

PMCID: PMC2859535
PMID: 20194497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 1;24(3):235-40. doi: 10.1101/gad.1865810.

Structural insights into the YAP and TEAD complex.

Li Z(1), Zhao B, Wang P, Chen F, Dong Z, Yang H, Guan KL, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

The Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional coactivator is a key regulator
of organ size and a candidate human oncogene inhibited by the Hippo tumor
suppressor pathway. The TEAD family of transcription factors binds directly to
and mediates YAP-induced gene expression. Here we report the three-dimensional
structure of the YAP (residues 50-171)-TEAD1 (residues 194-411) complex, in which
YAP wraps around the globular structure of TEAD1 and forms extensive interactions
via three highly conserved interfaces. Interface 3, including YAP residues
86-100, is most critical for complex formation. Our study reveals the biochemical
nature of the YAP-TEAD interaction, and provides a basis for pharmacological
intervention of YAP-TEAD hyperactivation in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC2811825
PMID: 20123905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mycopathologia. 2010 May;169(5):413-23. doi: 10.1007/s11046-009-9267-8. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

Ophiostoma tsotsi sp. nov., a wound-infesting fungus of hardwood trees in Africa.

Grobbelaar JW(1), de Beer ZW, Bloomer P, Wingfield MJ, Wingfield BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.

Polymorphic sequence-characterised marker assays from a recent diversity study on
the Ascomycete fungus Ophiostoma quercus reported that some isolates from Africa 
were genetically distinct from O. quercus. In the present study, these African
isolates were compared with authentic O. quercus isolates by evaluating
morphological characters, growth in culture, mating compatibility and DNA
sequence data. The isolates from Africa were morphologically similar to O.
quercus, presenting Pesotum and Sporothrix synanamorphs in culture. Phylogenetic 
analyses of the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer regions 1 and 2,
beta-tubulin and translation elongation factor 1-alpha gene regions confirmed
that the African group represents a distinct species within the hardwood lineage 
of the O. piceae complex, closely related to O. ulmi and O. himal-ulmi. Mating
studies between O. quercus and the African isolates showed that isolates mated
predominantly with those of their own group, although there were rare cases of
fertile crosses between the groups. Isolates residing in the African lineage are 
described here as a new species, O. tsotsi sp. nov.

PMID: 20054655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 1;69(15):6033-41. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4592. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

Transcriptional output of the Salvador/warts/hippo pathway is controlled in
distinct fashions in Drosophila melanogaster and mammalian cell lines.

Zhang X(1), Milton CC, Humbert PO, Harvey KF.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory and Cell Cycle and Cancer Genetics
Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The Salvador/Warts/Hippo (SWH) pathway is an important modulator of organ size,
and deregulation of pathway activity can lead to cancer. Several SWH pathway
components are mutated or expressed at altered levels in different human tumors
including NF2, LATS1, LATS2, SAV1, and YAP. The SWH pathway regulates tissue
growth by restricting the activity of the transcriptional coactivator protein
known as Yorkie (Yki) in Drosophila melanogaster and Yes-associated protein (YAP)
in mammals. Yki/YAP drives tissue growth in partnership with the Scalloped
(Sd)/TEAD1-4 transcription factors. Yki/YAP also possesses two WW domains, which 
contact several proteins that have been suggested to either promote or inhibit
the ability of Yki to induce transcription. To investigate the regulatory role of
the Yki/YAP WW domains, we analyzed the functional consequence of mutating these 
domains. WW domain mutant YAP promoted transformation and migration of breast
epithelial cells with increased potency, suggesting that WW domains mediate the
inhibitory regulation of YAP in these cells. By contrast, the WW domains were
required for YAP to promote NIH-3T3 cell transformation and for the ability of
Yki to drive tissue growth in D. melanogaster and optimally activate Sd. This
shows that Yki/YAP WW domains have distinct regulatory roles in different cell
types and implies the existence of proteins that promote tissue growth in
collaboration with Yki and Sd.

PMID: 19584286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Ophthalmology. 2009 May;116(5):971-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2008.10.032.

Cellular and molecular origin of circumpapillary dysgenesis of the pigment
epithelium.

Tosi J(1), Janisch KM, Wang NK, Kasanuki JM, Flynn JT, Lin CS, Tsang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Bernard and Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, Department of Pathology and
Cell Biology, Columbia University, 160 Fort Washington Ave., New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

PURPOSE: We studied clinical phenotyping and TEAD1 expression in mice and humans 
to gain a better understanding of the primary origin in the pathogenesis of
circumpapillary dysgenesis of the pigment epithelium.
DESIGN: Observational case series and experimental study.
PARTICIPANTS: Three female patients from an affected family were included for
phenotypic study. Mice and human tissues were used for biochemistry and
immunohistochemistry studies.
METHODS: We performed genetic analyses and longitudinal clinical, imaging, and
electrophysiologic studies in a 3-generation family. Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry were used to detect TEAD1 expression in mice and human
retinal tissues.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Autofluorescence and optical coherence tomography (OCT)
imaging were compared and reviewed from 3 patients. TEAD1 expression was compared
in different tissues from mice and human samples.
RESULTS: A point mutation at T1261 in TEAD1 was detected in the mother.
Autofluorescence and OCT imaging studies revealed choroid is involved earlier
than retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). From immunoblot analysis, we discovered
that TEAD1 and its cofactors YAP65 and FOXA2 are expressed in the choroid.
Immunohistochemical analysis on frozen sections of mouse retina supports
immunoblot results.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary cellular origin of circumpapillary dysgenesis of the
pigment epithelium is within the choroid instead of the pigment epithelium. The
loss of the RPE and photoreceptors in later stages of the disease is a secondary 
consequence of choroidal degeneration. Studies of the downstream targets of TEAD1
in choroidal cells will provide promising new research opportunities for the
development of treatments for choroidal diseases.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest
in any materials discussed in this article.

PMCID: PMC2717946
PMID: 19410955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Virology. 2009 Jun 20;389(1-2):82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.04.002. Epub 2009
May 1.

Cellular factors are required to activate bovine papillomavirus-1 early gene
transcription and to establish viral plasmid persistence but are not required for
cellular transformation.

Haugen TH(1), Lace MJ, Ishiji T, Sameshima A, Anson JR, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, The Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. thomas-haugen@uiowa.edu

Transcription from the major upstream early gene promoter, P89, of bovine
papillomavirus (BPV)-1 is detectable in transfected cells lacking viral gene
products yet also responds to viral E2 proteins. In contrast to human
papillomaviruses (HPVs), the BPV upstream regulatory region (URR) functions as a 
transcriptional enhancer in epithelial cells and fibroblasts of bovine, murine or
human origin. Mutations of Sp1 and/or two novel transcriptional enhancer factor
(TEF)-1 sites within the 5' URR of the intact BPV-1 genome dramatically reduced
P89-initiated mRNA levels, leading to decreased BPV-1 plasmid amplification and
inefficient formation of transformed cell foci. However, cell lines transformed
with wt or mutant BPV-1 genomes contained similar levels of unintegrated BPV-1
DNA, P89 mRNA and E2-dependent transactivation. We conclude that cellular factors
necessary for activating viral early gene transcription, establishment of viral
plasmid replication and cell immortalization are not required during the
maintenance phase of BPV-1 infection.

PMID: 19410271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 1;22(23):3320-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.1726608. Epub 2008 Nov 17.

YAP regulates neural progenitor cell number via the TEA domain transcription
factor.

Cao X(1), Pfaff SL, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Tight control of cell proliferation is essential for proper growth during
development and for tissue homeostasis in mature animals. The evolutionarily
conserved Hippo pathway restrains proliferation through a kinase cascade that
culminates in the inhibition of the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
Unphosphorylated YAP activates genes involved in cell proliferation and survival 
by interacting with a DNA-binding factor. Here we show that during vertebrate
neural tube development, the TEA domain transcription factor (TEAD) is the
cognate DNA-binding partner of YAP. YAP and TEAD gain of function causes marked
expansion of the neural progenitor population, partly owing to their ability to
promote cell cycle progression by inducing cyclin D1 and to inhibit
differentiation by suppressing NeuroM. Their loss of function results in
increased apoptosis, whereas repressing their target genes leads to premature
neuronal differentiation. Inhibiting the upstream kinases of the Hippo pathway
also causes neural progenitor overproliferation. Thus, the Hippo pathway plays
critical roles in regulating neural progenitor cell number by affecting
proliferation, fate choice, and cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2600760
PMID: 19015275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4059-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.027151. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as
transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling.

Ota M(1), Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Regulation of organ size is important for development and tissue homeostasis. In 
Drosophila, Hippo signaling controls organ size by regulating the activity of a
TEAD transcription factor, Scalloped, through modulation of its co-activator
protein Yki. Here, we show that mouse Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation
by mediating Hippo signaling. In NIH3T3 cells, cell density and Hippo signaling
regulated the activity of endogenous Tead proteins by modulating nuclear
localization of a Yki homolog, Yap1, and the resulting change in Tead activity
altered cell proliferation. Tead2-VP16 mimicked Yap1 overexpression, including
increased cell proliferation, reduced cell death, promotion of EMT, lack of cell 
contact inhibition and promotion of tumor formation. Growth-promoting activities 
of various Yap1 mutants correlated with their Tead-co-activator activities.
Tead2-VP16 and Yap1 regulated largely overlapping sets of genes. However, only a 
few of the Tead/Yap1-regulated genes in NIH3T3 cells were affected in
Tead1(-/-);Tead2(-/-) or Yap1(-/-) embryos. Most of the previously identified
Yap1-regulated genes were not affected in NIH3T3 cells or mutant mice. In
embryos, levels of nuclear Yap1 and Tead1 varied depending on cell type. Strong
nuclear accumulation of Yap1 and Tead1 were seen in myocardium, correlating with 
requirements of Tead1 for proliferation. However, their distribution did not
always correlate with proliferation. Taken together, mammalian Tead proteins
regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as a transcriptional mediator 
of Hippo signaling, but the mechanisms by which Tead/Yap1 regulate cell
proliferation differ depending on the cell type, and Tead, Yap1 and Hippo
signaling may play multiple roles in mouse embryos.

PMID: 19004856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Br J Cancer. 2008 Dec 2;99(11):1849-58. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604774. Epub 2008
Nov 11.

TEAD1 and c-Cbl are novel prostate basal cell markers that correlate with poor
clinical outcome in prostate cancer.

Knight JF(1), Shepherd CJ, Rizzo S, Brewer D, Jhavar S, Dodson AR, Cooper CS,
Eeles R, Falconer A, Kovacs G, Garrett MD, Norman AR, Shipley J, Hudson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Bob Champion Prostate Stem Cell
Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed male cancer, and its clinical
outcome is difficult to predict. The disease may involve the inappropriate
expression of genes that normally control the proliferation of epithelial cells
in the basal layer and their differentiation into luminal cells. Our aim was to
identify novel basal cell markers and assess their prognostic and functional
significance in prostate cancer. RNA from basal and luminal cells isolated from
benign tissue by immunoguided laser-capture microdissection was subjected to
expression profiling. We identified 112 and 267 genes defining basal and luminal 
populations, respectively. The transcription factor TEAD1 and the ubiquitin
ligase c-Cbl were identified as novel basal cell markers. Knockdown of either
marker using siRNA in prostate cell lines led to decreased cell growth in PC3 and
disrupted acinar formation in a 3D culture system of RWPE1. Analyses of prostate 
cancer tissue microarray staining established that increased protein levels of
either marker were associated with decreased patient survival independent of
other clinicopathological metrics. These data are consistent with basal features 
impacting on the development and clinical course of prostate cancers.

PMCID: PMC2600693
PMID: 19002168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 26;283(52):36154-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807461200. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Overexpression of TEAD-1 in transgenic mouse striated muscles produces a slower
skeletal muscle contractile phenotype.

Tsika RW(1), Schramm C, Simmer G, Fitzsimons DP, Moss RL, Ji J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

TEA domain (TEAD) transcription factors serve important functional roles during
embryonic development and in striated muscle gene expression. Our previous work
has implicated a role for TEAD-1 in the fast-to-slow fiber-type transition in
response to mechanical overload. To investigate whether TEAD-1 is a modulator of 
slow muscle gene expression in vivo, we developed transgenic mice expressing
hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged TEAD-1 under the control of the muscle creatine kinase 
promoter. We show that striated muscle-restricted HA-TEAD-1 expression induced a 
transition toward a slow muscle contractile protein phenotype, slower shortening 
velocity (Vmax), and longer contraction and relaxation times in adult fast twitch
extensor digitalis longus muscle. Notably, HA-TEAD-1 overexpression resulted in
an unexpected activation of GSK-3alpha/beta and decreased nuclear beta-catenin
and NFATc1/c3 protein. These effects could be reversed in vivo by mechanical
overload, which decreased muscle creatine kinase-driven TEAD-1 transgene
expression, and in cultured satellite cells by TEAD-1-specific small interfering 
RNA. These novel in vivo data support a role for TEAD-1 in modulating slow muscle
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2606011
PMID: 18978355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Nov 25;295(1-2):32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.08.007.
Epub 2008 Aug 19.

TEAD1 inhibits prolactin gene expression in cultured human uterine decidual
cells.

Kessler CA(1), Bachurski CJ, Schroeder J, Stanek J, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, United States.

Forced overexpression of TEAD1 in human uterine fibroblast (HUF) and human
endometrial stromal cells markedly inhibited prolactin promoter activity in both 
cell types in a dose-dependent manner, with maximal inhibition of greater than
90%. Conversely, the knockdown of TEAD1 expression in HUF cells with a TEAD1
siRNA resulted in a 75-80% increase in prolactin mRNA levels (p<0.01) compared to
control cells exposed to a scrambled nonsense RNA. Mutagenesis of the putative
TEAD site inhibited basal promoter activity by about 80%. However, mutagenesis of
the TEAD site did not prevent TEAD1-induced inhibition of promoter activity; and 
the transcription activity of a minimal promoter fragment lacking a putative TEAD
binding site was repressed by overexpression of TEAD1. Taken together, these
findings suggest that the TEAD binding site on the prolactin promoter is
important for the maintenance of basal prolactin promoter activity and that
overexpression of TEAD1 has a dominant-negative effect on prolactin promoter
activity, probably by interacting directly with other transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2615051
PMID: 18775765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;41(4):229-38. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0080. Epub 2008 Aug 
12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element within the promoter of microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) gene is crucial for MTTP basal expression
and insulin responsiveness.

Au WS(1), Lu L, Yeung CM, Liu CC, Wong OG, Lai L, Kung HF, Lin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery 
and Synthesis, The University of Hong Kong, Room 8N-11, Kadoorie Biological
Science Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

Insulin inhibits the transcription of the microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein (MTTP), which plays a pivotal role in lipoprotein assembly and secretion.
Here, we provide evidence that a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element
(HNF1A element) within the MTTP promoter serves as a novel negative
insulin-responsive element. Deletion/mutation mapping of the MTTP gene promoter
identified a modified HNF1A element that is crucial to the negative insulin
effect. Chimeric promoter containing this HNF1A element and minimal TEAD1
promoter also responded negatively toward insulin treatment. Gel shift assay
demonstrated that HNF1A but not HNF1B binds to this element. Enforced expression 
of HNF1A was sufficient to reconstitute the negative insulin responsiveness of
MTTP promoter in TM4SF1 myocytes that are HNF1A negative. Furthermore, replacing 
this element with consensus HNF1A element preserved the negative insulin
response, suggesting that negative insulin responsiveness is a generic
characteristic of HNF1A element. Given that many genes implicated in diabetes
contain HNF1A element, the potential regulation of these genes by insulin via
HNF1A element may provide important clues for the manifestation and treatment of 
diabetic metabolic syndromes.

PMID: 18697801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genes Dev. 2008 Jul 15;22(14):1962-71. doi: 10.1101/gad.1664408. Epub 2008 Jun
25.

TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control.

Zhao B(1), Ye X, Yu J, Li L, Li W, Li S, Yu J, Lin JD, Wang CY, Chinnaiyan AM,
Lai ZC, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The YAP transcription coactivator has been implicated as an oncogene and is
amplified in human cancers. Recent studies have established that YAP is
phosphorylated and inhibited by the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway. Here we
demonstrate that the TEAD family transcription factors are essential in mediating
YAP-dependent gene expression. TEAD is also required for YAP-induced cell growth,
oncogenic transformation, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. CTGF is
identified as a direct YAP target gene important for cell growth. Moreover, the
functional relationship between YAP and TEAD is conserved in Drosophila Yki (the 
YAP homolog) and Scalloped (the TEAD homolog). Our study reveals TEAD as a new
component in the Hippo pathway playing essential roles in mediating biological
functions of YAP.

PMCID: PMC2492741
PMID: 18579750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3177-89. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01759-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of
cell proliferation and survival.

Sawada A(1), Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Four members of the TEAD/TEF family of transcription factors are expressed widely
in mouse embryos and adult tissues. Although in vitro studies have suggested
various roles for TEAD proteins, their in vivo functions remain poorly
understood. Here we examined the role of Tead genes by generating mouse mutants
for Tead1 and Tead2. Tead2(-/-) mice appeared normal, but Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) 
embryos died at embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) with severe growth defects and
morphological abnormalities. At E8.5, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) embryos were already
small and lacked characteristic structures such as a closed neural tube, a
notochord, and somites. Despite these overt abnormalities, differentiation and
patterning of the neural plate and endoderm were relatively normal. In contrast, 
the paraxial mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm were displaced laterally, and a 
differentiated notochord was not maintained. These abnormalities and defects in
yolk sac vasculature organization resemble those of mutants for Yap, which
encodes a coactivator of TEAD proteins. Moreover, we demonstrated genetic
interactions between Tead1 and Tead2 and Yap. Finally, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-)
embryos showed reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. These results 
suggest that Tead1 and Tead2 are functionally redundant, use YAP as a major
coactivator, and support notochord maintenance as well as cell proliferation and 
survival in mouse development.

PMCID: PMC2423158
PMID: 18332127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jan 23;582(2):391-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.12.033. Epub
2008 Jan 3.

Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1/TEAD1) mediates activation of IFITM3
gene by BRGl.

Cuddapah S(1), Cui K, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The interferon inducible transmembrane (IFITM) proteins mediate several cellular 
processes such as homotypic cell adhesion functions of interferons (IFNs) and
cellular anti-proliferative activities. We show that the BAF complex-mediated
induction of IFITM3 is dependent on binding of the transcriptional enhancer
factor 1 (TEF-1/TEAD1) to the M-CAT like elements of its promoter. TEF-1
knock-down reduced the BAF complex-mediated activation of IFITM3 promoter. In the
absence of the BAF complex, TEF-1 is repressive to IFITM3 expression. The
regulation of IFITM3 by TEF-1 demonstrates that TEF-1 dependent regulation is
more widespread than its previously established role in the expression of muscle 
specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2278002
PMID: 18177740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):270-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Tead4 is required for specification of trophectoderm in pre-implantation mouse
embryos.

Nishioka N(1), Yamamoto S, Kiyonari H, Sato H, Sawada A, Ota M, Nakao K, Sasaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

During pre-implantation mouse development, embryos form blastocysts with
establishment of the first two cell lineages: the trophectoderm (TE) which gives 
rise to the placenta, and the inner cell mass (ICM) which will form the embryo
proper. Differentiation of TE is regulated by the transcription factor
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2), but the mechanisms which act upstream of Cdx2
expression remain unknown. Here we show that the TEA domain family transcription 
factor, Tead4, is required for TE development. Tead1, Tead2 and Tead4 were
expressed in pre-implantation embryos, and at least Tead1 and Tead4 were
expressed widely in both TE and ICM lineages. Tead4-/- embryos died at
pre-implantation stages without forming the blastocoel. The mutant embryos
continued cell proliferation, and adherens junction and cell polarity were not
significantly affected. In Tead4-/- embryos, Cdx2 was weakly expressed at the
morula stage but was not expressed in later stages. None of the TE specific
genes, including Eomes and a Cdx2 independent gene, Fgfr2, was detected in
Tead4-/- embryos. Instead, the ICM specific transcription factors, Oct3/4 and
Nanog, were expressed in all the blastomeres. Tead4-/- embryos also failed to
differentiate trophoblast giant cells when they were cultured in vitro. ES cells 
with normal in vitro differentiation abilities were established from Tead4-/-
embryos. These results suggest that Tead4 has a distinct role from Tead1 and
Tead2 in trophectoderm specification of pre-implantation embryos, and that Tead4 
is an early transcription factor required for specification and development of
the trophectoderm lineage, which includes expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18083014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):8-17. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

MCAT elements and the TEF-1 family of transcription factors in muscle development
and disease.

Yoshida T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, MR5 Room 1226, 415 Lane Road, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
ty2c@virginia.edu

MCAT elements are located in the promoter-enhancer regions of cardiac, smooth,
and skeletal muscle-specific genes including cardiac troponin T, beta-myosin
heavy chain, smooth muscle alpha-actin, and skeletal alpha-actin, and play a key 
role in the regulation of these genes during muscle development and disease. The 
binding factors of MCAT elements are members of the transcriptional enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1) family. However, it has not been fully understood how these
transcription factors confer cell-specific expression in muscle, because their
expression patterns are relatively broad. Results of recent studies revealed
multiple mechanisms whereby TEF-1 family members control MCAT element-dependent
muscle-specific gene expression, including posttranslational modifications of
TEF-1 family members, the presence of muscle-selective TEF-1 cofactors, and
cell-selective control of TEF-1 accessibility to MCAT elements. In addition, of
particular interest, recent studies regarding MCAT element-dependent
transcription of the myocardin gene and the smooth muscle alpha-actin gene in
muscle provide evidence for the transcriptional diversity among distinct cell
types and subtypes. This article summarizes the role of MCAT elements and the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors in muscle development and disease, and
reviews recent progress in our understanding of the transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms involved in MCAT element-dependent muscle-specific gene expression.

PMID: 17962623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(8):745-52.

Differential expression of two TEF-1 (TEAD) genes during Xenopus laevis
development and in response to inducing factors.

Naye F(1), Tréguer K, Soulet F, Faucheux C, Fédou S, Thézé N, Thiébaud P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5164, Universite Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.

Transcription enhancer factors 1 (TEF-1 or TEAD) make a highly conserved family
of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins that activate not only viral regulatory
elements but muscle specific genes and are involved in several developmental
processes. In this study, we report the identification and the expression pattern
of NTEF-1 (TEAD1) and DTEF-1 (TEAD3), two members of this family in Xenopus
laevis. Both X. laevis NTEF-1 (XNTEF-1 or XTEAD1) and DTEF-1 (XDTEF-1 or XTEAD3) 
possess a 72 amino acid TEA domain characteristic of TEF-1 proteins. XNTEF-1 is a
426 amino acid protein that has 96% identity with the avian or the mammalian
NTEF-1 proteins while XDTEF-1 is a 433 amino acid protein with 77 to 80% identity
with the avian and mammalian DTEF-1 sequences respectively. Temporal expression
analysis by RT-PCR indicated that the two genes are expressed maternally and
throughout embryonic development. In the adult, the two genes are broadly
expressed although they showed differences of expression between tissues. Spatial
expression analysis by whole mount in situ hybridization showed that the XNTEF-1 
and XDTEF-1 mRNAS were predominantly detected in eye, embryonic brain, somites
and heart. In animal cap assay, the two genes are activated by bFGF but are
differently regulated by BMP4, and the muscle regulatory factor Mef2d.

PMID: 17939122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9055-65.

High cancer-specific expression of mesothelin (MSLN) is attributable to an
upstream enhancer containing a transcription enhancer factor dependent MCAT
motif.

Hucl T(1), Brody JR, Gallmeier E, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Farrance IK, Kern SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Identification of genes with cancer-specific overexpression offers the potential 
to efficiently discover cancer-specific activities in an unbiased manner. We
apply this paradigm to study mesothelin (MSLN) overexpression, a nearly
ubiquitous, diagnostically and therapeutically useful characteristic of
pancreatic cancer. We identified an 18-bp upstream enhancer, termed CanScript,
strongly activating transcription from an otherwise weak tissue-nonspecific
promoter and operating selectively in cells having aberrantly elevated
cancer-specific MSLN transcription. Introducing mutations into CanScript showed
two functionally distinct sites: an Sp1-like site and an MCAT element. Gel
retardation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed the MCAT element to
be bound by transcription enhancer factor (TEF)-1 (TEAD1) in vitro and in vivo.
The presence of TEF-1 was required for MSLN protein overexpression as determined 
by TEF-1 knockdown experiments. The cancer specificity seemed to be provided by a
putative limiting cofactor of TEF-1 that could be outcompeted by exogenous TEF-1 
only in a MSLN-overexpressing cell line. A CanScript concatemer offered enhanced 
activity. These results identify a TEF family member as a major regulator of MSLN
overexpression, a fundamental characteristic of pancreatic and other cancers,
perhaps due to an upstream and highly frequent aberrant cellular activity. The
CanScript sequence represents a modular element for cancer-specific targeting,
potentially suitable for nearly a third of human malignancies.

PMID: 17909009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Oncol. 2007 Oct;31(4):693-703.

Expression of connective tissue growth factor in pancreatic cancer cell lines.

Kwon S(1), Munroe X, Crawley SC, Lee HY, Spong S, Bradham D, Gum JR Jr,
Sleisenger MH, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94132, USA.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) is thought to play a role in normal
wound repair and bone remodeling, but also promotes fibrosis in several disease
processes including diabetic nephropathy, sclerodoma and pancreatitis. A
contribution to desmoplasia associated with pancreatic cancer progression has
also been proposed. CTGF is induced by TGFbeta in diverse cell types, but TGFbeta
receptor mediated signaling is impaired in pancreatic cancers and cell lines,
usually due to DPC4/Smad4 mutations which arise during the later stages of
intraepithelial neoplastic progression. Therefore, in order to define signaling
pathways that mediate basal and TGFbeta-induced CTGF expression in normal and
transformed cells, we compared CTGF gene regulation in pancreatic cancer cells
and fibroblasts by measuring the effects of small molecule inhibitors and
dominant negative mutants of signaling proteins on CTGF promoter reporter
activity, message, and protein expression. We determined that the previously
identified TEF-1 cis element is essential for CTGF promoter reporter activity in 
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Whereas p38 mediated CTGF induction by TGFbeta in
fibroblasts, MEK/ERK signaling mediated TGFbeta-induced CTGF expression in
pancreatic cancer cells and was also responsible for basal CTGF expression in
pancreatic cancer cell lines with defective Smad signaling. Since activating Ras 
mutations occur in the earliest stages of pancreatic cancer, CTGF may be induced 
independent of Smad4 in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 17786299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 5;361(4):1022-6. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

A Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy-associated missense mutation in mouse Tead1
affects its interaction with the co-factors YAP and TAZ.

Kitagawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
kitagawa@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (SCRA) is an autosomal dominant eye disease
characterized by bilateral chorioretinal degeneration. A missense mutation in the
gene encoding the transcription factor TEAD1/TEF-1 (Y421H) is genetically linked 
to SCRA, but the mechanisms of pathology remain unclear. To study the molecular
mechanisms underlying SCRA, a missense mutation corresponding to Y421H in human
TEAD1 was introduced into mouse Tead1 (Y410H), and a functional analysis of the
mutant protein was performed in RPE-J cells. The missense mutation reduced the
ability of Tead1 to interact with the co-factors YAP and TAZ, but not with the
co-factors Vgl-1, -2, and -3, in a mammalian two-hybrid assay. A GST pull-down
assay showed that the direct interaction between Tead1 and YAP or TAZ was lost
owing to the mutation. Amino acid substitutions at position 410 of Tead1 revealed
the essentiality of this tyrosine residue to the interaction. The Y410H mutation 
also abolished the transcriptional activity of Tead1 under the co-expression of
YAP or TAZ. These results suggest that SCRA pathogenesis may be due to a
loss-of-function of TEAD1 affecting the regulation of its target genes.

PMID: 17689488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Dec;132(6):1262-71. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Myocardial transcription factors are modulated during pathologic cardiac
hypertrophy in vivo.

Azakie A(1), Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Surgery, San Francisco,
Calif 94143, USA. azakiet@surgery.ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVES: In the current study we describe and characterize a novel ovine model
of biventricular hypertrophy and heart failure and evaluate the role of selected 
cardiac transcription factors in the regulation of cardiac gene expression during
pathologic hypertrophy in vivo. The cardiac troponin T promoter is used as a
model gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transient transfections of ovine cardiomyocytes in culture
show that Sp1, transcriptional enhancer factor-1, and myocyte enhancer factor-2
activate cardiac troponin T promoter constructs. Cotransfection of Sp3 inhibits
cardiac troponin T promoter activity and represses Sp1-mediated activation of the
cardiac troponin T promoter. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, transcriptional
enhancer factor-1, myocyte enhancer factor-2, NKX2.5, GATA-4, and Sp factors bind
the cardiac troponin T promoter in vivo. To assess the role of cardiac
transcription during pathologic hypertrophy, in vivo, we created surgical
aorta-pulmonary shunts in utero in fetal lambs. Two weeks after spontaneous
delivery, shunted lambs showed failure to thrive, significant biventricular
hypertrophy, and heart failure. Shunted hearts had significant increases in
myosin and cardiac troponin T protein expression. There was a shift in expression
to the high-molecular-weight fetal isoforms. Transcriptional enhancer factor-1,
myocyte enhancer factor-2, GATA-4, NKX2.5, and Sp1 transcription factor levels
were increased in all heart chambers of shunted animals. Sp3 expression was
decreased in shunted ventricles. Immunoprecipitated Sp3 was associated with
significant increases in histone acetyl transferase activity and decreases in
histone-deacetylase activity.
CONCLUSION: The shunted neonatal lamb is a valid, novel model of pathologic
biventricular hypertrophy. During pathologic hypertrophy myocardial
transactivators are upregulated while repressors are downregulated.

PMID: 17140938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2006 Nov;133(21):4245-56. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Myocardin is a direct transcriptional target of Mef2, Tead and Foxo proteins
during cardiovascular development.

Creemers EE(1), Sutherland LB, McAnally J, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Myocardin is a transcriptional co-activator of serum response factor (Srf), which
is a key regulator of the expression of smooth and cardiac muscle genes.
Consistent with its role in regulating cardiovascular development, myocardin is
the earliest known marker specific to both the cardiac and smooth muscle lineages
during embryogenesis. To understand how the expression of this early
transcriptional regulator is initiated and maintained, we scanned 90 kb of
genomic DNA encompassing the myocardin gene for cis-regulatory elements capable
of directing myocardin transcription in cardiac and smooth muscle lineages in
vivo. Here, we describe an enhancer that controls cardiovascular expression of
the mouse myocardin gene during mouse embryogenesis and adulthood. Activity of
this enhancer in the heart and vascular system requires the combined actions of
the Mef2 and Foxo transcription factors. In addition, the Tead transcription
factor is required specifically for enhancer activation in neural-crest-derived
smooth muscle cells and dorsal aorta. Notably, myocardin also regulates its own
enhancer, but in contrast to the majority of myocardin target genes, which are
dependent on Srf, myocardin acts through Mef2 to control its enhancer. These
findings reveal an Srf-independent mechanism for smooth and cardiac
muscle-restricted transcription and provide insight into the regulatory
mechanisms responsible for establishing the smooth and cardiac muscle phenotypes 
during development.

PMID: 17021041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34406-20. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Transcription enhancer factor-1-dependent expression of the alpha-tropomyosin
gene in the three muscle cell types.

Pasquet S(1), Naye F, Faucheux C, Bronchain O, Chesneau A, Thiébaud P, Thézé N.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 441, Avenue du Haut-Lévêque, 33600 Pessac, France.

In vertebrates, the actin-binding proteins tropomyosins are encoded by four
distinct genes that are expressed in a complex pattern during development and
muscle differentiation. In this study, we have characterized the transcriptional 
machinery of the alpha-tropomyosin (alpha-Tm) gene in muscle cells. Promoter
analysis revealed that a 284-bp proximal promoter region of the Xenopus laevis
alpha-Tm gene is sufficient for maximal activity in the three muscle cell types. 
The transcriptional activity of this promoter in the three muscle cell types
depends on both distinct and common cis-regulatory sequences. We have identified 
a 30-bp conserved sequence unique to all vertebrate alpha-Tm genes that contains 
an MCAT site that is critical for expression of the gene in all muscle cell
types. This site can bind transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) present in
muscle cells both in vitro and in vivo. In serum-deprived differentiated smooth
muscle cells, TEF-1 was redistributed to the nucleus, and this correlated with
increased activity of the alpha-Tm promoter. Overexpression of TEF-1 mRNA in
Xenopus embryonic cells led to activation of both the endogenous alpha-Tm gene
and the exogenous 284-bp promoter. Finally, we show that, in transgenic embryos
and juveniles, an intact MCAT sequence is required for correct temporal and
spatial expression of the 284-bp gene promoter. This study represents the first
analysis of the transcriptional regulation of the alpha-Tm gene in vivo and
highlights a common TEF-1-dependent regulatory mechanism necessary for expression
of the gene in the three muscle lineages.

PMID: 16959782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem J. 2006 May 15;396(1):163-72.

TEF-1 and C/EBPbeta are major p38alpha MAPK-regulated transcription factors in
proliferating cardiomyocytes.

Ambrosino C(1), Iwata T, Scafoglio C, Mallardo M, Klein R, Nebreda AR.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

p38 MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases) play important roles in the
regulation of cellular responses to environmental stress. Recently, this
signalling pathway has also been implicated in the regulation of processes
unrelated to stress, for example, in T lymphocytes and cardiomyocytes. In order
to identify molecular targets responsible for the housekeeping functions of p38
MAPKs, we have analysed the differences in the transcriptomes of normally
proliferating wild-type and p38alpha knockout immortalized embryonic
cardiomyocytes. Interestingly, many potential components of the myocardium
extracellular matrix were found to be upregulated in the absence of p38alpha.
Further analysis of the microarray data identified TEF-1 (transcriptional
enhancer factor-1), a known regulator of heart-specific gene expression, and
C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta), as the two transcription factors
the binding sites of which were most enriched in the promoters of
p38alpha-regulated genes. We have focused on the study of the extracellular
matrix component COL1A1 (alpha1 chain of type I collagen) and found evidence for 
the involvement of both TEF-1 and C/EBPbeta in the p38alpha-dependent inhibition 
of COL1A1 transcription. Our data therefore show that p38 MAPKs regulate TEF-1
and C/EBPbeta transcriptional activity in the absence of environmental stress and
suggests a role for p38alpha in the expression of extracellular matrix components
that maintain organ architecture.

PMCID: PMC1449985
PMID: 16492136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4719-29. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Tead proteins activate the Foxa2 enhancer in the node in cooperation with a
second factor.

Sawada A(1), Nishizaki Y, Sato H, Yada Y, Nakayama R, Yamamoto S, Nishioka N,
Kondoh H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The cell population and the activity of the organizer change during the course of
development. We addressed the mechanism of mouse node development via an analysis
of the node/notochord enhancer (NE) of Foxa2. We first identified the core
element (CE) of the enhancer, which in multimeric form drives gene expression in 
the node. The CE was activated in Wnt/beta-catenin-treated P19 cells with a time 
lag, and this activation was dependent on two separate sequence motifs within the
CE. These same motifs were also required for enhancer activity in transgenic
embryos. We identified the Tead family of transcription factors as binding
proteins for the 3' motif. Teads and their co-factor YAP65 activated the CE in
P19 cells, and binding of Tead to CE was essential for enhancer activity.
Inhibition of Tead activity by repressor-modified Tead compromised NE enhancer
activation and notochord development in transgenic mouse embryos. Furthermore,
manipulation of Tead activity in zebrafish embryos led to altered expression of
foxa2 in the embryonic shield. These results suggest that Tead activates the
Foxa2 enhancer core element in the mouse node in cooperation with a second factor
that binds to the 5' element, and that a similar mechanism also operates in the
zebrafish shield.

PMID: 16207754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem J. 2005 May 15;388(Pt 1):217-25.

The transcriptional co-activator TAZ interacts differentially with
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family members.

Mahoney WM Jr(1), Hong JH, Yaffe MB, Farrance IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Members of the highly related TEF-1 (transcriptional enhancer factor-1) family
(also known as TEAD, for TEF-1, TEC1, ABAA domain) bind to MCAT (muscle C, A and 
T sites) and A/T-rich sites in promoters active in cardiac, skeletal and smooth
muscle, placenta, and neural crest. TEF-1 activity is regulated by interactions
with transcriptional co-factors [p160, TONDU (Vgl-1, Vestigial-like protein-1),
Vgl-2 and YAP65 (Yes-associated protein 65 kDa)]. The strong transcriptional
co-activator YAP65 interacts with all TEF-1 family members, and, since YAP65 is
related to TAZ (transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif), we wanted
to determine if TAZ also interacts with members of the TEF-1 family. In the
present study, we show by GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, by
co-immunoprecipitation and by modified mammalian two-hybrid assays that TEF-1
interacts with TAZ in vitro and in vivo. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
with purified TEF-1 and GST-TAZ fusion protein showed that TAZ interacts with
TEF-1 bound to MCAT DNA. TAZ can interact with endogenous TEF-1 proteins, since
exogenous TAZ activated MCAT-dependent reporter promoters. Like YAP65, TAZ
interacted with all four TEF-1 family members. GST pull-down assays with
increasing amounts of [35S]TEF-1 and [35S]RTEF-1 (related TEF-1) showed that TAZ 
interacts more efficiently with TEF-1 than with RTEF-1. This differential
interaction also extended to the interaction of TEF-1 and RTEF-1 with TAZ in
vivo, as assayed by a modified mammalian two-hybrid experiment. These data show
that differential association of TEF-1 proteins with transcriptional
co-activators may regulate the activity of TEF-1 family members.

PMCID: PMC1186710
PMID: 15628970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genesis. 2004 Aug;39(4):273-9.

Transcription cofactor Vgl-2 is required for skeletal muscle differentiation.

Chen HH(1), Maeda T, Mullett SJ, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate gene expression in skeletal muscle but are
not muscle-specific. Instead, TEF-1 factors rely on the muscle-specific cofactor 
Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2), a protein related to Drosophila vestigial. Previously, 
we showed that Vgl-2 promotes skeletal muscle differentiation and activates
muscle-specific promoters. However, the mechanism whereby Vgl-2 regulates TEF-1
factors and the requirement for Vgl-2 for muscle-specific gene expression were
not known. In Drosophila, vestigial alters DNA binding specificity of the TEF-1
homolog scalloped to drive wing and flight muscle-specific gene expression. Here,
gel mobility shift assays show that Vgl-2 differentially affects DNA binding of
different TEF-1 factors. Using an antisense morpholino, we blocked the expression
of Vgl-2 and a muscle-specific gene in the myogenic C2C12 cell line and in chick 
embryos by electroporation. These results demonstrate that Vgl-2 is required for 
muscle gene expression, in part by switching DNA binding of TEF-1 factors during 
muscle differentiation.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15287000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30800-6. Epub 2004 May 12.

Vgl-4, a novel member of the vestigial-like family of transcription cofactors,
regulates alpha1-adrenergic activation of gene expression in cardiac myocytes.

Chen HH(1), Mullett SJ, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

Cardiac and skeletal muscle genes are regulated by the transcriptional enhancer
factor (TEF-1) family of transcription factors. In skeletal muscle, TEF-1 factors
interact with a skeletal muscle-specific cofactor called Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2)
that is related to the Drosophila protein Vestigial. Here, we characterize Vgl-4,
the only member of the Vestigial-like family expressed in the heart. Unlike other
members of the Vgl family that have a single TEF-1 interaction domain called the 
tondu (TDU) motif, Vgl-4 has two TDU motifs in its carboxyl-terminal domain. Like
other Vgl factors, Vgl-4 physically interacts with TEF-1 in an
immunoprecipitation assay. Vgl-4 functionally interacts with TEF-1 and also with 
myocyte enhancer factor 2 in a mammalian two-hybrid assay. Overexpression of
Vgl-4 in cardiac myocytes interfered with the basal expression and
alpha1-adrenergic receptor-dependent activation of a TEF-1-dependent skeletal
alpha-actin promoter. In cardiac myocytes cultured in serum and in serum-free
medium, a myc-tagged Vgl-4 protein was located in the nucleus and cytoplasm but
was exported from the nucleus when cells were treated with alpha1-adrenergic
receptor agonist. A chimeric nuclear-retained Vgl-4 protein inhibited
alpha1-adrenergic receptor-dependent activation. In contrast, deletion of the TDU
motifs of Vgl-4 prevented Vgl-4 nuclear localization, relieved Vgl-4 interference
of basal activity, and enhanced alpha1-adrenergic up-regulation of the skeletal
alpha-actin promoter. Nuclear export of Vgl-4 is dependent on the nuclear
exportin CRM-1. These results suggest that Vgl-4 modulates the activity of TEF-1 
factors and counteracts alpha1-adrenergic activation of gene expression in
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 15140898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25010-6. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

RTEF-1, a novel transcriptional stimulator of vascular endothelial growth factor 
in hypoxic endothelial cells.

Shie JL(1), Wu G, Wu J, Liu FF, Laham RJ, Oettgen P, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic growth factor known to
be up-regulated in ischemic heart and hypoxic endothelial cells. However, the
transcriptional regulation of VEGF in hypoxia-induced angiogenesis is not fully
understood. Transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) is a transcriptional factor
family that can regulate many genes expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle
cells by binding to myocyte-specific chloramphenicol acetyltransferase heptamer
elements in the promoters of these genes. In this study, we demonstrated that
related TEF-1 (RTEF-1), a member of the TEF-1 family, is up-regulated in hypoxic 
endothelial cells. Overexpression of RTEF-1 increases VEGF promoter activity and 
VEGF expression. Sequential deletion and site-directed mutation analyses of the
VEGF promoter demonstrated that a GC-rich region containing four Sp1 response
elements, located between -114 and -50, was essential for RTEF-1 function. This
region is beyond the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha binding site and does not
consist of M-CAT-related elements. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
RTEF-1 was found to interact with the first Sp1 residue (-97 to -87) of the four 
consecutive Sp1 elements. Binding activity of RTEF-1 to VEGF promoter is also
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. In addition, induction of VEGF
promoter activity by RTEF-1 results in an increase of angiogenic processes
including endothelial cells proliferation and vascular structure formation. These
results indicate that RTEF-1 acts as a transcriptional stimulator of VEGF by
regulating VEGF promoter activity through binding to Sp1 site. In addition,
RTEF-1-induced VEGF promoter activity was enhanced in a hypoxic condition,
indicating that RTEF-1 may play an important role in the regulation of VEGF under
hypoxia.

PMID: 15073166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 May 1;13(9):975-81. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

A novel TEAD1 mutation is the causative allele in Sveinsson's chorioretinal
atrophy (helicoid peripapillary chorioretinal degeneration).

Fossdal R(1), Jonasson F, Kristjansdottir GT, Kong A, Stefansson H, Gosh S,
Gulcher JR, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. ragnheidur.fossdal@decode.is

Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (SCRA), also referred to as helicoid
peripapillary chorioretinal degeneration or atrophia areata, is an autosomal
dominant eye disease, characterized by symmetrical lesions radiating from the
optic disc involving the retina and the choroid. Genome-wide linkage analysis
mapped the SCRA gene to chromosome 11p15 in 81 patients from a large founder
pedigree in Iceland. The parametric LOD score obtained was 18.9 using an
autosomal dominant model with high penetrance. Crossover analysis of the linkage 
region with 51 markers identified a 593 kb segment shared by all patients.
Sequencing exons of the only gene in this interval, the transcriptional enhancer 
TEAD1, revealed a novel missense mutation (Y421H) carried by all patients and
none of the 502 controls. The mutation is in a conserved amino acid sequence in
the C terminal of the protein, a potential binding site for YAP65 one of TEAD1's 
cofactors that is expressed in human retina as well as TEAD1 based on RT-PCR
experiments. Therefore, we conclude that the mutation in the TEAD1 gene is the
cause of Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy.

PMID: 15016762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):2153-68.

Direct interaction between nucleosome assembly protein 1 and the papillomavirus
E2 proteins involved in activation of transcription.

Rehtanz M(1), Schmidt HM, Warthorst U, Steger G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, 50935 Cologne, Germany.

Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified human nucleosome assembly protein 
1 (hNAP-1) as a protein interacting with the activation domain of the
transcriptional activator encoded by papillomaviruses (PVs), the E2 protein. We
show that the interaction between E2 and hNAP-1 is direct and not merely mediated
by the transcriptional coactivator p300, which is bound by both proteins.
Coexpression of hNAP-1 strongly enhances activation by E2, indicating a
functional interaction as well. E2 binds to at least two separate domains within 
hNAP-1, one within the C terminus and an internal domain. The binding of E2 to
hNAP-1 is necessary for cooperativity between the factors. Moreover, the
N-terminal 91 amino acids are crucial for the transcriptional activity of hNAP-1,
since deletion mutants lacking this N-terminal portion fail to cooperate with E2.
We provide evidence that hNAP-1, E2, and p300 can form a ternary complex
efficient in the activation of transcription. We also show that p53 directly
interacts with hNAP-1, indicating that transcriptional activators in addition to 
PV E2 interact with hNAP-1. These results suggest that the binding of
sequence-specific DNA binding proteins to hNAP-1 may be an important step
contributing to the activation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC350572
PMID: 14966293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 3;32(2):791-802. Print 2004.

VITO-1 is an essential cofactor of TEF1-dependent muscle-specific gene
regulation.

Günther S(1), Mielcarek M, Krüger M, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
Hollystrasse 1, 06097 Halle, Germany.

The expression of several muscle-specific genes is partially or completely
regulated by MCAT elements, which bind members of the TEF family of transcription
factors. TEF1 itself is unable to activate reporter plasmids bearing TEF1-binding
sites, suggesting that additional bridging or co-activating factors are necessary
to allow interaction of TEF1 with the transcriptional machinery. In addition,
none of the known TEF genes are exclusively expressed in the cardiac or skeletal 
muscle lineage to account for the muscle-specific expression of MCAT-dependent
genes. Here we describe that VITO-1, a new SID (scalloped interaction
domain)-containing protein, binds to TEF1 in vitro and strongly stimulates
transcription of a MCAT reporter plasmid together with TEF-1. Since VITO-1 is
predominantly expressed in the skeletal muscle lineage, it might serve as an
essential transcriptional intermediary factor to promote muscle-specific
expression via MCAT cis-regulatory elements. Although VITO-1 alone is not
sufficient to initiate myogenic conversion of 10T1/2 fibroblastic cells, it
enhanced MyoD-mediated myogenic conversion. In addition, interference with VITO-1
expression by siRNA attenuated differentiation of C2C12 muscle cells and
MyoD-dependent myogenesis in 10T1/2 cells. We conclude that VITO-1 is a crucial
new cofactor of the muscle regulatory programme.

PMCID: PMC373362
PMID: 14762206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 30;314(1):131-7.

Targeting of therapeutic gene expression to the liver by using liver-type
pyruvate kinase proximal promoter and the SV40 viral enhancer active in multiple 
cell types.

Park CW(1), Park YM, Lee GT, Lee Y, Woo S, Cha JY, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim KS, Ahn
YH, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrine Research, College of Medicine, Yonsei University,
Seoul, South Korea.

To achieve the liver-directed expression in sufficient amounts of therapeutic
genes for successful and safe gene therapy, natural liver-specific promoters can 
be used to direct the expression of therapeutic genes in the liver, whereas
strong viral enhancers were used to obtain sufficient amounts of expressed
therapeutic gene products. However, very often use of either the former or the
latter does not guarantee both potent and liver-specific therapeutic gene
expression. Here we conglomerate them and thus create a potent tissue-specific
promoter by characterizing and using the liver-type pyruvate kinase proximal
promoter (LPKPP) harboring its TATA box and a HNF-1alpha binding site. Alone it
hardly activated its reporter gene expression in non-hepatocytes or hepatocytes. 
However, in the presence of the SV40 viral enhancer (SV40VE), which is active in 
multiple cell types, it was able to potently activate its reporter gene
expression specifically in hepatocytes. The tissue-specific activation of the
LPKPP by the viral enhancer was attributed to HNF-1alpha binding to the LPKPP.
Taken together, these results support the idea that the constitutively active
SV40VE could be used to activate the LPKPP in a tissue-specific manner in the
presence of HNF-1alpha. To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize
HNF-1alpha and its binding site, in the context of the LPKPP, to generate a basal
promoter that is transcriptionally activated potently in a tissue-specific manner
by a viral enhancer that is active in multiple cell types.

PMID: 14715256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochemistry. 2004 Jan 13;43(1):217-23.

Analysis of nucleotide sequence-dependent DNA binding of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase in a purified system.

Huang K(1), Tidyman WE, Le KU, Kirsten E, Kun E, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and The Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The enzymatic transfer of ADP-ribose from NAD to histone H(1) [defined as
trans(oligo-ADP-ribosylation)] or to PARP-1 [defined as
auto(poly-ADP-ribosylation)] requires binding of coenzymic DNA. The preceding
paper [Kun, E., et al. (2004) Biochemistry 43, 210-216] shows that
oligonucleotides of dsDNA can serve as coenzymic DNA for PARP-1 trans- or
auto-modification activity. Results of DNA-protein binding (EMSA) experiments
reported here demonstrate that short DNA oligonucleotides containing the
5'-TGTTG-3' nucleotide sequence motif preferentially bind to cloned PARP-1 in
vitro. The same nucleotide sequence motif is responsible for striated
myocyte-selective transcription of a contractile protein gene encoding cardiac
troponin T (cTnT). Results of experiments reported here demonstrate that mutation
of this motif also abolishes the differentiation-dependent activation of the
transfected cTnT promoter in myoblasts cultured in vitro, indicating that
nucleotide sequence-dependent binding of PARP-1 to promoter DNA of the cTnT gene 
is also necessary for differentiation-dependent activation. Thus, PARP-1 has two 
types of dsDNA binding activity: (1) nucleotide sequence-dependent binding,
analyzed here with EMSA experiments, and (2) coenzymic binding, measured
catalytically, which does not depend on the nucleotide sequence of the dsDNA. We 
hypothesize that the well-known association of PARP-1 with chromatin can be
attributed to its stable binding to chromosomal dsDNA, some portion of which is
likely to be nucleotide sequence-dependent binding. According to this hypothesis,
the distribution of this protein-modifying enzyme in chromatin may be targeted to
specific genomic loci and vary according to cell type and developmental stage.

PMID: 14705948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5143-64.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 binds multiple muscle MEF2 and A/T-rich elements 
during fast-to-slow skeletal muscle fiber type transitions.

Karasseva N(1), Tsika G, Ji J, Zhang A, Mao X, Tsika R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, 1600 Rollins Road, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

In adult mouse skeletal muscle, beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) gene
expression is primarily restricted to slow type I fibers; however, its expression
can be induced in fast type II fibers in response to a sustained increase in
load-bearing work (mechanical overload [MOV]). Our previous betaMyHC transgenic
and protein-DNA interaction studies have identified an A/T-rich element
(betaA/T-rich -269/-258) that is required for slow muscle expression and which
potentiates MOV responsiveness of a 293-bp betaMyHC promoter (beta293wt). Despite
the GATA/MEF2-like homology of this element, we found binding of two unknown
proteins that were antigenically distinct from GATA and MEF2 isoforms. By using
the betaA/T-rich element as bait in a yeast one-hybrid screen of an MOV-plantaris
cDNA library, we identified nominal transcription enhancer factor 1 (NTEF-1) as
the specific betaA/T-rich binding factor. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
analysis confirmed that NTEF-1 represents the enriched binding activity obtained 
only when the betaA/T-rich element is reacted with MOV-plantaris nuclear extract.
Moreover, we show that TEF proteins bind MEF2 elements located in the control
region of a select set of muscle genes. In transient-coexpression assays using
mouse C2C12 myotubes, TEF proteins transcriptionally activated a 293-bp betaMyHC 
promoter devoid of any muscle CAT (MCAT) sites, as well as a minimal thymidine
kinase promoter-luciferase reporter gene driven by three tandem copies of the
desmin MEF2 or palindromic Mt elements or four tandem betaA/T-rich elements.
These novel findings suggest that in addition to exerting a regulatory effect by 
binding MCAT elements, TEF proteins likely contribute to regulation of skeletal, 
cardiac, and smooth muscle gene networks by binding select A/T-rich and MEF2
elements under basal and hypertrophic conditions.

PMCID: PMC165722
PMID: 12861002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mech Dev. 2003 May;120(5):587-96.

Further developmental roles of the Vestigial/Scalloped transcription complex
during wing development in Drosophila melanogaster.

Srivastava A(1), Bell JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada T6G 2E9.

The Drosophila homologue of the human TEF-1 gene, scalloped (sd), is required for
wing development. The SD protein forms part of a transcriptional activation
complex with the protein encoded by vestigial (vg) that, in turn, activates
target genes important for wing formation. One sd function involves a regulatory 
feedback loop with vg and wingless (wg) that is essential in this process. The
dorsal-ventral (D/V) margin-specific expression of wg is lost in sd mutant wing
discs while the hinge-specific expression appears normal. In the context of wing 
development, a VG::sdTEA domain fusion produces a protein that mimics the
wild-type SD/VG complex and restores the D/V boundary-specific expression of wg
in a sd mutant background. Further, targeted expression of wg at the D/V boundary
in the wing disc was able to partially rescue the sd mutant phenotype. This
infers that sd could function in either the maintenance or induction of wg at the
D/V border. Another functional role for sd is the establishment of sensory organ 
precursors (SOP) of the peripheral nervous system at the wing margin. Thus, the
relationship between sd and senseless (sens) in the development of these cells is
also examined, and it appears that sd must be functional for proper sens
expression, and ultimately, for sensory organ precursor development.

PMID: 12782275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 May;35(5):461-71.

Basal and alpha1-adrenergic-induced activity of minimal rat betaMHC promoters in 
cardiac myocytes requires multiple TEF-1 but not NFAT binding sites.

McLean BG(1), Lee KS, Simpson PC, Farrance IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, 108 N. Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

A culture model for cardiac hypertrophy, stimulation of neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes by alpha(1)-adrenergic agonists, has been used extensively to identify
transcription factors that activate genes during cardiac hypertrophy, such as
skeletal alpha-actin, beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMHC), and B-natriuretic
peptide. We used this culture model to further investigate transcription factors 
regulating the betaMHC promoter in cardiac myocytes under basal conditions and
during hypertrophy. We found that the rat betaMHC promoter contains two other
MCAT sites, in addition to the two MCATs reported previously. The four MCAT sites
are conserved in some but not all of the mammalian betaMHC promoters examined,
and all bind TEF-1 but with varying affinity. As assayed by transient
transfection into cardiac myocytes, the four MCATs within 348 bp of the
transcription start site are required for full activity of the rat betaMHC
promoter in the absence and presence of the alpha(1)-adrenergic agonist
phenylephrine (PE). We found that the betaMHC promoter also contains a binding
site for the NFAT family of transcription factors, which are activated by
calcineurin and are implicated in the hypertrophic process. Although this site
bound NFAT3 in vitro and has been reported to be required for betaMHC promoter
activity in slow skeletal muscle, mutation of the site had no effect on basal or 
on PE-induced activity of the promoter in cardiac myocytes. Our results show that
full activity of minimal betaMHC promoters in the presence and absence of
hypertrophic agents requires multiple MCAT sites but not NFAT-binding sites.

PMID: 12738228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 7;301(2):267-74.

Inhibition of the TEF/TEAD transcription factor activity by nuclear calcium and
distinct kinase pathways.

Thompson M(1), Andrade VA, Andrade SJ, Pusl T, Ortega JM, Goes AM, Leite MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, MG 31270-901, Brazil.

Transcription enhancer factor (TEF/TEAD) is a family of four transcription
factors that share a common TEA-DNA binding domain and are involved in similar
cellular functions, such as cell differentiation and proliferation. All adult
tissues express at least one of the four TEAD genes, so this family of
transcription factors may be of widespread importance, yet little is known about 
their regulation. Here we examine the factors that regulate TEAD activity in CHO 
cells. RT-PCR indicated the presence of TEAD-1, TEAD-3, and both isoforms of
TEAD-4, but not TEAD-2. Quantitative measurements showed that TEAD-4 is most
abundant, followed by TEAD-3, then TEAD-1. We examined the relative effects of
nuclear and cytosolic Ca(2+) on TEAD activity, since TEAD proteins are localized 
to the nucleus and since free Ca(2+) within the nucleus selectively regulates
transcription in some systems. Chelation of nuclear but not cytosolic Ca(2+)
increased TEAD activity two times above control. Inhibition of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) also increased TEAD activity, while cAMP decreased TEAD
activity, and protein kinase C had no effect. Together, these results show that
nuclear Ca(2+), MAPK, and cAMP each negatively regulate the activity of the TEAD 
transcription factor.

PMID: 12565854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Mar;284(3):C738-48. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

Transcriptional regulation of the type I myosin heavy chain gene in denervated
rat soleus.

Huey KA(1), Haddad F, Qin AX, Baldwin KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine
92697, USA.

Denervation (DEN) of rat soleus is associated with a decreased expression of slow
type I myosin heavy chain (MHC) and an increased expression of the faster MHC
isoforms. The molecular mechanisms behind these shifts remain unclear. We first
investigated endogenous transcriptional activity of the type I MHC gene in normal
and denervated soleus muscles via pre-mRNA analysis. Our results suggest that the
type I MHC gene is regulated via transcriptional processes in the denervated
soleus. Deletion and mutational analysis of the rat type I MHC promoter was then 
used to identify cis elements or regions of the promoter involved in this
response. DEN significantly decreased in vivo activity of the -3,500, -2,500,
-914, -408, -299, and -215 bp type I MHC promoters, relative to the
alpha-skeletal actin promoter. In contrast, normalized -171 promoter activity was
unchanged. Mutation of the betae3 element (-214/-190) in the -215 promoter and
deletion of this element (-171 promoter) blunted type I downregulation with DEN. 
In contrast, betae3 mutation in the -408 promoters was not effective in
attenuating the DEN response, suggesting the existence of additional
DEN-responsive sites between -408 and -215. Western blotting and gel mobility
supershift assays demonstrated decreased expression and DNA binding of
transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) with DEN, suggesting that this decrease
may contribute to type I MHC downregulation in denervated muscle.

PMID: 12444021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;37(9):542-5.

[Expression of lethal gene mRNA on placenta villi in patients with spontaneous
abortion].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1), Lin Q, Wang X, Lu P, Sheng Z, Ding C, Hong Y, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Renji Hospital, Second Medical
College in Shanghai, Shanghai 200001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of lethal gene: including retinoic X receptor
(RXR)alpha, N-myc and transcript enhancer factor (TEF)-1 in human spontaneous
abortion.
METHODS: The levels of RXRalpha, N-myc and TEF-1 mRNA expression on placenta
villi from 38 spontaneous abortion women and 33 normal early pregnant women were 
examined by reverse transcription, polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: (1) The levels of RXRalpha mRNA on placenta villi from the abortion
group were significantly decreased as compared with those from normal group (0.4 
+/- 0.3 versus 0.6 +/- 0.3, P < 0.05); There were no significant differences in
the levels of N-myc mRNA expression between the abortion group and normal group
(2.1 +/- 1.2 versus 2.2 +/- 0.9, P > 0.05). The levels of TEF-1 mRNA on placenta 
from abortion group were significantly lower than those from normal group (1.6
+/- 1.1, 2.3 +/- 1.2, P < 0.05); (2) The levels of RXR alpha mRNA, TEF-1 mRNA in 
recurrent abortion group were significantly lower than those from non-recurrent
group (0.3 +/- 0.2 versus 0.6 +/- 0.4, P < 0.05, 1.0 +/- 1.1 versus 1.9 +/- 1.2, 
P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: It was suggested that the lower expression of RXR alpha mRNA, TEF-1
mRNA may play an important role in the pathogenesis of spontaneous abortion
especially in recurrent abortion.

PMID: 12411016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003 Jan;284(1):H193-203. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Regulation of the S100B gene by alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation in cardiac
myocytes.

Tsoporis JN(1), Marks A, Van Eldik LJ, O'Hanlon D, Parker TG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University of Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6, Canada.

We previously reported that S100B, a 20-kDa Ca(2+)-binding homodimer, inhibited
the postinfarct myocardial hypertrophic response mediated by alpha(1)-adrenergic 
stimulation through the protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathway. In the present 
study, we examined whether the same pathway induced the S100B gene, supporting
the hypothesis that S100B is a feedback negative regulator of this pathway. We
transfected cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes with a luciferase reporter
gene driven by the maximal human S100B promoter and progressively shorter
segments of this promoter sequentially deleted from the 5' end. We identified a
basic promoter essential for transcription spanning 162 bp upstream of the
transcription initiation site and positive (at -782/-162 and -6,689/-4,463) and
negative (at -4,463/-782) myocyte-selective regulatory elements. We showed that
the basic and maximal S100B promoters were activated specifically by
alpha(1)-adrenergic agonists through the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor, but not
by any other trophic hormonal stimuli. The activation of the S100B promoter was
mediated through the PKC signaling pathway. Transcription enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) influenced transcription from the maximal, 
but not the basic, promoter implicating active MCAT elements upstream from the
basic promoter. Acting in opposing fashions, TEF-1 transrepressed the S100B
promoter and RTEF-1 transactivated the promoter. Our results suggest that
alpha(1)-adrenergic stimulation induces the S100B gene after myocardial
infarction through the PKC signaling pathway and that this induction is modulated
by TEF-1 and RTEF-1.

PMID: 12388300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Dec;283(6):C1761-75. Epub 2002 Aug 22.

Divergence in species and regulatory role of beta -myosin heavy chain proximal
promoter muscle-CAT elements.

Tsika RW(1), McCarthy J, Karasseva N, Ou Y, Tsika GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

We examined the functional role of distinct muscle-CAT (MCAT) elements during
non-weight-bearing (NWB) regulation of a wild-type 293-base pair beta-myosin
heavy chain (beta MyHC) transgene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
revealed decreased NTEF-1, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and Max binding at the
human distal MCAT element when using NWB soleus vs. control soleus nuclear
extract. Compared with the wild-type transgene, expression assays revealed that
distal MCAT element mutation decreased basal transgene expression, which was
decreased further in response to NWB. EMSA analysis of the human proximal MCAT
(pMCAT) element revealed low levels of NTEF-1 binding that did not differ between
control and NWB extract, whereas the rat pMCAT element displayed robust NTEF-1
binding that decreased when using NWB soleus extracts. Differences in binding
between human and rat pMCAT elements were consistent whether using rat or mouse
nuclear extract or in vitro synthesized human TEF-1 proteins. Our results provide
the first evidence that 1) different binding properties and likely regulatory
functions are served by the human and rat pMCAT elements, and 2) previously
unrecognized beta MyHC proximal promoter elements contribute to NWB regulation.

PMID: 12388056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Gene. 2002 Sep 4;297(1-2):1-9.

Alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of the cardiac ankyrin repeat protein gene in
cardiac myocytes.

Maeda T(1), Sepulveda J, Chen HH, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Cardiac ankyrin repeat protein (CARP) is a nuclear transcription cofactor that is
activated by multiple signaling pathways in hypertrophic cardiac myocytes. Since 
CARP has been reported to be a transcriptional co-repressor, its activation
during hypertrophy might contribute to the deregulation of gene expression
leading to heart failure. Here, we found that alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling
activates CARP mRNA expression in rat cardiac myocytes. To examine how
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling activates the CARP gene, a 660 bp fragment of the
mouse CARP promoter was cloned. Previous reports suggested that the mouse CARP
promoter was dependent on the GATA4 transcription factor whereas the human CARP
promoter was dependent on transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). TEF-1 and
GATA4 transcription factors, known mediators of alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling,
bound to the mouse CARP promoter at several sites as determined by gel mobility
shift assays. These sites are highly conserved between the mouse and human
promoters, suggesting that they are functionally important in both. Mutation
analysis showed that binding of TEF-1 factors is required for basal activity of
the CARP promoter in cardiac myocytes. However, over-expression of TEF-1 factors 
could not potentiate the response of the CARP promoter to alpha(1)-adrenergic
stimulation. On the other hand, the alpha(1)-adrenergic response was potentiated 
by GATA4 over-expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling regulates CARP expression in cardiac myocytes, in
part through the transcription factor GATA4.

PMID: 12384280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48889-98. Epub 2002 Oct 9.

Mammalian vestigial-like 2, a cofactor of TEF-1 and MEF2 transcription factors
that promotes skeletal muscle differentiation.

Maeda T(1), Chapman DL, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Expression of many skeletal muscle-specific genes depends on TEF-1 (transcription
enhancer factor-1) and MEF2 transcription factors. In Drosophila, the TEF-1
homolog Scalloped interacts with the cofactor Vestigial to drive differentiation 
of the wing and indirect flight muscles. Here, we identify three mammalian
vestigial-like genes, Vgl-1, Vgl-2, and Vgl-3, that share homology in a TEF-1
interaction domain. Vgl-1 and Vgl-3 transcripts are enriched in the placenta,
whereas Vgl-2 is expressed in the differentiating somites and branchial arches
during embryogenesis and is skeletal muscle-specific in the adult. During muscle 
differentiation, Vgl-2 mRNA levels increase and Vgl-2 protein translocates from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In situ hybridization revealed co-expression of
Vgl-2 with myogenin in the differentiating muscle of embryonic myotomes but not
in newly formed somites prior to muscle differentiation. Like Vgl-1, Vgl-2
interacts with TEF-1. In addition, we show that Vgl-2 interacts with MEF2 in a
mammalian two-hybrid assay and that Vgl-2 selectively binds to MEF2 in vitro.
Co-expression of Vgl-2 with MEF2 markedly co-activates an MEF2-dependent promoter
through its MEF2 element. Overexpression of Vgl-2 in MyoD-transfected 10T(1/2)
cells markedly increased myosin heavy chain expression, a marker of terminal
muscle differentiation. These results identify Vgl-2 as an important new
component of the myogenic program.

PMID: 12376544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 6;296(5):1279-85.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate activity of the mouse mammary tumor virus
LTR.

Maeda T(1), Maeda M, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, 200 Lothrop Street, 15213, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (LTR) is a potent
transcriptional enhancer. We identified several putative binding sites for the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors (TEF-1, RTEF-1, DTEF-1, and ETF) in the
proximal negative regulatory element of the LTR. Gel mobility shift assays
revealed strong TEF-1 factor binding to one site using nuclear extracts from CV-1
cells and from the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Mutation of this site
increased basal activity of the LTR. In transient transfection assays, TEF-1
squelched the basal LTR activity and completely abrogated the response to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone. RTEF-1 and DTEF-1 had little effect on the basal
activity, whereas ETF activated the LTR. These TEF-1 factors also interfered with
the response to dexamethasone. Taken together, our results reveal an important
new role for TEF-1 factors in regulating MMTV LTR activity and suggest that TEF-1
factors might participate in mammary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12207913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2002 Mar;42(1):1-9.

Molecular characterization of regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from adult
mesenchymal stem cells.

Fukuda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. kfukuda@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp.

We recently isolated a cardiomyogenic (CMG) cell line from murine bone marrow
stroma, and in this paper characterize regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from
adult mesenchymal stem cells at the molecular level. Stromal cells were
immortalized, exposed to 5-azacytidine, and repeatedly screened for spontaneously
beating cells. CMG cells began to beat spontaneously after 2 weeks, and beat
synchronously after 3 weeks. They exhibited sinus-node-like or
ventricular-cell-like action potentials. Analysis of the isoforms of contractile 
protein genes, such as of myosin and alpha-actin, indicated that their phenotype 
was similar to that of fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes. The cells expressed
Nkx2.5, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF2-C mRNA before 5-azacytidine exposure, and MEF2-A
and MEF2-D after exposure. CMG cells expressed alpha1A, alpha1B, and
alpha1D-adrenergic receptor mRNA prior to differentiation, and beta1,
beta2-adrenergic and M1, M2-muscarinic receptors after acquiring the
cardiomyocyte phenotype. Phenylephrine induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and the
phosphorylation was inhibited by prazosin. Isoproterenol increased the cAMP level
38-fold and beating rate, cell motion, %shortening, and contractile velocity by
48%, 38%, 27%, and 51%, respectively, and the increases were blocked by CGP20712A
(beta1-selective blocker). Carbachol increased IP3 32-fold, and the increase was 
inhibited by AFDX116 (M2-selective blocker). These findings demonstrated that the
regenerated cardiomyocytes were capable of responding to adrenergic and
muscarinic stimulation. This new cell line provides a model for the study of
cardiomyocyte transplantation.

PMID: 12094073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jun 21;294(4):791-7.

TEF-1 and MEF2 transcription factors interact to regulate muscle-specific
promoters.

Maeda T(1), Gupta MP, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, PA 15213, USA.

Many muscle-specific genes are regulated by transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1), serum response factor (SRF), and myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2)
transcription factors. TEF-1 interacts with the MADS domain of SRF and together
SRF and TEF-1 co-activate the skeletal alpha-actin promoter. MEF2 factors also
contain a MADS domain with 50% amino acid identity to the SRF MADS domain.
Because of this sequence divergence, some SRF co-factors do not interact with
MEF2. To demonstrate that TEF-1 factors could also interact with MEF2 through its
MADS domain, we used co-immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays in vitro and
a mammalian two-hybrid assay in vivo. The MADS domain was not sufficient for MEF2
interaction with TEF-1, because additional sequences in the activation domains of
both proteins were required for in vivo association. The physiological
significance of this interaction was also demonstrated by transient transfection 
assays using muscle-specific promoters. Our results suggest that by their
interaction with MEF2 factors, TEF-1 factors can control MEF2-dependent
muscle-specific gene expression.

PMID: 12061776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8682-92. Epub 2001 Dec 21.

Cryptic MCAT enhancer regulation in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells.
Suppression of TEF-1 mediated activation by the single-stranded DNA-binding
proteins, Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1.

Carlini LE(1), Getz MJ, Strauch AR, Kelm RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

An asymmetric polypurine-polypyrimidine cis-element located in the 5' region of
the mouse vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene serves as a binding site for
multiple proteins with specific affinity for either single- or double-stranded
DNA. Here, we test the hypothesis that single-stranded DNA-binding proteins are
responsible for preventing a cryptic MCAT enhancer centered within this element
from cooperating with a nearby serum response factor-interacting CArG motif to
trans-activate the minimal promoter in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. DNA
binding studies revealed that the core MCAT sequence mediates binding of
transcription enhancer factor-1 to the double-stranded polypurine-polypyrimidine 
element while flanking nucleotides account for interaction of Pur alpha and Pur
beta with the purine-rich strand and MSY1 with the complementary pyrimidine-rich 
strand. Mutations that selectively impaired high affinity single-stranded DNA
binding by fibroblast or smooth muscle cell-derived Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1
in vitro, released the cryptic MCAT enhancer from repression in transfected
cells. Additional experiments indicated that Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1 also
interact specifically, albeit weakly, with double-stranded DNA and with
transcription enhancer factor-1. These results are consistent with two plausible 
models of cryptic MCAT enhancer regulation by Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1
involving either competitive single-stranded DNA binding or masking of MCAT-bound
transcription enhancer factor-1.

PMID: 11751932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;33(7):723-34.

Regulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin gene expression in myofibroblast
differentiation from rat lung fibroblasts.

Roy SG(1), Nozaki Y, Phan SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 48109-0602,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Myofibroblasts express alpha-smooth muscle actin and have a phenotype
intermediate between fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. Their emergence can be 
induced by cytokines such as transforming growth factor beta; but the regulatory 
mechanism for induction of alpha-smooth muscle actin gene expression in
myofibroblast differentiation has not been determined. To examine this mechanism 
at the level of the alpha-smooth muscle actin promoter, rat lung fibroblasts were
transfected with varying lengths of the alpha-smooth muscle actin promoter linked
to the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter gene and treated with
transforming growth factor beta1. The results show that the shortest inducible
promoter was 150 base pairs long, suggesting the presence in this region of
cis-elements of potential importance in transforming growth factor beta1 induced 
myofibroblast differentiation. Transfection of "decoy" oligonucleotides
corresponding to sequences for four suspected regulatory factors demonstrated
that only the transforming growth factor beta control element is involved in the 
regulation of transforming growth factor beta1-induced alpha-smooth muscle actin 
expression in myofibroblast differentiation. Consistent with this conclusion is
the finding that a mutation in the transforming growth factor beta control
element caused a significant reduction in promoter activity. These observations
taken together show that alpha-smooth muscle actin promoter regulation during
myofibroblast differentiation is uniquely different from that in smooth muscle
cells and other cell lines. Since myofibroblasts play a key role in wound
contraction and synthesis of extracellular matrix, clarification of this
differentiation mechanism should provide new insight into fibrogenesis and
suggest future novel strategies for modulation of wound healing and controlling
fibrosis.

PMID: 11390280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23464-70. Epub 2001 Apr 19.

DNA binding of TEA/ATTS domain factors is regulated by protein kinase C
phosphorylation in human choriocarcinoma cells.

Jiang SW(1), Dong M, Trujillo MA, Miller LJ, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) controls the expression of a diverse set 
of genes. Previous studies implicated protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated signal
transduction in modulating TEF function. We demonstrate that in human
choriocarcinoma BeWo cells, the PKC activator 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol
13-acetate and PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide reciprocally down- and
up-regulate, respectively, TEF-mediated GGAATG core enhancer activity. In vitro
TEF-1 phosphorylation with several PKC isozymes and phosphoamino acid analysis
confirmed that TEF-1 is a potential PKC substrate. TEF-1.DNA complexes formed by 
BeWo nuclear extracts are supershifted by phosphoserine- and phosphothreonine-
but not phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies, indicating that TEF-1 is
phosphorylated in vivo at serine and threonine residues. The TEF-1
phosphorylation domain was localized to the third alpha-helix of the DNA binding 
domain and adjacent hinge region by phosphopeptide analysis. TEF-1
phosphorylation significantly reduced its DNA binding activity both in vitro and 
in vivo, providing a possible mechanism for the inhibitory action of PKC.
Finally, BeWo cells contained abundant levels of gamma and delta PKC isoforms,
and their overexpression resulted in even greater inhibition of GGAATG core
enhancer activity after 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate treatment. These
data strongly suggest that PKC-mediated phosphorylation is a key factor
controlling TEF function.

PMID: 11313339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 May;59(5):1225-34.

Cloning and characterization of the mouse alpha1C/A-adrenergic receptor gene and 
analysis of an alpha1C promoter in cardiac myocytes: role of an MCAT element that
binds transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

O'Connell TD(1), Rokosh DG, Simpson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA.

alpha1-Adrenergic receptor (AR) subtypes in the heart are expressed by myocytes
but not by fibroblasts, a feature that distinguishes alpha1-ARs from beta-ARs.
Here we studied myocyte-specific expression of alpha1-ARs, focusing on the
subtype alpha1C (also called alpha1A), a subtype implicated in cardiac
hypertrophic signaling in rat models. We first cloned the mouse alpha1C-AR gene, 
which consisted of two exons with an 18 kb intron, similar to the alpha1B-AR
gene. The receptor coding sequence was >90% homologous to that of rat and human. 
alpha1C-AR transcription in mouse heart was initiated from a single Inr consensus
sequence at -588 from the ATG; this and a putative polyadenylation sequence 8.5
kb 3' could account for the predominant 11 kb alpha1C mRNA in mouse heart. A
5'-nontranscribed fragment of 4.4 kb was active as a promoter in cardiac myocytes
but not in fibroblasts. Promoter activity in myocytes required a single muscle
CAT (MCAT) element, and this MCAT bound in vitro to recombinant and endogenous
transcriptional enhancer factor-1. Thus, alpha1C-AR transcription in cardiac
myocytes shares MCAT dependence with other cardiac-specific genes, including the 
alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chains, skeletal alpha-actin, and brain natriuretic 
peptide. However, the mouse alpha1C gene was not transcribed in the neonatal
heart and was not activated by alpha1-AR and other hypertrophic agonists in rat
myocytes, and thus differed from other MCAT-dependent genes and the rat alpha1C
gene.

PMID: 11306707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10413-22. Epub 2001 Jan 2.

Physical interaction between the MADS box of serum response factor and the
TEA/ATTS DNA-binding domain of transcription enhancer factor-1.

Gupta M(1), Kogut P, Davis FJ, Belaguli NS, Schwartz RJ, Gupta MP.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute for Children and Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Illinois, Chicago 60612, USA. mgupta@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu

Serum response factor is a MADS box transcription factor that binds to consensus 
sequences CC(A/T)(6)GG found in the promoter region of several serum-inducible
and muscle-specific genes. In skeletal myocytes serum response factor (SRF) has
been shown to heterodimerize with the myogenic basic helix-loop-helix family of
factors, related to MyoD, for control of muscle gene regulation. Here we report
that SRF binds to another myogenic factor, TEF-1, that has been implicated in the
regulation of a variety of cardiac muscle genes. By using different biochemical
assays such as affinity precipitation of protein, GST-pulldown assay, and
coimmunoprecipitation of proteins, we show that SRF binds to TEF-1 both in in
vitro and in vivo assay conditions. A strong interaction of SRF with TEF-1 was
seen even when one protein was denatured and immobilized on nitrocellulose
membrane, indicating a direct and stable interaction between SRF and TEF-1, which
occurs without a cofactor. This interaction is mediated through the C-terminal
subdomain of MADS box of SRF encompassing amino acids 204-244 and the putative
2nd and 3rd alpha-helix/beta-sheet configuration of the TEA/ATTS DNA-binding
domain of TEF-1. In the transient transfection assay, a positive cooperative
effect of SRF and TEF-1 was observed when DNA-binding sites for both factors,
serum response element and M-CAT respectively, were intact; mutation of either
site abolished their synergistic effect. Similarly, an SRF mutant, SRFpm-1,
defective in DNA binding failed to collaborate with TEF-1 for gene regulation,
indicating that the synergistic trans-activation function of SRF and TEF-1 occurs
via their binding to cognate DNA-binding sites. Our results demonstrate a novel
association between SRF and TEF-1 for cardiac muscle gene regulation and disclose
a general mechanism by which these two super families of factors are likely to
control diversified biological functions.

PMID: 11136726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):82-90.

Tumor cell splice variants of the transcription factor TEF-1 induced by SV40
T-antigen transformation.

Zuzarte PC(1), Farrance IK, Simpson PC, Wildeman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The large tumor antigen (TAg) of simian virus 40 is able to transform cells
through interactions with cellular proteins, notably p53 and Rb. Among the other 
proteins that form complexes with TAg is TEF-1, a transcription factor utilized
by the viral enhancer to activate expression of the early gene which encodes TAg.
We show that fibroblasts contain several alternately spliced TEF-1 mRNAs, the
most abundant of which encodes a protein with an additional four amino acid exon 
compared to the database entry for Hela cell TEF-1. Transformation by TAg induces
alternate splicing, producing a more abundant form lacking this exon and matching
the published sequence. Splicing variants lacking this exon were detected in
mouse pancreatic tumors and in cell lines derived from human pancreatic cancers, 
in contrast to a single isoform with the exon in normal mouse pancreas. A total
of eight splice variants were identified, with the loss of the four amino acid
exon typical of transformed cells. These and other data presented suggest that
TAg 're-models' host cell transcription factors that are used early in viral
infection, and thereby mimics an event that naturally occurs during
transformation. The data indicate that TEF-1 alterations may be a hallmark
feature of tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11118619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1173-84.

Multiprotein complex formation at the beta myosin heavy chain distal muscle CAT
element correlates with slow muscle expression but not mechanical overload
responsiveness.

Vyas DR(1), McCarthy JJ, Tsika GL, Tsika RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine,
and the Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
Missouri 65211, USA.

To examine the role of the beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) distal muscle CAT
(MCAT) element in muscle fiber type-specific expression and mechanical overload
(MOV) responsiveness, we conducted transgenic and in vitro experiments. In adult 
transgenic mice, mutation of the distal MCAT element led to significant
reductions in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) specific activity measured 
in control soleus and plantaris muscles when compared with wild type transgene
beta293WT but did not abolish MOV-induced CAT specific activity. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay revealed the formation of a specific low migrating nuclear
protein complex (LMC) at the betaMyHC MCAT element that was highly enriched only 
when using either MOV plantaris or control soleus nuclear extract. Scanning
mutagenesis of the betaMyHC distal MCAT element revealed that only the
nucleotides comprising the core MCAT element were essential for LMC formation.
The proteins within the LMC when using either MOV plantaris or control soleus
nuclear extracts were antigenically related to nominal transcription enhancer
factor 1 (NTEF-1), poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), and Max. Only in vitro
translated TEF-1 protein bound to the distal MCAT element, suggesting that this
multiprotein complex is tethered to the DNA via TEF-1. Protein-protein
interaction assays revealed interactions between nominal TEF-1, PARP, and Max.
Our studies show that for transgene beta293 the distal MCAT element is not
required for MOV responsiveness but suggest that a multiprotein complex likely
comprised of nominal TEF-1, PARP, and Max forms at this element to contribute to 
basal slow fiber expression.

PMID: 11010974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. DNA Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;19(8):507-14.

Cooperative binding of TEF-1 to repeated GGAATG-related consensus elements with
restricted spatial separation and orientation.

Jiang SW(1), Desai D, Khan S, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) family includes TEF-1, TEF-3,
TEF-4, and TEF-5. The TEFs share a highly conserved 68-amino acid TEA/ATTS
DNA-binding domain, which binds to SV40 GT-IIC (GGAATG), SphI (AGTATG), SphII
(AGCATG), and muscle-specific M-CAT (GGTATG) enhansons. We determined the optimal
DNA-binding consensus sequence for TEF-1. Using a purified GST-TEF-1 fusion
protein and a random pool of synthetic oligonucleotides, 31 independent clones
were obtained after six rounds of binding site selection. DNA sequences analysis 
revealed that 16 clones contained direct repeats with a 3-bp spacer (DR3), and 15
clones contained a single binding site. The predominate consensus half-site was
GGAATG (67%), and the other elements were of the form G(A)GA(T/C)ATG. The TEF-1
bound to the DR3 as a dimer in a cooperative manner. Cooperative binding was
dependent on the spacing and orientation of the half-sites and was inhibited by
deoxycholate treatment, providing evidence that protein-protein interactions were
involved. The data suggest that TEF dimerization is important for its ability to 
modulate gene transcription.

PMID: 10975468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Aug 15;28(16):3168-77.

Protein kinase-A dependent phosphorylation of transcription enhancer factor-1
represses its DNA-binding activity but enhances its gene activation ability.

Gupta MP(1), Kogut P, Gupta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (Cardiac and Thoracic), The University of Chicago, 5841 
South Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. mgupta@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu

The cAMP-dependent signaling pathway has been implicated in cardiac cell
growth/differentiation and muscle gene transcription. Previously, we have
identified a cAMP-inducible E-box/M-CAT hybrid motif in the cardiac alpha-myosin 
heavy chain (alpha-MHC) gene promoter. The two factors, TEF-1 and Max, that bind 
to this motif are found to physically associate with each other and exert a
positive cooperative effect for gene regulation. Here we show that TEF-1, but not
Max, is a substrate for protein kinase-A (PK-A)-dependent phosphorylation. TEF-1 
is phosphorylated by PK-A at residue serine-102. This post-translational
modification of TEF-1 repressed its DNA-binding activity, but not its ability to 
interact with the Max protein. Replacement of serine-102 in TEF-1 by a neutral or
a charged amino acid did not abolish its DNA-binding ability, suggesting that
changing a charge at the 102 amino-acid position of TEF-1 was not sufficient to
inhibit its DNA-binding activity. We also show that PK-A response of the
alpha-MHC gene is stimulated by the presence of wild-type TEF-1 but not by mutant
TEF-1 having serine-102 replaced by alanine, suggesting that phosphorylation at
this residue accounts for the cAMP/PK-A response of the gene. Thus, these data
demonstrate that TEF-1 is a direct target of cAMP/PK-A signaling in cardiac
myocytes.

PMCID: PMC108436
PMID: 10931933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 9;275(23):17476-80.

Identification of the functional domain in the transcription factor RTEF-1 that
mediates alpha 1-adrenergic signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

Ueyama T(1), Zhu C, Valenzuela YM, Suzow JG, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. stewartaf@msx.upmc.edu

Cardiac myocytes respond to alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor stimulation by a
progressive hypertrophy accompanied by the activation of many fetal genes,
including skeletal muscle alpha-actin. The skeletal muscle alpha-actin gene is
activated by signaling through an MCAT element, the binding site of the
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family of transcription factors.
Previously, we showed that overexpression of the TEF-1-related factor (RTEF-1)
increased the alpha(1)-adrenergic response of the skeletal muscle alpha-actin
promoter, whereas TEF-1 overexpression did not. Here, we identified the
functional domains and specific sequences in RTEF-1 that mediate the
alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Chimeric TEF-1 and RTEF-1 expression constructs
localized the region responsible for the alpha(1)-adrenergic response to the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RTEF-1. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to
inactivate eight serine residues of RTEF-1, not present in TEF-1, that are
putative targets of alpha(1)-adrenergic-dependent kinases. Mutation of a single
serine residue, Ser-322, reduced the alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of RTEF-1 by 
70% without affecting protein stability, suggesting that phosphorylation at this 
serine residue accounts for most of the alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Thus, these
results demonstrate that RTEF-1 is a direct target of alpha(1)-adrenergic
signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 10764782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 28;39(12):3505-13.

Novel human TEF-1 isoforms exhibit altered DNA binding and functional properties.

Jiang SW(1), Trujillo MA, Sakagashira M, Wilke RA, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry/Molecular
Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) is a member of the TEA/ATTS domain 
family. TEF-1 binds to GT-IIC (GGAATG), SphI (AGTATG), SphII (AGCATG), and M-CAT 
(GGTATG) response elements and is involved in the transactivation of a variety of
genes, including the SV40 large T antigen, mammalian muscle-specific genes, and
human chorionic somatomammotropin genes. Also, TEF-1 acts as a transcriptional
repressor in placental cells, possibly through interaction with the TATA binding 
protein (TBP), preventing TBP binding to the TATA box. Here we describe the
cloning, tissue-specific expression pattern, and functional characterization of
two novel TEF-1 isoforms, TEF-1beta and TEF-1gamma. These isoforms most likely
arise from alternative splicing of mRNA transcribed from a single gene and
involve substitutions and/or insertions in a region immediately following the DNA
binding domain. TEF-1beta appears to be widely distributed like the prototypic
TEF-1, designated TEF-1alpha, whereas TEF-1gamma exhibits a narrower
tissue-specific expression pattern that includes pancreas, kidney, and skeletal
and heart muscle. The relatively limited sequence alterations among these
isoforms cause significant changes in their DNA binding and transcriptional
activities. TEF-1beta and TEF-1gamma bind to GT-IIC sequences with higher
affinity and repress hCS promoter more efficiently than TEF-1alpha. These results
suggest that each TEF-1 isoform may play unique regulatory roles in various
tissues.

PMID: 10727247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4807-16.

TONDU (TDU), a novel human protein related to the product of vestigial (vg) gene 
of Drosophila melanogaster interacts with vertebrate TEF factors and substitutes 
for Vg function in wing formation.

Vaudin P(1), Delanoue R, Davidson I, Silber J, Zider A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Quantitative et Moléculaire, Institut Jacques Monod, 
France. Zider@ijm.jussieu.fr.

The mammalian TEF and the Drosophila scalloped genes belong to a conserved family
of transcriptional factors that possesses a TEA/ATTS DNA-binding domain.
Transcriptional activation by these proteins likely requires interactions with
specific coactivators. In Drosophila, Scalloped (Sd) interacts with Vestigial
(Vg) to form a complex, which binds DNA through the Sd TEA/ATTS domain. The Sd-Vg
heterodimer is a key regulator of wing development, which directly controls
several target genes and is able to induce wing outgrowth when ectopically
expressed. Here we show that Vg contains two distinct transcriptional activation 
domains, suggesting that the function of Vg is to mediate transcriptional
activation by Sd. By expressing a chimeric GAL4-Sd protein in Drosophila, we
found that the transcriptional activity of the Vg-Sd heterodimer is negatively
regulated at the AP and DV boundary of the wing disc. We also identify a novel
human protein, TONDU, which contains a short domain homologous to the domain of
Vg required for interaction with Sd. We show that TONDU specifically interacts
with a domain conserved in all the mammalian TEF factors. Expression of TDU in
Drosophila by means of the UAS-GAL4 system shows that this human protein can
substitute for Vg in wing formation. We propose that TDU is a specific
coactivator for the mammalian TEFs.

PMID: 10518497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Feb 4;1449(1):50-62.

Purification and characterization of TEF1, a transcription factor that controls
the human transforming growth factor-alpha promoter.

Wang D(1), Kudlow JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Alabama at Birmingham, 756 Diabetes Research and Education Building, 1808
Seventh Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) is a member of the epidermal growth 
factor family. It activates signal transduction pathways leading to cell
proliferation through the interaction with cell surface epidermal growth factor
receptor. The overexpression of TGF-alpha has been found in many types of cancers
and is thought to be involved in the genesis and maintenance of these tumors.
Recent results also implicate this growth factor in the development of certain
diabetic complications, such as atherosclerosis. The function of TGF-alpha can be
tightly controlled at the level of transcription of its gene. We have previously 
characterized the proximal TGF-alpha promoter and identified two neighboring
regulatory elements that appeared to cooperate with each other in the regulation 
of TGF-alpha transcription. The transcription factor that functions through the
distal element was identified as AP-2, a protein that was found to be induced by 
the oncoprotein, Ras. However, what factor binds and controls the proximal
regulatory element (PRE) is still unclear. Here, we report the purification and
preliminary characterization of the PRE-binding transcription factor TEF1 by
sequence-specific DNA-affinity chromatography from rat kidney nuclear extracts.
The purified TEF1 migrates on the SDS-PAGE at a molecular mass of about 36 kDa.
It specifically interacts with the PRE and was able to strongly activate
transcription from the TGF-alpha promoter in HeLa cell nuclear extracts in an in 
vitro transcription assay. The UV cross-linking experiment confirmed that this 36
kDa protein is indeed the protein that specifically binds the PRE. We also show
that the spacing between the AP-2 and the TEF1 sites in the TGF-alpha promoter
has little effect on the transcription from the TGF-alpha promoter. The
purification of TEF1 furthers our understanding of how TGF-alpha expression is
regulated and may help us understand the upstream signaling events that lead to
the elevated expression of this growth factor.

PMID: 10076050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):127-9.

Localization of human transcription factor TEF-4 and TEF-5 (TEAD2, TEAD3) genes
to chromosomes 19q13.3 and 6p21.2 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid analysis.

Jacquemin P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/, Illkirch Cédex, F-67404, France.

PMID: 9889009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 15;12(24):3900-9.

The Vestigial and Scalloped proteins act together to directly regulate
wing-specific gene expression in Drosophila.

Halder G(1), Polaczyk P, Kraus ME, Hudson A, Kim J, Laughon A, Carroll S.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 USA.

A small number of major regulatory (selector) genes have been identified in
animals that control the development of particular organs or complex structures. 
In Drosophila, the vestigial gene is required for wing formation and is able to
induce wing-like outgrowths on other structures. However, the molecular function 
of the nuclear Vestigial protein, which bears no informative similarities to
other proteins, was unknown. Here, we show that Vestigial requires the function
of the Scalloped protein, a member of the TEA family of transcriptional
regulators, to directly activate the expression of genes involved in wing
morphogenesis. Genetic and molecular analyses reveal that Vestigial regulates
wing identity by forming a complex with the Scalloped protein that binds sequence
specifically to essential sites in wing-specific enhancers. These enhancers also 
require the direct inputs of signaling pathways, and the response of an enhancer 
can be switched to another pathway through changes in signal-transducer binding
sites. Combinatorial regulation by selector proteins and signal transducers is
likely to be a general feature of the tissue-specific control of gene expression 
during organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC317267
PMID: 9869643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 15;12(24):3815-20.

Molecular interactions between Vestigial and Scalloped promote wing formation in 
Drosophila.

Simmonds AJ(1), Liu X, Soanes KH, Krause HM, Irvine KD, Bell JB.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, Charles H. Best Institute,
University of Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6, Canada.

Scalloped (Sd) and Vestigial (Vg) are each needed for Drosophila wing
development. We show that Sd is required for Vg function and that altering their 
relative cellular levels inhibits wing formation. In vitro, Vg binds directly to 
both Sd and its human homolog, Transcription Enhancer Factor-1. The interaction
domains map to a small region of Vg that is essential for Vg-mediated gene
activation and to the carboxy-terminal half of Sd. Our observations indicate that
Vg and Sd function coordinately to control the expression of genes required for
wing development, which implies that Vg is a tissue-specific transcriptional
intermediary factor of Sd.

PMCID: PMC317270
PMID: 9869635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):296-306.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase binds with transcription enhancer factor 1 to MCAT1
elements to regulate muscle-specific transcription.

Butler AJ(1), Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0452, USA.

Striated muscle-specific expression of the cardiac troponin T (cTNT) gene is
mediated through two MCAT elements that act via binding of transcription enhancer
factor 1 (TEF-1) to the MCAT core motifs and binding of an auxiliary protein to
nucleotides flanking the 5' side of the core motif. Using DNA-protein and
protein-protein binding experiments, we identified a 140-kDa polypeptide that
bound both the muscle-specific flanking sequences of the most distal MCAT1
element and TEF-1. Screening of an expression library with the MCAT1 element
yielded a cDNA encoding a truncated form of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP).
Endogenous PARP from embryonic tissue nuclear extracts migrated as a 140-kDa
protein. Recombinant full-length PARP preferentially bound the wild-type MCAT1
element and was shown to physically interact with TEF-1. In addition, endogenous 
TEF-1 could be coimmunoprecipitated with PARP from extracts of primary skeletal
muscle cells. Recombinant PARP was able to ADP-ribosylate TEF-1 in vitro.
Inhibition of the enzymatic activity of PARP repressed expression of an
MCAT1-dependent reporter in transiently transfected primary muscle cells.
Together, these data implicate PARP as the auxiliary protein that binds with
TEF-1 to the MCAT1 element to provide muscle-specific gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC83887
PMID: 9858553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Physiol. 1998 Dec;275(6 Pt 1):C1438-48.

Effect of serum and mechanical stretch on skeletal alpha-actin gene regulation in
cultured primary muscle cells.

Carson JA(1), Booth FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, Pharmacology, and Physiology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether mechanical stretch or serum
availability alters pretranslational regulation of skeletal alpha-actin (SkA) in 
cultured striated muscle cells. Chicken primary skeletal myoblasts and cardiac
myocytes were plated on collagenized Silastic membranes adherent to nylon
supports and stretched 8-20% of initial length 96 h postplating. Serum dependence
of SkA gene regulation was determined by maintaining differentiated muscle cells 
in growth/differentiation (G/D; skeletal myotubes, 10% horse serum-2% chick
embryo extract; cardiac myocytes, 10% horse serum) or growth-limiting (G-L; 0.5% 
horse serum) medium. Skeletal myotubes had higher SkA mRNA and SkA promoter
activity in G/D than in G-L medium. Cardiac myocyte SkA mRNA was higher in G-L
than in G/D medium. Serum response factor (SRF) protein binding to serum response
element 1 (SRE1) of SkA promoter increased in skeletal cultures in G/D compared
with G-L medium. Western blot analysis demonstrated that increased SRF-SRE1
binding was due, in part, to increased SRF protein. Stretching skeletal myotubes 
in G-L medium reduced SkA mRNA and repressed SkA promoter activity. The first 100
bp of SkA promoter were sufficient for stretch-induced repression of SkA promoter
activity, and an intact transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) binding site
was necessary for this response. Serum and stretch appear to repress SkA promoter
activity in skeletal myotubes through different DNA binding elements, the SRE1
and TEF-1 sites, respectively. Stretching increased SkA mRNA in cardiac myocytes 
in G-L medium but did not alter SkA mRNA level in cardiac cells in G/D medium.
These results demonstrate that stretch and serum interact differently to alter
SkA expression in cultured cardiac and skeletal muscle cells.

PMID: 9843704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1998 Jul;50(1):85-92.

Utilization of the TEF1-alpha gene (TEF1) promoter for expression of
polygalacturonase genes, pgaA and pgaB, in Aspergillus oryzae.

Kitamoto N(1), Matsui J, Kawai Y, Kato A, Yoshino S, Ohmiya K, Tsukagoshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Food Research Institute, Aichi Prefectural Government, Nagoya, Japan.

For the development of an efficient gene expression system in a shoyu koji mold
Aspergillus oryzae KBN616, the TEF1 gene, encoding translation-elongation factor 
1 alpha, was cloned from the same strain and used for expression of
polygalacturonase genes. The TEF1 gene comprised 1647 bp with three introns. The 
TEF1-alpha protein consisted of 460 amino acids possessing high identify to other
fungal TEF proteins. Two nucleotide sequences homologous to the upstream
activation sequence, characterized for the ribosomal protein genes in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as well as the pyrimidine-rich sequences were present
in the TEF1 gene promoter region, suggesting that the A, oryzae TEF1 gene has a
strong promoter activity. Two expression vectors, pTFGA300 and pTFGB200 for
production of polygalacturonases A and B respectively, were constructed by using 
the TEF1 gene promoter. A polygalacturonase (PGB) gene cloned from the same
strain comprised 1226 bp with two introns and encoded a protein of 367 amino
acids with high similarity to other fungal polygalacturonases. PGA and PGB were
secreted at approximately 100 mg/l in glucose medium and purified to homogeneity.
PGA had a molecular mass of 41 kDa, a pH optimum of 5.0 and temperature optimum
of 45 degrees C. PGB had a molecular mass of 39 kDa, a pH optimum of 5.0 and
temperature optimum of 55 degrees C.

PMID: 9720204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Am J Physiol. 1998 Aug;275(2 Pt 1):C608-18.

Two MCAT elements of the SM alpha-actin promoter function differentially in SM
vs. non-SM cells.

Swartz EA(1), Johnson AD, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22906, USA.

Transcriptional activity of the smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin gene is
differentially regulated in SM vs. non-SM cells. Contained within the rat SM
alpha-actin promoter are two MCAT motifs, binding sites for transcription
enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) transcriptional factors implicated in the regulation of
many muscle-specific genes. Transfections of SM alpha-actin promoter-CAT
constructs containing wild-type or mutagenized MCAT elements were performed to
evaluate their functional significance. Mutation of the MCAT elements resulted in
increased transcriptional activity in SM cells, whereas these mutations either
had no effect or decreased activity in L6 myotubes or endothelial cells.
High-resolution gel shift assays resolved several complexes of different
mobilities that were formed between MCAT oligonucleotides and nuclear extracts
from the different cell types, although no single band was unique to SM. Western 
blot analysis of nuclear extracts with polyclonal antibodies to conserved domains
of the TEF-1 gene family revealed multiple reactive bands, some that were similar
and others that differed between SM and non-SM. Supershift assays with a
polyclonal antibody to the TEF-related protein family demonstrated that TEF-1 or 
TEF-1-related proteins were contained in the shifted complexes. Results suggest
that the MCAT elements may contribute to cell type-specific regulation of the SM 
alpha-actin gene. However, it remains to be determined whether the differential
transcriptional activity of MCAT elements in SM vs. non-SM is due to differences 
in expression of TEF-1 or TEF-1-related proteins or to unique (cell type
specific) combinatorial interactions of the MCAT elements with other cis-elements
and trans-factors.

PMID: 9688616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Circ Res. 1998 Jul 13;83(1):43-9.

Transcription factor RTEF-1 mediates alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal 
gene program in cardiac myocytes.

Stewart AF(1), Suzow J, Kubota T, Ueyama T, Chen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
als6+@pitt.edu

Alpha1-adrenergic receptor stimulation induces cardiac myocytes to hypertrophy
and reactivates many fetal genes, including beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC)
and skeletal alpha-actin (SKA), by signaling through myocyte-specific CAT (M-CAT)
cis elements, binding sites of the transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1)
family of transcription factors. To examine functional differences between TEF-1 
and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) in alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal
program, expression constructs were cotransfected with betaMyHC and SKA
promoter/reporter constructs in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. TEF-I
overexpression tended to transactivate a minimal betaMyHC promoter but
significantly interfered with a minimal SKA promoter. In contrast, RTEF-1
transactivated both the minimal betaMyHC and SKA promoters. TEF-1 and RTEF-I also
affected the alpha1-adrenergic response of the betaMyHC and SKA promoters
differently. TEF-1 had no effect. In contrast, RTEF-1 potentiated the
alpha1-adrenergic responses of the SKA promoter and of a -3.3-kb betaMyHC
promoter. To determine why the promoters responded differently to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, promoters with mutated M-CAT elements were tested in the same way. The
betaMyHC promoter required an intact M-CAT element to respond to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, whereas the SKA promoter M-CAT was required for the TEF-1 response but
not for the RTEF-1 response, suggesting that SKA promoter-specific cofactors may 
be involved. By competition gel shift assay, the M-CAT of the minimal betaMyHC
promoter had a lower affinity than that of the SKA promoter, which partly
explains the different responses of these promoters to TEF-1. These results
highlight functional differences between TEF-1 and RTEF-1 and suggest a novel
function of RTEF-1 in mediating the alpha1-adrenergic response in hypertrophic
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9670917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1233-44.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin enhancers form a composite silencer in
pituitary cells in vitro.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human GH (GH) gene family includes the pituitary-specific hGH-1,
placental-specific chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS-5, hCS-2, and hCS-1), and
hGH-2 genes. These duplicated, nearly identical genes are localized on
approximately 50 kb of DNA on chromosome 17q23-q24. An enhancer (CSEn2), located 
downstream of the hCS-2 gene, participates in mediating placental-specific hCS
gene expression. In the preceding paper we demonstrated that CSEn2 activity
derives from the cooperative binding of transcription factor-1, TEF-1, and a
placental-specific factor CSEF-1 to multiple enhansons, Enh1-Enh5, that are
related to the SV40 GT-IIC and SphI/SphII enhansons. Here we demonstrate that two
copies of CSEn2 or a single copy of CSEn2 linked to either of the other two
enhancers in the hGH/hCS locus, CSEn1 and CSEn5, act cooperatively to enhance hCS
promoter activity in choriocarcinoma (BeWo) cells, but silence the promoter in
pituitary GC cells. Mutation of Enh4, an essential GT-IIC-like enhanson in the
context of the intact enhancer, abolishes silencer activity, and multimerized
GT-IIC enhansons mimic the intact CSEn enhancer/silencer activities in BeWo and
GC cells, respectively. By antibody-mediated supershift, Western, and far Western
analyses, we identified TEF-1 as the GT-IIC-binding factor in pituitary cells.
The data suggest that TEF-1 may be involved in pituitary-specific repression of
placental GH/CS gene transcription through long-range interactions between the
multiple CS enhancers present on the GH/CS gene locus.

PMID: 9259315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1223-32.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer function is mediated by cooperative
binding of TEF-1 and CSEF-1 to multiple, low-affinity binding sites.

Jiang SW(1), Trujillo MA, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer (CSEn) is composed of
multiple enhansons (Enh) that share sequence similarities with those of the
simian virus, SV40 enhancer (SVEn). The sequence homology includes two
GT-IIC-like (Enh1 and Enh4) and three SphI/II-like enhansons (Enh2, Enh3, and
Enh5). We previously showed that transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) and a
30-kDa placental-specific factor, chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer factor 1
(CSEF-1), bind to Enh4, which plays an essential role in enhancer function. In
this study, we demonstrate that TEF-1 and CSEF-1 bind specifically to all the
other GT-IIC- and SphI/II-like elements within CSEn with a broad range of binding
affinities that vary between 0.005 and 0.15 that of Enh4. Each individual
concatenated enhanson was able to stimulate hCS promoter activity in an
orientation-independent manner in choriocarcinoma cells (BeWo) with an observed
stimulation that was directly proportional to its relative binding affinity for
TEF-1 and CSEF-1. These results indicate that CSEn function results from the
cooperative interaction of TEF-1 and/or CSEF-1 binding to multiple, low-affinity 
GT-IIC- and SphI/II-like enhansons within the enhancer.

PMID: 9259314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3924-36.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix zipper
protein, Max, for positive regulation of cardiac alpha-myosin heavy-chain gene
expression.

Gupta MP(1), Amin CS, Gupta M, Hay N, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The M-CAT binding factor transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) has been
implicated in the regulation of several cardiac and skeletal muscle genes.
Previously, we identified an E-box-M-CAT hybrid (EM) motif that is responsible
for the basal and cyclic AMP-inducible expression of the rat cardiac alpha-myosin
heavy chain (alpha-MHC) gene in cardiac myocytes. In this study, we report that
two factors, TEF-1 and a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper protein, Max, bind
to the alpha-MHC EM motif. We also found that Max was a part of the cardiac
troponin T M-CAT-TEF-1 complex even when the DNA template did not contain an
apparent E-box binding site. In the protein-protein interaction assay, a stable
association of Max with TEF-1 was observed when glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-TEF-1 or GST-Max was used to pull down in vitro-translated Max or TEF-1,
respectively. In addition, Max was coimmunoprecipitated with TEF-1, thus
documenting an in vivo TEF-1-Max interaction. In the transient transcription
assay, overexpression of either Max or TEF-1 resulted a mild activation of the
alpha-MHC-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene at lower
concentrations and repression of this gene at higher concentrations. However,
when Max and TEF-1 expression plasmids were transfected together, the repression 
mediated by a single expression plasmid was alleviated and a three- to fourfold
transactivation of the alpha-MHC-CAT reporter gene was observed. This effect was 
abolished once the EM motif in the promoter-reporter construct was mutated, thus 
suggesting that the synergistic transactivation function of the TEF-1-Max
heterotypic complex is mediated through binding of the complex to the EM motif.
These results demonstrate a novel association between Max and TEF-1 and indicate 
a positive cooperation between these two factors in alpha-MHC gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC232245
PMID: 9199327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10664-8.

The human transcription enhancer factor-1, TEF-1, can substitute for Drosophila
scalloped during wingblade development.

Deshpande N(1), Chopra A, Rangarajan A, Shashidhara LS, Rodrigues V, Krishna S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Biological Sciences, TIFR Center, Bangalore 560012, India.

The human transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) belongs to a family of
evolutionarily conserved proteins that have a DNA binding TEA domain. TEF-1
shares a 98% homology with Drosophila scalloped (sd) in the DNA binding domain
and a 50% similarity in the activation domain. We have expressed human TEF-1 in
Drosophila under the hsp-70 promoter and find that it can substitute for Sd
function. The transformants rescue the wingblade defects as well as the lethality
of loss-of-function alleles. Observation of reporter activity in the imaginal
wing discs of the enhancer-trap alleles suggests that TEF-1 is capable of
promoting sd gene regulation. The functional capability of the TEF-1 product was 
assessed by comparing the extent of rescue by heat shock (hs)-TEF-1 with that of 
hs-sd. The finding that TEF-1 can function in vivo during wingblade development
offers a potent genetic system for the analysis of its function and in the
identification of the molecular partners of TEF-1.

PMID: 9099715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. EMBO J. 1997 Apr 1;16(7):1721-31.

Developmental acquisition of enhancer function requires a unique coactivator
activity.

Majumder S(1), Zhao Z, Kaneko K, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Enhancers are believed to stimulate promoters by relieving chromatin-mediated
repression. However, injection of plasmid-encoded genes into mouse oocytes and
embryos revealed that enhancers failed to stimulate promoters prior to formation 
of a two-cell embryo, even though the promoter was repressed in the maternal
nucleus of both oocytes and one-cell embryos. The absence of enhancer function
was not due to the absence of a required sequence-specific enhancer activation
protein, because enhancer function was not elicited even when these proteins
either were provided by an expression vector (GAL4:VP16) or were present as an
endogenous transcription factor (TEF-1) and shown to be active in stimulating
promoters. Instead, enhancer function in vivo required a unique coactivator
activity in addition to enhancer-specific DNA binding proteins and promoter
repression. This coactivator activity first appeared during mouse development in 
two- to four-cell embryos, concurrent with the major onset of zygotic gene
expression. Competition between various enhancers was observed in these embryos, 
but not competition between enhancers and promoters, and competition between
enhancers was absent in one-cell embryos. Moreover, enhancer function in oocytes 
could be partially restored by pre-injecting mRNA from cells in which enhancers
were active, the same mRNA did not affect enhancer function in two- to four-cell 
embryos.

PMCID: PMC1169775
PMID: 9130716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biochem. 1997 Feb;121(2):212-8.

Regulation of troponin T gene expression in chicken fast skeletal muscle:
involvement of an M-CAT-like element distinct from the standard M-CAT.

Watanabe T(1), Takemasa T, Yonemura I, Hirabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki.

Troponin T (TnT), like other myofibrillar proteins, is expressed as various
isoforms in different muscle fibers and/or at different development stages. A
recent study suggested the expression pattern of chicken fast TnT isoforms is
fixed in a given cell lineage. In the present study, we isolated genomic clones
of the chicken fast TnT gene to carry out molecular analysis of its expression
mechanism. One of the clones, pWETNTa, contained the 5' upstream region and
approximately 20 kb downstream from exon 1. We constructed promoter/upstream
segments of the chicken fast TnT gene linked to the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) gene and tested the regulatory function of the 5'
upstream region by transient transfection of the gene constructs into muscle
cells. We showed that a DNA segment between -264 and -44 bp from the most 5'
transcriptional initiation site, which has an MEF2, and M-CAT-like element, a
CArG box and two E boxes, was essential for the expression of the fast TnT gene. 
Furthermore, mutation of the M-CAT-like element in the segment resulted in the
most serious reduction in the fast TnT promoter activity. The results suggested
that the M-CAT-like element plays an important role in transcriptional regulation
of the fast TnT gene. The M-CAT-like element is very similar to the M-CAT
element, but in electrophoretic mobility shift assay, the factor(s) that bound to
this motif was found to be different from the M-CAT binding factor (MCBF).

PMID: 9089392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):365-70.

A novel family of TEA domain-containing transcription factors with distinct
spatiotemporal expression patterns.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We cloned two novel types of TEA domain-containing transcription factor (ETFR-1
and -2) cDNAs. Amino acid sequences deduced for ETFR-1 and -2 as well as those of
other known proteins of the same family, TEF-1 and ETF, exhibited significant
identity (63-75% overall) to each other not only in the TEA DNA binding domain
but also in the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis revealed that both the
mRNAs were expressed in embryos as well as in many adult tissues, although their 
levels of expression varied. The results demonstrate that the mammalian TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family consists of at least four distinct 
members, TEF-1, ETF, ETFR-1, and ETFR-2, which exhibit overlapping but differing 
spatiotemporal expression patterns, suggesting their redundant yet unique roles
involved in not only developmental control but also tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 8920920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):24278-85.

Repression of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 and activator protein-1-dependent
enhancer activity by vascular actin single-stranded DNA binding factor 2.

Kelm RJ Jr(1), Sun S, Strauch AR, Getz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcriptional repression of the murine vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene 
in fibroblasts results from the interaction of two sequence-specific
single-stranded DNA binding activities (VACssBF1 and VACssBF2) with opposite
strands of an essential transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) element (Sun,
S., Stoflet, E. S., Cogan, J. G., Strauch, A. R., and Getz, M. J. (1995) Mol.
Cell. Biol. 15, 2429-2436). Here, we identify a sequence element located within a
protein-coding exon of the gene that bears structural similarity with the TEF-1
enhancer. This includes a 30-base pair region of purine-pyrimidine asymmetry
encompassing a perfect 6-base pair GGAATG TEF-1 recognition motif. Unlike the
enhancer, however, the exon sequence exhibits no TEF-1 binding activity nor does 
the pyrimidine-rich strand bind VACssBF1. However, VACssBF2 interacts equally
well with the purine-rich strand of both the enhancer and the exon sequence. To
test the ability of VACssBF2 to independently repress transcription, the exon
sequence was placed upstream of a deletionally activated promoter containing an
intact TEF-1 binding site. The exon sequence repressed promoter activity, whereas
a mutant deficient in VACssBF2 binding did not. Moreover, VACssBF2 similarly
repressed activator protein-1-dependent transcription of a heterologous tissue
factor promoter. These results suggest that VACssBF2 possesses an intrinsic
ability to disrupt enhancer function independently of the enhancer-binding
proteins involved.

PMID: 8798674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21775-85.

A novel family of developmentally regulated mammalian transcription factors
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain.

Jacquemin P(1), Hwang JJ, Martial JA, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of two novel human and murine transcription
factors containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). These factors bind to the consensus TEA/ATTS cognate
binding site exemplified by the GT-IIC and Sph enhansons of the SV40 enhancer but
differ in their ability to bind cooperatively to tandemly repeated sites. The
human TEFs are differentially expressed in cultured cell lines and the mouse
(m)TEFs are differentially expressed in embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues in 
early post-implantation embryos. Strikingly, at later stages of embryogenesis,
mTEF-3 is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle precursors, whereas mTEF-1 is
expressed not only in developing skeletal muscle but also in the myocardium.
Together with previous data, these results point to important, partially
redundant, roles for these TEF proteins in myogenesis and cardiogenesis. In
addition, mTEF-1 is strongly coexpressed with mTEF-4 in mitotic neuroblasts,
while accentuated mTEF-4 expression is also observed in the gut and the
nephrogenic region of the kidney. These observations suggest additional roles for
the TEF proteins in central nervous system development and organogenesis.

PMID: 8702974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Virology. 1996 Sep 1;223(1):120-31.

Determination of occupancies of the SPH and GT-IIC transcription factor binding
motifs in SV40: evidence for two forms of transcription elongation complex.

Eadara JK(1), Lutter LC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Program, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan
48202, USA.

Occupancies of the SPH and GT-IIC sequence motifs in the native SV40 late
transcription elongation complex were determined by assessing blockage to
restriction enzyme cleavage. Cleavages specific to the transcription elongation
complex were quantified by radioactive extension labeling and polymerase run-off 
analysis. The SPH motif was assayed by Sphl digestion and found to be unoccupied.
In contrast, digestion with Pvull at the GT-IIC site was blocked in 36% of the
complexes, indicating that approximately a third of the complexes are occupied by
factor. This fractional occupancy indicates that there are at least two forms of 
SV40 late transcription elongation complexes, one form with the GT-IIC site
occupied by a factor and another with the site vacant.

PMID: 8806546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3742-55.

Flanking sequences modulate the cell specificity of M-CAT elements.

Larkin SB(1), Farrance IK, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, California
94143, USA.

M-CAT elements mediate both muscle-specific and non-muscle-specific
transcription. We used artificial promoters to dissect M-CAT elements derived
from the cardiac troponin T promoter, whose regulation is highly striated muscle 
specific. We show that muscle-specific M-CAT-dependent expression requires two
distinct components: the core heptameric M-CAT motif (5'-CATTCCT-3'), which
constitutes the canonical binding site for TEF-1-related proteins, and specific
sequences immediately flanking the core motif that bind an additional factor(s). 
These factors are found in higher-order M-CAT DNA-protein complexes with TEF-1
proteins. Non-muscle-specific promoters are produced when the sequences flanking 
the M-CAT motif are removed or modified to match those of non-muscle-specific
promoters such as the simian virus 40 promoter. Moreover, a mutation of the
5'-flanking region of the cardiac troponin T M-CAT-1 element upregulated
expression in nonmuscle cells. That mutation also disrupts a potential E box that
apparently does not bind myogenic basic helix-loop-helix proteins. We propose a
model in which M-CAT motifs are potentially active in many cell types but are
modulated through protein binding to specific flanking sequences. In nonmuscle
cells, these flanking sequences bind a factor(s) that represses M-CAT-dependent
activity. In muscle cells, on the other hand, the factor(s) binding to these
flanking sequences contributes to both the cell specificity and the overall
transcriptional strength of M-CAT-dependent promoters.

PMCID: PMC231370
PMID: 8668191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13786-95.

Identification of a murine TEF-1-related gene expressed after mitogenic
stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts and during myogenic differentiation.

Hsu DK(1), Guo Y, Alberts GF, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Peifley KA,
Winkles JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Holland Laboratory, American Red Cross,
Rockville, Maryland 20855, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1 binding to cell surface receptors stimulates an 
intracellular signaling pathway that ultimately promotes the transcriptional
activation of specific genes. We have used a mRNA differential display method to 
identify FGF-1-inducible genes in mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Here, we report that
one of these genes, FGF-regulated (FR)-19, is predicted to encode a member of the
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 family of structurally related
DNA-binding proteins. Specifically, the deduced FR-19 amino acid sequence has
approximately89, 77, and 68% overall identity to chicken TEF-1A, mouse TEF-1, and
mouse embryonic TEA domain-containing factor, respectively. Gel mobility shift
experiments indicate that FR-19, like TEF-1, can bind the GT-IIC motif found in
the SV40 enhancer. The FR-19 gene maps in the distal region of mouse chromosome
6, and analysis of several FR-19 cDNA clones indicates that at least two FR-19
isoforms may be expressed from this locus. FGF-1 induction of FR-19 mRNA
expression in mouse fibroblasts is first detectable at 4 h after FGF-1 addition
and is dependent on de novo RNA and protein synthesis. FGF-2, calf serum,
platelet-derived growth factor-BB, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate can also
induce FR-19 mRNA levels. We have also found that FR-19 mRNA expression increases
during mouse C2C12 myoblast differentiation in vitro. The FR-19 gene is expressed
in vivo in a tissue-specific manner, with a relatively high level detected in
lung. These results indicate that increased expression of a TEF-1-related protein
may be important for both mitogen-stimulated fibroblast proliferation and
skeletal muscle cell differentiation.

PMID: 8662936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Physiol. 1996 Jun;270(6 Pt 1):C1624-33.

SRF and TEF-1 control of chicken skeletal alpha-actin gene during slow-muscle
hypertrophy.

Carson JA(1), Schwartz RJ, Booth FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas-Houston Health Science 
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to delineate the alpha-actin regulatory elements
and transcription factors that are responsible for conferring stretch-overload
responsiveness during hypertrophy of the anterior latissimus dorsi (ALD) muscle
of young chickens by weighting one wing. Minimal promoter constructs were
evaluated by direct injection into the ALD, which demonstrated that both serum
response element 1 (SRE1) and the transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1)
elements were sufficient for increased expression during stretch overload. A
mutated SRE1 prevented expression in both basal and stretched ALD muscles,
whereas a mutated TEF-1 element reduced actin promoter function in both control
and stretched muscles. The serum response factor (SRF)-SRE1 binding complex
demonstrated faster migration in mobility shift assays from day 3-and day
6-stretched ALD nuclear extracts relative to their control. TEF-1 binding was
qualitatively increased in stretched extracts at day 3 but not day 6 of stretch
overload. Skeletal alpha-actin mRNA accumulated from day 3 to day 6 of stretch
overload. These data demonstrate that SRE1 is necessary and sufficient for
stretch-overload responsiveness from the skeletal alpha-actin promoter and that
the SRF-SRE1 binding complex migrates faster in stretched nuclear extracts of
hypertrophied relative to control extracts from intact ALD muscles of chickens.

PMID: 8764144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 19;271(16):9510-8.

TEF-1 transrepression in BeWo cells is mediated through interactions with the
TATA-binding protein, TBP.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) has been implicated in transactivating a 
placental enhancer (CSEn) that regulates human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) 
gene activity. We demonstrated that TEF-1 represses hCS promoter activity in
choriocarcinoma (BeWo) cells (Jiang, S.W., and Eberhardt, N.L. (1995) J. Biol.
Chem. 270, 13609-13915), suggesting that TEF-1 interacts with basal transcription
factors. Here we demonstrate that hTEF-1 overexpression inhibits minimal hCS
promoters containing TATA and/or initiator elements, Rous sarcoma virus and
thymidine kinase promoters in BeWo cells. Cotransfection of TEF-1 antisense
oligonucleotides alleviated exogenous TEF-1-mediated repression and increased
basal hCS promoter activity, indicating that endogenous TEF-1 exerts repressor
activity. GST-TEF-1 fusion peptides fixed to glutathione-Sepharose beads retained
in vitro-generated human TATA-binding protein, hTBP. The TEF-1 proline-rich
domain was essential for TBP binding, but polypeptides also containing the zinc
finger domain bound TBP with higher apparent affinity. TBP supershifted
hTEF-GT-IIC DNA complexes, but TEF-1 inhibited in vitro binding of TBP to the
TATA motif. Coexpression of TBP and TEF-1 in BeWo cells alleviated TEF-1-mediated
transrepression, indicating that the TBP-TEF-1 interaction is functional in vivo.
The data indicate that TEF-1 transrepression is mediated by direct interactions
with TBP, possibly by inhibiting preinitiation complex formation.

PMID: 8621623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Biochem. 1996 Apr 12-26;157(1-2):117-24.

Sympathetic control of cardiac myosin heavy chain gene expression.

Gupta MP(1), Gupta M, Dizon E, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Several neuroendocrine factors have been shown to influence the muscle phenotype.
Various physiological reports have suggested the role of adrenergic nervous
system for cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) expression. We have used cultured
fetal rat heart myocytes to investigate the role of cAMP on the alpha- and
beta-MHC gene expression. In low density cultures, addition of 1 mM 8 Br cAMP
resulted in up regulation of alpha-MHC and down regulation of beta-MHC mRNA. This
antithetic effect of cAMP depends on the basal expression of both expression of
both MHC transcripts. In transient transfection analysis employing a series of
alpha-MHC gene promoter/reporter constructs, we identified a 13 bp E-box M-CAT
hybrid motif (EM element) which conferred a basal muscle specific and
cAMP-inducible expression of the alpha-MHC gene. Data obtained from the mobility 
gel-shift analysis indicated that one of the factor(s) binding to the EM element 
is related to troponin T M-CAT binding factor (TEF-1). To test whether the
protein binding to this sequence could be a substrate for cAMP-dependent
phosphorylation, the cardiac nuclear proteins were preincubated in a kinase
reaction buffer either with a catalytic subunit of PKA (CatPKA) or with cAMP, and
binding activity of proteins to the EM element was evaluated by mobility gel
shift assay. In a concentration dependent manner, a twofold increase in the
intensity of the retarded band was observed. Furthermore, at 100 units of CatPKA,
an additional band of faster mobility was observed which was not present either
when phosphorylated nuclear extract was incubated with alkaline phosphatase or
when ATP was absent in kinase reaction buffer. These results strongly suggest
that factor(s) binding to the EM element is a substrate for cAMP dependent
phosphorylation.

PMID: 8739237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8266-74.

The role of transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) related proteins in the
formation of M-CAT binding complexes in muscle and non-muscle tissues.

Farrance IK(1), Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, 94143, USA.

M-CAT sites are required for the activity of many promoters in cardiac and
skeletal muscle. M-CAT binding activity is muscle-enriched, but is found in many 
tissues and is immunologically related to the HeLa transcription enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1). TEF-1-related cDNAs (RTEF-1) have been cloned from chick heart.
RTEF-1 mRNA is muscle-enriched, consistent with a role for RTEF-1 in the
regulation of muscle-specific gene expression. Here, we have examined the tissue 
distribution of TEF-1-related proteins and of M-CAT binding activity by Western
analysis and mobility shift polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. TEF-1-related
proteins of 57, 54 and 52 kDa were found in most tissues with the highest levels 
in muscle tissues. All of these TEF-1-related proteins bound M-CAT DNA and the
57- and 54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptides were phosphorylated. Proteolytic
digestion mapping showed that the 54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptide is encoded by 
a different gene than the 52- and 57-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptides. A comparison
of the migration and proteolytic digestion of the 54-kDa TEF-1-related
polypeptide with proteins encoded by the cloned RTEF-1 cDNAs showed that the
54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptide is encoded by RTEF-1A. High resolution mobility 
shift polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed multiple M-CAT binding activities
in tissues. All of these activities contained TEF-1-related proteins. One
protein-M-CAT DNA complex was muscle-enriched and was up-regulated upon
differentiation of a skeletal muscle cell line. This complex contained the 54-kDa
TEF-1-related polypeptide. Therefore, RTEF1-A protein is a component of a
muscle-enriched transcription complex that forms on M-CAT sites and may play a
key role in the regulation of transcription in muscle.

PMID: 8626521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Apr;16(2):205-10.

The human placenta expresses transcription enhancer factor-1 but there is no
correlation with the expression of placental lactogen.

Quinn G(1), Boam DS, Davis JR, Glazier JD, Mylona P, Sides K, Sibley CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, University of Manchester, St. Mary's Hospital, UK.

A transcriptional enhancer which has a consensus binding sequence for
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) has been found 3' of the hPL(3) gene. We 
examined whether TEF-1 is expressed by the human placenta and whether such
expression is co-ordinated with that of human placental lactogen (hPL). Probing
Northern blots of total RNA from first trimester and term placenta, the
choriocarcinoma-derived cell line JAr and primary cultured cytotrophoblast cells 
with a cDNA for TEF-1 revealed transcripts of 12-13 kb and 3-4 kb. The level of
TEF-1 expression was the same in first trimester as compared with term placenta
and in undifferentiated JAr as compared with differentiated cytotrophoblast
cells. hPL expression was tenfold higher in term compared with first trimester
placenta and, whilst detectable in cytotrophoblast cells, was undetectable in JAr
cells. These data show that TEF-1 is expressed by the placenta but is not
co-ordinated with hPL expression.

PMID: 9156523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 1;271(9):4646-52.

A novel site in the muscle creatine kinase enhancer is required for expression in
skeletal but not cardiac muscle.

Fabre-Suver C(1), Hauschka SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

Expression of the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene in skeletal and heart muscle 
is controlled in part by a 5' tissue-specific enhancer. In order to identify new 
regulatory elements, we designed mutations in a previously untested conserved
portion of this enhancer. Transfection analysis of these mutations delineated a
new control element, named Trex (Transcriptional regulatory element x), which is 
required for full transcriptional activity of the MCK enhancer in skeletal but
not cardiac muscle cells. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrate that myocyte,
myoblast, and fibroblast nuclear extracts but not primary cardiomyocyte nuclear
extracts contain a trans-acting factor that binds specifically to Trex. The Trex 
sequence is similar (7/8 bases) to the TEF-1 consensus DNA-binding site involved 
in regulating other muscle genes. To determine if TEF-1 interacts with Trex,
selected TEF-1 binding sites such as GTIIc and M-CAT and two anti-TEF-1 antisera 
were used in gel shift assays. These experiments strongly suggest that a factor
distinct from TEF-1 binds specifically to Trex. Thus it appears that MCK
transcription is regulated in skeletal muscles through a Trex-dependent pathway
while Trex is not required for MCK expression in heart. This distinction could
account partially for the difference in levels of muscle creatine kinase in these
tissues.

PMID: 8617727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3727-36.

cDNA cloning and characterization of murine transcriptional enhancer
factor-1-related protein 1, a transcription factor that binds to the M-CAT motif.

Yockey CE(1), Smith G, Izumo S, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Beth Israel Hospital and Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The M-CAT motif is a cis-regulatory DNA sequence that is essential for
muscle-specific transcription of several genes. Previously, we had shown that
both muscle-specific (A1) and ubiquitous (A2) factors bind to an essential M-CAT 
motif in the myosin heavy chain beta gene and that the ubiquitous factor is
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1. Here we report the isolation of mouse
cDNAs encoding two forms (a and b) of a TEF-1-related protein, TEFR1. The TEFR1a 
cDNA encodes a 427-amino acid protein. The coding region of TEFR1b is identical
to 1a in both nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence except for the absence
of 43 amino acids downstream of the TEA DNA-binding domain. Three TEFR1
transcripts (approximately 7, approximately 3.5, and approximately 2 kilobase
pairs) are enriched in differentiated skeletal muscle (myotubes) relative to
undifferentiated skeletal muscle (myoblasts) and non-muscle cells in culture. In 
situ hybridization analysis indicated that TEFR1 transcripts are enriched in the 
skeletal muscle lineage during mouse embryogenesis. Transient expression of
fusion proteins of TEFR1 and the yeast GAL4 DNA-binding domain in cell lines
activated the expression of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter
constructs containing GAL4 binding sites, indicating that TEFR1 contains an
activation domain. An anti-TEFR1 polyclonal antibody supershifted the
muscle-specific M-CAT.A1 factor complex in gel mobility shift assays, suggesting 
that TEFR1 is a major component of this complex. Our results suggest that TEFR1
might play a role in the embryonic development of skeletal muscle in the mouse.

PMID: 8631987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Virol. 1996 Feb;70(2):1203-12.

Interaction between T antigen and TEA domain of the factor TEF-1 derepresses
simian virus 40 late promoter in vitro: identification of T-antigen domains
important for transcription control.

Berger LC(1), Smith DB, Davidson I, Hwang JJ, Fanning E, Wildeman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The large tumor antigen (TAg) of simian virus 40 regulates transcription of the
viral genes. The early promoter is repressed when TAg binds to the origin and DNA
replication begins, whereas the late promoter is activated by TAg through both
replication-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Previously it was shown that
activation is diminished when a site in the viral enhancer to which the factor
TEF-1 binds is disrupted. We show here that the NH2-terminal region of TAg binds 
to the TEA domain of TEF-1, a DNA binding domain also found in the Drosophila
scalloped and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae TEC1 proteins. The interaction
inhibits DNA binding by TEF-1 and activates transcription in vitro from a subset 
of naturally occurring late start sites. These sites are also activated by
mutations in the DNA motifs to which TEF-1 binds. Therefore, TEF-1 appears to
function as a repressor of late transcription, and its involvement in the
early-to-late shift in viral transcription is discussed. The mutation of Ser-189 
in TAg, which reduces transformation efficiency in certain assays, disrupts the
interaction with TEF-1. Thus, TEF-1 might also regulate genes involved in growth 
control.

PMCID: PMC189929
PMID: 8551581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 1996;54:127-63.

Hormonal and cell-specific regulation of the human growth hormone and chorionic
somatomammotropin genes.

Eberhardt NL(1), Jiang SW, Shepard AR, Arnold AM, Trujillo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

PMID: 8768074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 18;270(33):19487-94.

A TATA-less promoter containing binding sites for ubiquitous transcription
factors mediates cell type-specific regulation of the gene for transcription
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

Boam DS(1), Davidson I, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculair et Cellulaire, Parc
d'Innovations, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

TEF-1 is a tissue-specific human transcription factor which binds to and
activates transcription from the SV40 early promoter and the HPV-16 E6/E7
promoter and may be involved in regulation of muscle-specific and
placenta-specific gene expression. To investigate the mechanism of its
tissue-specific expression, we have isolated up to 3 kilobase pairs of
5'-flanking DNA and characterized the promoter of the gene for TEF-1. Multiple
transcription start sites centering on a motif similar to the initiator element
(Inr) were identified. A minimal promoter, which contains no recognizable TATA
element but contains an Inr, delimited at -137 base pairs had full
transcriptional activity both in vivo in HeLa cells and in vitro in HeLa cell
extracts. This promoter is also highly active in vitro in lymphoid cell extracts,
but not in vivo in lymphoid cell lines, which do not express the endogenous TEF-1
gene. The minimal promoter, which is sufficient to direct tissue-specific
expression of the TEF-1 gene in vivo, contains multiple sites which bind the
ubiquitous transcription factors Sp1 and ATF-1. Mutation of the Inr completely
abolished transcription from the major start site while transcription from the
minor sites was slightly augmented. Inactivation of the proximal Sp1 site
abolished transcription from the principle start site and increased transcription
from a 5' minor start site. Insertion of a TATA box element did not qualitatively
alter the pattern of start site usage which seemed to be dependent upon integrity
of the upstream Sp1 site. These observations suggest a "cross-talk" between the
Inr and a proximal element to fix transcription start sites, which is independent
of spacing and the presence of a TATA element.

PMID: 7642633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 4;270(31):18649-54.

Molecular characterization of cDNA encoding a novel protein related to
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 from neural precursor cells.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Houtani T, Sugimoto T, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We identified a novel cDNA related to that of transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) during the course of isolation and characterization of cDNAs, whose mRNAs
are preferentially expressed in the mouse neural precursor cells. The putative
polypeptide, termed embryonic TEA domain-containing factor (ETF), deduced from
the nucleotide sequence contains 445 amino acids and shares 66% amino acid
identity with mouse and human TEF-1 proteins. The primary structure of the TEA
domain, a probable DNA-binding domain, and the specific DNA binding activity to
the GT-IIC motif of ETF are indistinguishable from those of the known vertebrate 
TEF-1 proteins. However, the expression of the ETF gene is strictly regulated in 
developing embryos and is limited to certain tissues, such as the hindbrain of a 
10-day-old mouse embryo, in contrast to the ubiquitous expression pattern of the 
TEF-1 gene. These results suggest that ETF is a novel mammalian member of the TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family and may be involved in the gene
regulation of the neural development. We have discussed the possible existence of
multiple subtypes of the mammalian TEF-1 family proteins, which may play
different roles in cellular and development gene regulation.

PMID: 7629195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):13906-15.

Involvement of a protein distinct from transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) in
mediating human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer function through the
GT-IIC enhanson in choriocarcinoma and COS cells.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Previous studies suggested that transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) was
involved in mediating the human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) gene enhancer
(CSEn) function (Jiang, S.-W., and Eberhardt, N. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,
10384-10392). We now show that an unrelated protein (CSEF-1) found in BeWo and
COS-1 cells binds to the GT-IIC enhanson in CSEn and is correlated with CSEn
activity in these cells. TEF-1 and CSEF-1 were distinguished by differential
migration as GT-IIC complexes, thermal stability, molecular mass, and
cross-reactivity with chicken TEF-1 antibodies. TEF-1 and CSEF-1 bound to the
GT-IIC and Sph-I/Sph-II enhansons with identical binding properties, and in vitro
generated TEF-1 competed with CSEF-1 binding to the GT-IIC motif, suggesting that
their actions might be mutually exclusive. Up- and down-regulation of TEF-1
levels by expression systems and antisense oligonucleotides demonstrated that
TEF-1 inhibited the hCS promoter in a manner independent of the enhancer or a
known TEF-1 DNA binding site. The data suggest that TEF-1 may provide a
counter-regulatory stimulus to the actions of CSEF-1, which may be involved in
mediating enhancer stimulatory activity.

PMID: 7775450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3501-9.

A TEF-1-independent mechanism for activation of the simian virus 40 (SV40) late
promoter by mutant SV40 large T antigens.

Casaz P(1), Rice PW, Cole CN, Hansen U.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Virology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumor antigen (T antigen) stimulates the activity of
the SV40 late promoter and a number of cellular and other viral promoters. We
have characterized the ability of T antigens with mutations in the DNA-binding
domain and within the N-terminal 85 residues to activate the SV40 late promoter. 
T antigens lacking both nonspecific and sequence-specific DNA-binding activities 
were able to induce the late promoter. Mutations within the N-terminal 85
residues of T antigen diminished activation by less than twofold. Activation by
wild-type and most of the mutant T antigens required intact binding sites for the
cellular transcription factor TEF-1 in the late promoter. Curiously, two mutants 
altered in the N-terminal region and an additional mutant altered in the
DNA-binding domain activated a late promoter derivative lacking TEF-1 binding
sites, indicating the existence of a TEF-1-independent pathway for activation of 
the late promoter. A consensus binding site for the TATA binding protein, TBP,
was created in variants of late promoters either containing or lacking TEF-1
binding sites. Basal expression was increased by the consensus TBP binding site
only when TEF-1 binding sites were present, leading to a reduction in the degree 
of activation by T antigen. However, activation by a mutant T antigen of the
promoter lacking TEF-1 sites was unchanged or slightly enhanced by the consensus 
TBP binding site. These results suggest that some mutant T antigens can stabilize
an interaction between TBP and additional factors bound to the late promoter.

PMCID: PMC189063
PMID: 7745697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2429-36.

Negative regulation of the vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene in fibroblasts
and myoblasts: disruption of enhancer function by sequence-specific
single-stranded-DNA-binding proteins.

Sun S(1), Stoflet ES, Cogan JG, Strauch AR, Getz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcriptional activation and repression of the vascular smooth muscle (VSM)
alpha-actin gene in myoblasts and fibroblasts is mediated, in part, by positive
and negative elements contained within an approximately 30-bp
polypurine-polypyrimidine tract. This region contains binding sites for an
essential transcription-activating protein, identified as transcriptional
enhancer factor I (TEF-1), and two tissue-restrictive, sequence-specific,
single-stranded-DNA-binding activities termed VACssBF1 and VACssBF2. TEF-1 has no
detectable single-stranded-DNA-binding activity, while VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 have
little, if any, affinity for double-stranded DNA. Site-specific mutagenesis
experiments demonstrate that the determinants of VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 binding
lie on opposite strands of the DNA helix and include the TEF-1 recognition
sequence. Functional analysis of this region reveals that the CCAAT box-binding
protein nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) can substitute for TEF-1 in activating VSM
alpha-actin transcription but that the TEF-1-binding site is essential for the
maintenance of full transcriptional repression. Importantly, replacement of the
TEF-1-binding site with that for NF-Y diminishes the ability of VACssBF1 and
VACssBF2 to bind to separated single strands. Additional activating mutations
have been identified which lie outside of the TEF-1-binding site but which also
impair single-stranded-DNA-binding activity. These data support a model in which 
VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 function as repressors of VSM alpha-actin transcription by 
stabilizing a local single-stranded-DNA conformation, thus precluding
double-stranded-DNA binding by the essential transcriptional activator TEF-1.

PMCID: PMC230472
PMID: 7739527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3631-7.

Characterization of a HeLa cell factor which negatively regulates transcriptional
activation in vitro by transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

Chaudhary S(1), Tora L, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch.

A novel negatively acting factor has been identified and partially purified from 
HeLa and BJA-B cell extracts by chromatographic fractionation. Addition of this
factor to HeLa cell extracts or to a reconstituted HeLa cell transcription system
repressed transcriptional activation by a chimeric activator, GAL-TEF-1,
containing the activation function of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). 
In contrast, this factor did not repress transactivation by the chimeric GAL-VP16
activator. Repression of transactivation by GAL-TEF-1 could be alleviated by the 
addition of immunopurified HeLa cell TFIID, but not by increased quantities of
GAL-TEF-1. These observations suggest that this negatively acting factor
represses transactivation by interfering with the function of, or competing for, 
the TATA-binding protein-associated coactivators which mediate the activity
TEF-1.

PMID: 7876100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1995;41(6):595-602.

Transcriptional repression of heterologous constitutive and inducible promoters
by the negative element of the rabbit angiotensin-converting enzyme gene.

Kessler SP(1), Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195, USA.

We previously identified a transcriptional negative element (NE) present in the
rabbit angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene. Here, we report that the NE can 
also repress transcription driven by the strong constitutive promoters of the
human beta-actin gene and SV40 in both ACE-expressing and nonexpressing cell
lines. The extent of repression was influenced by the relative positions of the
NE and the SV40 promoter and enhancer. The NE could also repress transcription
driven by interleukin-1 and interferon-alpha-inducible promoters. Finally,
transcription from a TATA-less promoter was equally repressed by the NE. Taken
together, these results suggest that the NE of the rabbit ACE gene can function
as a universal transcriptional silencer element.

PMID: 8777439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Arch Dermatol Res. 1995;287(8):740-6.

Repression of involucrin gene expression by transcriptional enhancer factor 1
(TEF-1).

Takahashi H(1), Kobayashi H, Matsuo S, Iizuka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical College, Japan.

Involucrin is one of the precursor proteins of keratinocyte cornified envelope
that is formed beneath the inner surface of the cell membrane during terminal
differentiation. Although involucrin is specifically expressed in the upper
squamous cells of the epidermis, the precise regulatory mechanism of involucrin
gene expression remains unknown. Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1), which
binds to SV40 enhancer, is a nuclear protein expressed in various types of cells 
including keratinocytes. Immunohistochemical study has revealed that TEF-1
protein is highly expressed on the basal cell layer of the epidermis. To examine 
the possible regulatory mechanism of involucrin gene expression by TEF-1 protein,
we analysed involucrin promoter activity of the INV-CAT vector, which was
constructed by connecting the 5' upstream region of the involucrin gene (-801 bp 
upstream from the transcription start site and downstream including the
untranslated first exon) to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter 
gene. The INV-CAT vector was transfected to SV40-transformed human keratinocytes 
(SVHK). Cotransfection of the TEF-1 expression vector significantly repressed
INV-CAT promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. The repression was also
observed by transfection of the GAL4-TEF-1 vector, which was constructed by
replacement of the TEF-1 DNA binding domain by the GAL4 activator domain. This
suggests that TEF-1-induced repression is due to interference/squelching of a
limiting transcriptional intermediary factor that is essential for involucrin
expression.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8554386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Genes Dev. 1994 Oct 1;8(19):2293-301.

Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 disruption by a retroviral gene trap leads to
heart defects and embryonic lethality in mice.

Chen Z(1), Friedrich GA, Soriano P.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104.

We have used a retroviral gene trap in embryonic stem (ES) cells to derive a
recessive embryonic lethal mouse strain, ROSA beta-geo5. Mutant embryos display
an enlarged pericardial cavity, bradycardia, a dilated fourth ventricle in the
brain, and die between embryonic days 11 and 12. Whereas heart development in the
mutant embryos is extensive, the ventricular wall is abnormally thin with a
reduced number of trabeculae. Cloning of the trapped gene indicates that proviral
insertion creates a null mutation in the transcriptional enhancer factor 1
(TEF-1) gene. Although transcription of a number of muscle-specific genes
believed to be TEF-1 targets appears normal, the defect in cardiogenesis is
likely attributable to diminished transcription of one or several
cardiac-specific genes.

PMID: 7958896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;13(10):1037-45.

A TEF-1 binding motif that interacts with a placental protein is important for
the transcriptional activity of the hCS-B enhancer.

Jacquemin P(1), Oury C, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

The transcriptional activity of the human placental lactogen genes
(choriosomatomammotropic hormone, hCS) is controlled by tissue-specific enhancers
located 4 kb downstream from their respective origins of transcription. The hCS-B
enhancer is the strongest; its activity is mediated by synergism between two
protein-binding sites (DF-3 and DF-4). The DF-4 site possesses a potential
binding sequence for TEF-1, a known transcription factor. In this paper, we show 
by electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and antibody supershift experiments that
TEF-1 does not bind to site DF-4. Mutations in the TEF-1-like binding motif of
site DF-4 prevent formation of the DNA-protein complex, called complex f, in the 
presence of placental JEG-3 cell extracts. When HeLa cell extracts are used,
another complex (complex c) is also affected. In transient expression
experiments, TKCAT constructs linked to this mutated DF-4 site exhibit greatly
reduced transcriptional activity when introduced into JEG-3 cells. Some cell
lines contain both protein c and protein f (the proteins forming complexes c and 
f); when transfected, these lines display reduced DF-4-driven activity,
suggesting that the two proteins could compete for the same DF-4 sequence. We
conclude that protein f is important for the placenta-specific activity of the
hCS-B enhancer. By UV cross-linking, we show that protein f is actually three
polypeptides ranging in size from about 12 to 21 kD.

PMID: 7945936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5290-9.

A cell-specific factor represses stimulation of transcription in vitro by
transcriptional enhancer factor 1.

Chaudhary S(1), Brou C, Valentin ME, Burton N, Tora L, Chambon P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Unité 184 de
Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique de l'INSERM, Institut de Chimie
Biologique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Transcription in HeLa cell extracts in vitro was stimulated 8- to 10-fold by a
recombinant chimera, GAL-TEF-1, consisting of the DNA-binding domain of GAL4 and 
the activation function of the HeLa cell activator TEF-1. In contrast, only a 2- 
to 3-fold stimulation was obtained with GAL-TEF-1 in extracts from BJA-B lymphoid
cells. Stimulation by GAL-TEF-1 in BJA-B extracts was dramatically increased by
the addition of immunopurified HeLa cell TFIID, suggesting that BJA-B TFIID lacks
or contains lower quantities of a TATA-binding-protein-associated factor(s)
required for the activity of the TEF-1 activation function. However,
chromatography, immunopurification, and transcriptional reconstitution
experiments indicated that BJA-B extracts did not lack the previously identified 
TATA-binding-protein-associated factors required for TEF-1 activity but rather
contained a negatively acting factor(s) which inhibited transactivation by
GAL-TEF-1. These results indicate that the relative lack of activity of the TEF-1
activation function in vitro in BJA-B cell extracts does not result from the
absence of positively acting factors from the presence of a cell-specific
negatively acting factor(s).

PMCID: PMC359048
PMID: 8035807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 17;269(24):16754-60.

Transforming growth factor-beta response elements of the skeletal alpha-actin
gene. Combinatorial action of serum response factor, YY1, and the SV40
enhancer-binding protein, TEF-1.

MacLellan WR(1), Lee TC, Schwartz RJ, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Skeletal alpha-actin (SkA) is representative of the cardiac genes that are
expressed at high levels in embryonic myocardium, down-regulated after birth, and
reactivated by trophic signals including type beta-transforming growth factors
(TGF beta). To investigate the molecular basis for cardiac-restricted and TGF
beta-induced SkA transcription, we have undertaken a mutational analysis of the
SkA promoter in ventricular myocytes, with emphasis on the role of three nominal 
serum response elements. Serum response factor (SRF) and the bifunctional factor 
YY1 are the predominant cardiac proteins contacting the proximal SRE (SRE1).
Mutations of SRE1 that prevent recognition by SRF and YY1, or SRF alone,
virtually abolish SkA transcription in both TGF beta- and vehicle-treated cells; 
mutation of distal SREs was ineffective. A mutation which selectively abrogates
YY1 binding increases both basal and TGF beta-dependent expression,
substantiating the predicted role of YY1 as an inhibitor of SRF effects. However,
efficient SkA transcription requires combinatorial action of SRE1 with consensus 
sites for Sp1 and the SV40 enhancer-binding protein, TEF-1. As isolated motifs,
either SRE1- or TEF-1-binding sites function as TGF beta response elements.
Induction of the SkA promoter by TGF beta required SRF and TEF-1 in concert,
unlike other pathways for TGF beta-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 8206998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;8(4):478-89.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer activity is dependent on the
blockade of a repressor mechanism.

Lytras A(1), Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin genes (hCS-A and -B) are expressed at high 
levels in the syncytiotrophoblast during pregnancy. A 22-base-pair (bp)
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) element in a 1022-bp fragment of the
hCS-B 3'-flanking DNA (nucleotides 1-1022) was shown to be important for
efficient promoter activity in placental cells. However, the TEF-1 site used
alone does not contain all of the information required for the complete enhancer 
activity seen with the 1022-bp fragment. A 241-bp region of the 1022-bp fragment 
(nucleotides 1-241) maintains full enhancer activity in placental cells.
Interactions between placental nuclear factors and sequences distinct from the
TEF-1 element (nucleotides 117-139) were identified by gel mobility shift assay
using the up-stream region corresponding to nucleotides 1-80. Interaction between
these factors and the TEF-1 element was indicated by competition of the 1-80 bp
region for complex formation by a TEF-1 site. We mutated sequences within the
1-80 bp region of the 241-bp enhancer fragment and assessed the enhancer function
of wild-type and modified 241-bp fragments. We identified a sequence (DF-1 site) 
upstream of the TEF-1 site which is required for hCS-B enhancer function. DF-1
derepresses a repressor mechanism present in the 241-bp fragment that inhibits
TEF-1 activity. A component of this repressor mechanism (RF-1 site) is present in
the 1-80 bp region adjacent to the DF-1 site. Gel mobility shift competition
analysis shows that the RF-1 and DF-1 sites participate in the formation of a
common complex or compete for common protein factors in a tissue-specific manner.

PMID: 8052268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 4;269(5):3147-50.

Muscle-enriched TEF-1 isoforms bind M-CAT elements from muscle-specific promoters
and differentially activate transcription.

Stewart AF(1), Larkin SB, Farrance IK, Mar JH, Hall DE, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143.

M-CAT elements mediate cardiac- and embryonic skeletal muscle-specific expression
of the cardiac troponin T gene and a number of other cardiac-specific genes.
M-CAT binding factor was shown to be related to cloned human TEF-1, a
transcriptional regulator of the SV40 viral enhancer. Here we describe the
cloning of TEF-1 from chick heart and the identification of several novel
isoforms. We show that TEF-1 mRNA is considerably enriched in cardiac and
skeletal muscle, consistent with a proposed role in muscle gene transcription.
The predominant TEF-1 isoforms, TEF-1A and a novel isoform TEF-1B, bind M-CAT
elements with high affinity and in a sequence-specific manner. We further
demonstrate that the C-terminal portion of TEF-1B, which contains the 13-amino
acid exon that distinguishes this isoform, can activate transcription when linked
to a heterologous DNA binding domain, while the same domain of TEF-1A cannot.
Therefore, isoforms of TEF-1 may play different roles in the regulation of
M-CAT-dependent promoters in striated muscle cells.

PMID: 8106348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Feb;130(2):210-5.

Transcriptional control and cell type specificity of HPV gene expression.

Bernard HU(1), Apt D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Papillomaviruses are of great medical interest as they are causally
associated with benign and malignant neoplasia of mucosal and cutaneous
epithelia. The viral genome can be viewed as a control unit that releases signals
in form of transforming proteins in infected epithelial cells. These proteins
create a molecular environment favorable for papillomavirus biology and an
expanded cell population for multiplication of the virus. On the other side, the 
genome receives signals through cellular transcription factors.
OBSERVATIONS: Cellular transcription factors help the virus to identify the
epithelial target cell, and they provide information about mitotic and
physiologic signals to the epithelium and its differentiation state. Present
research concentrates on the question how these distinct functions are brought
about by factors that are ubiquitous rather than cell-type specific, such as
NFI/CTF, TEF-1, AP-1, oct-1, and the progesterone receptor. Papillomaviruses have
the additional capability to generate positive and negative feedback loops of
gene expression through the virally encoded E2 proteins, a necessary tool to
achieve long-term persistence.
CONCLUSIONS: An intricate interplay between cellular and viral transcription
factors is a prerequisite for epithelial specificity, physiologic responses, and 
persistence of papillomavirus infections.

PMID: 8304760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):93-103.

Characterization of a single strong tissue-specific enhancer downstream from the 
three human genes encoding placental lactogen.

Jacquemin P(1), Oury C, Peers B, Morin A, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart Tilman, Belgium.

The human genes coding for growth hormone (hGH) and placental lactogen
(choriosomatomammotropic hormone [hCS]) are clustered on chromosome 17 in the
following order: 5' hGH-N hCS-L hCS-A hGH-V hCS-B 3'. So far, a single
placenta-specific enhancer has been identified in the locus, 2 kb downstream from
the hCS-B gene, and shown to comprise one in vitro binding site for a nuclear
protein. We here provide evidence that the hCS-B enhancer is more complex: (i)
protection against DNase I digestion in the 3' flanking region of the hCS-B gene 
reveals four binding sites (DF-1, DF-2, DF-3, and DF-4) for nuclear proteins from
either placental or HeLa cells, and (ii) placenta-specific enhancer activity can 
be fully exerted in transient expression experiments by a 126-bp fragment
comprising the DF-3 and DF-4 protein-binding sites. By dissecting this region, we
show that enhancer activity is mediated by a synergy between DF-3 and DF-4.
Competitions with various oligonucleotides in footprinting and gel retardation
experiments indicate that the same protein or set of proteins, different in HeLa 
and placenta cell nuclei, interacts with sites DF-2, DF-3, and DF-4. We also
studied the regions of the hCS-L and hCS-A genes which are highly similar to the 
hCS-B enhancer. Although they each present the same four protein-binding sites,
they exhibit only minor enhancer activity.

PMCID: PMC358360
PMID: 8264656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 15;268(35):26658-62.

Transcriptional enhancer factor-1 in cardiac myocytes interacts with an alpha
1-adrenergic- and beta-protein kinase C-inducible element in the rat beta-myosin 
heavy chain promoter.

Kariya K(1), Farrance IK, Simpson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
San Francisco, California 94121.

In cultured rat cardiac myocytes, a 20-base pair sequence (-215/-196) of the rat 
beta-myosin heavy chain (MHC) promoter mediates induction by both alpha
1-adrenergic stimulation and a constitutively activated beta-protein kinase C
(PKC), and binds cardiac myocyte nuclear factor(s) through an "enhancer core"
element (5'-TGTGG-TATG-3') (Kariya, K., Karns, L. R., and Simpson, P. C. (1994)
J. Biol. Chem. 269, in press). Here, we report identification of this enhancer
core binding factor as the rat homologue of transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1), a human transcription factor for viral enhancers. In gel mobility shift 
and immunoblot analyses, the myocyte factor and human TEF-1 were
indistinguishable in terms of sequence recognition, mobility, and
immunoreactivity. Furthermore, DNA binding activity for the beta-MHC enhancer
core and TEF-1 immunoreactivity correlated closely. These results are the first
to suggest a role for TEF-1 in transcriptional regulation by PKC. The data also
provide direct evidence for interaction of TEF-1 with the beta-MHC promoter,
supporting a function for TEF-1 in regulation of cellular gene expression, as
well as viral, and outline a pathway for alpha 1-adrenergic regulation of
beta-MHC gene transcription in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 8253797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. EMBO J. 1993 Dec;12(12):4657-66.

Transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) DNA binding sites can specifically
enhance gene expression at the beginning of mouse development.

Mélin F(1), Miranda M, Montreau N, DePamphilis ML, Blangy D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UPR 272, Laboratoire Virus et Différenciation de l'Université Pierre et 
Marie Curie, Villejuif, France.

In an effort to identify transcriptional elements that are recognized at
different stages of early mouse development, polyomavirus (PyV) enhancer
mutations were selected for their ability to support PyV transcription and
replication in various mouse undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma (EC) and
embryonic stem (ES) cell lines. Several of these enhancer mutations were then
isolated, sequenced and tested for their ability to stimulate the PyV early gene 
promoter in plasmid DNA that was either transfected into EC, ES and fibroblast
cell lines, or injected into the nuclei of mouse 1-cell and 2-cell embryos. EC,
ES and fibroblast cell lines showed clear preferences for different enhancer
configurations, and cleavage-stage embryos (2- to 8-cell stage) strongly
preferred the same enhancer configuration favored by ES cells. This 'embryo
responsive' (ER) enhancer configuration was characterized by a tandem duplication
of the region containing a single point mutation that created a DNA binding site 
for Transcription Enhancer Factor-1 (TEF-1). ER enhancers stimulated the PyV
promoter up to 350-fold in embryos, and were up to 74-fold more active than the
wild-type PyV enhancer. Most of the activity from PyER enhancers could be
duplicated in 2-cell embryos by synthesizing only the tandemly repeated sequence.
Comparison of these synthetic enhancers with ER enhancers confirmed that TEF-1
DNA binding sites were highly preferred in ES cells and cleavage-stage embryos,
and suggested that ER enhancer activity resulted primarily from cooperative
interaction between either two closely spaced TEF-1 DNA binding sites or two
TEF-1 DNA binding sites separated by a third, as yet unidentified, transcription 
factor binding site. These results provide a prototype of a mammalian embryo
responsive enhancer, and suggest that TEF-1 plays an important role in activation
of gene expression at the beginning of mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC413903
PMID: 8223475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurogenet. 1993 Dec;9(2):123-39.

The Drosophila homolog of the human transcription factor TEF-1, scalloped, is
essential for normal taste behavior.

Inamdar M(1), Vijayraghavan K, Rodrigues V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India.

The scalloped (sd) locus of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a protein with a
novel DNA binding domain bearing a high degree of similarity to the human
transcription factor TEF-1 (Campbell et al., 1992). We demonstrate that sd
mutants show defects in response to a number of taste stimuli. Higher stimulus
concentrations are required to elicit behavioral responses from mutant larvae and
adult flies. The electrophysiological responses of the peripheral taste neurons
in the labellum were found to be normal, suggesting that an inability to detect
stimuli is not the cause of the mutant phenotype. The range of mutant responses
of sd alleles to salt and sugar stimuli define a functional requirement for the
gene in the nervous system and provide an assay for the genetic and molecular
analysis of this role.

PMID: 8126597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4103-10.

Both a ubiquitous factor mTEF-1 and a distinct muscle-specific factor bind to the
M-CAT motif of the myosin heavy chain beta gene.

Shimizu N(1), Smith G, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

The A element, a fourteen base pair sequence in the rabbit myosin heavy chain
(HC) beta promoter (-276/-263), contains the M-CAT motif, a cis-acting element
found in several muscle-specific genes. The A element is essential for
muscle-specific transcription of the myosin HC beta gene. Recently, we have
identified both muscle-specific and ubiquitous factors (A1 and A2 factors,
respectively) that bind to the A element. Since the sequence of the A element is 
very similar to the GTIIC motif in the SV40 enhancer, we examined the
relationship between A-element-binding factors and a GTIIC binding factor TEF-1, 
recently isolated from HeLa cells. The GTIIC motif was bound by the A1 and A2
factors in muscle nuclear extracts and competed with the A element for
DNA-protein complex formation. Antibody against human TEF-1 'supershifted' the
ubiquitous A2 factor-DNA complex, but did not alter the mobility of the
muscle-specific A1 factor-DNA complex. We isolated a murine cDNA clone (mTEF-1)
from a cardiac cDNA library. The clone is highly homologous to Hela cell TEF-1.
The in vitro transcription/translation product of mTEF-1 cDNA bound to the A
element, and the DNA binding property of mTEF-1 was identical to that of the A2
factor. Transfection of mTEF-1 cDNA into muscle and non-muscle cells confirmed
that mTEF-1 corresponds to A2, but not to A1 factors. The mTEF-1 mRNA is
expressed abundantly in skeletal and cardiac muscles, kidney and lung, but it is 
also expressed at lower levels in other tissues. These results suggest that the
M-CAT binding factors consist of two different factors; the ubiquitous A2 is
encoded by mTEF-1, but the muscle-specific A1 factor is distinct from mTEF-1.

PMCID: PMC310013
PMID: 8396764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. EMBO J. 1993 Jun;12(6):2337-48.

Characterization of the transcription activation function and the DNA binding
domain of transcriptional enhancer factor-1.

Hwang JJ(1), Chambon P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Strasbourg,
France.

The regions of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) required for its
activation function and sequence-specific DNA binding have been determined.
Deletion analysis of a chimera between TEF-1 and the GAL4 DNA binding domain
(DBD) indicated that at least three regions of TEF-1 were involved in
transactivation. However, none of these regions functioned as independent
activating domains. Moreover, none of the GAL4 chimeras containing individual
TEF-1 regions interfered with the activity of endogenous HeLa cell TEF-1, while
interference was observed with the GAL4-TEF-1 chimeras which functioned as
transactivators. These results indicate that there is a general correlation
between the abilities of a given GAL4-TEF-1 chimera to function in
transcriptional activation and interference, thus supporting the idea that
transactivation by TEF-1 is mediated by a limiting transcriptional intermediary
factor. In addition, we show experimentally that the TEA/ATTS domain is a novel
class of DBD involved in the sequence-specific DNA binding of TEF-1 and its
Drosophila homologue scalloped. Two other regions of TEF-1 are also required for 
DNA binding. These regions are not part of the minimum DBD, but may function by
antagonizing the effect of sequences which negatively regulate DNA binding
mediated by both the TEF-1 TEA/ATTS domain and the GAL4 DBD. In addition,
analysis of TEF-1 and scalloped derivatives in which their TEA/ATTS domains have 
been interchanged further indicates that the TEA/ATTS domain is not the only
determinant of DNA binding specificity.

PMCID: PMC413464
PMID: 8389695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. EMBO J. 1993 May;12(5):2039-48.

The Aspergillus nidulans yA gene is regulated by abaA.

Aramayo R(1), Timberlake WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

The developmentally regulated Aspergillus nidulans yA gene encodes a p-diphenol
oxidase that is needed for synthesis of green conidial pigment. We subjected the 
yA 5' flanking region to mutational analysis in A. nidulans and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to identify DNA sequence elements involved in its transcriptional
control, and identified two functionally distinct elements. Element I contained
potential BrlA binding sites and was required for full level yA transcription,
but not for developmental regulation in the presence of element II. Element II
contained putative TEF-1 binding sites flanking a CCAAT element and was
sufficient for developmental regulation of transcription. Mutation of the TEF-1
binding sites eliminated developmental regulation, whereas mutation of the CCAAT 
element led to elevated levels of transcription. Element II was also sufficient
to induce transcription in S. cerevisiae when the A.nidulans developmental
regulatory gene abaA was expressed from the GAL1 promoter. As AbaA and TEF-1
possess similar DNA binding domains, the abaA-yA interaction in yeast is probably
direct. Thus, abaA appears to be a direct activator of yA, but yA regulation may 
also involve interactions with BrlA and a member of the CCAAT class of DNA
binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC413426
PMID: 8491194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 11;21(3):747-8.

Striking homology between mouse and human transcription enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1).

Blatt C(1), DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, NJ 07110.

PMCID: PMC309183
PMID: 8441689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):961-9.

Transcriptional activation by simian virus 40 large T antigen: interactions with 
multiple components of the transcription complex.

Gruda MC(1), Zabolotny JM, Xiao JH, Davidson I, Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6142.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen is a potent transcriptional activator of
both viral and cellular promoters. Within the SV40 late promoter, a specific
upstream element necessary for T-antigen transcriptional activation is the
binding site for transcription-enhancing factor 1 (TEF-1). The promoter structure
necessary for T-antigen-mediated transcriptional activation appears to be simple.
For example, a promoter consisting of upstream TEF-1 binding sites (or other
factor-binding sites) and a downstream TATA or initiator element is efficiently
activated. It has been demonstrated that transcriptional activation by T antigen 
does not require direct binding to the DNA; thus, the most direct effect that T
antigen could have on these simple promoters would be through protein-protein
interactions with either upstream-bound transcription factors, the basal
transcription complex, or both. To determine whether such interactions occur,
full-length T antigen or segments of it was fused to the glutathione-binding site
(GST fusions) or to the Gal4 DNA-binding domain (amino acids 1 to 147) (Gal4
fusions). With the GST fusions, it was found that TEF-1 and the TATA-binding
protein (TBP) bound different regions of T antigen. A GST fusion containing amino
acids 5 to 172 (region T1) efficiently bound TBP. TEF-1 bound neither region T1
nor a region between amino acids 168 and 373 (region T2); however, it bound
efficiently to the combined region (T5) containing amino acids 5 to 383.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC358980
PMID: 8423815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 25;267(24):17234-40.

M-CAT binding factor is related to the SV40 enhancer binding factor, TEF-1.

Farrance IK(1), Mar JH, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452.

M-CAT binding factor (MCBF) governs the activity of the cardiac troponin T gene
promoter. M-CAT motifs have also been implicated recently in the regulation of
other contractile protein genes which like cardiac troponin T, do not require
direct interaction with MyoD1 or related factors for activity. Mutational
analysis of the M-CAT motif revealed that it can be functionally replaced by a
regulatory motif of the SV40 enhancer which binds human transcription factor
TEF-1. Biochemical analyses show that MCBF from muscle nuclei is
indistinguishable from TEF-1 in terms of specificity of binding site recognition,
fractionation on DNA-agarose, and apparent molecular weight. In addition,
antibodies raised against amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions of human TEF-1
also bind to MCBF from chicken muscle. We conclude, therefore, that MCBF is
closely related to TEF-1. Finally, MCBF/TEF-1 is highly enriched in the nuclei of
striated muscle, as compared with other tissues, consistent with a role in
muscle-specific promoter regulation.

PMID: 1324927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. EMBO J. 1992 Jun;11(6):2271-81.

Transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 and its cell-specific co-activator
activate human papillomavirus-16 E6 and E7 oncogene transcription in
keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells.

Ishiji T(1), Lace MJ, Parkkinen S, Anderson RD, Haugen TH, Cripe TP, Xiao JH,
Davidson I, Chambon P, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City
52242.

The human papillomavirus (HPV)-16 oncogenes, E6 and E7, are transcribed
preferentially in keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells due to a 5'
enhancer. An abundant peptide binding to a 37 nt enhancer element was purified
from human keratinocytes by sequence-specific DNA chromatography. This protein
was identified as transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 by complex mobility,
binding to wild-type and mutant SV40 and HPV-16 enhansons and antigenic
reactivity with two anti-TEF-1 antibodies. TEF-1 is cell-specific, but its
transactivation also depends on a limiting, cell-specific TEF-1 'co-activator'.
We show that both TEF-1 and the TEF-1 co-activator are active in human
keratinocytes and essential for HPV-16 transcription. TEF-1 binding in vivo was
necessary for HPV-16 P97 promoter activity. Excess TEF-1 and chimeric GAL4-TEF-1 
specifically inhibited the P97 promoter by 'squelching', indicating that HPV-16
transcription also requires a limiting TEF-1 co-activator. TEF-1 and the TEF-1
co-activator functions mirrored HPV-16 transcription by their presence in
keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells and their absence from lymphoid
B-cells, but also functioned in liver cells where the HPV-16 promoter is
inactive. TEF-1 and its associated co-activator are thus part of a complex
mechanism which determines the restricted cell range of the HPV-16 E6 and E7
oncogene promoter.

PMCID: PMC556694
PMID: 1318197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Virol. 1991 Dec;65(12):6535-43.

trans activation of the simian virus 40 late promoter by large T antigen requires
binding sites for the cellular transcription factor TEF-1.

Casaz P(1), Sundseth R, Hansen U.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Transcription, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) T antigen stimulates the level of transcription from
several RNA polymerase II promoters, including the SV40 late promoter. The
mechanism of trans activation appears to be indirect since binding of T antigen
to specific DNA sequences is not required. However, specific promoter elements
that respond to T antigen have not previously been defined. We identified DNA
sequences from the SV40 late promoter whose ability to stimulate transcription is
induced by the expression of T antigen. In particular, the Sph I + II motifs of
the SV40 enhancer can confer T-antigen inducibility to the normally uninducible
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene promoter when multiple copies of the
sequence are inserted 5' of the transcription initiation site and TATA sequence. 
Binding sites for the cellular transcription factor TEF-1 and octamer binding
proteins are contained within the Sph I + II motifs, as well as at other
positions in the SV40 promoter. To study the role of individual protein-binding
sites in trans activation by T antigen, mutations were constructed in various
TEF-1 and octamer protein-binding sites of the SV40 late promoter. These
mutations did not significantly affect basal promoter activity. However, mutation
of all three TEF-1 sites prevented detectable activation by T antigen. DNase I
footprinting of the mutated promoters with purified proteins demonstrated that
inducibility by T antigen correlated with binding affinity of TEF-1 for the DNA
and not with binding affinity of an octamer binding protein.

PMCID: PMC250705
PMID: 1658359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Plant Cell. 1991 Aug;3(8):747-8.

ATTS, a new and conserved DNA binding domain.

Andrianopoulos A, Timberlake WE.

PMCID: PMC160041
PMID: 1820817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cell. 1991 Jul 12;66(1):11-2.

The TEA domain: a novel, highly conserved DNA-binding motif.

Bürglin TR.

PMID: 2070413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cell. 1991 May 17;65(4):551-68.

Cloning, expression, and transcriptional properties of the human enhancer factor 
TEF-1.

Xiao JH(1), Davidson I, Matthes H, Garnier JM, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Unité 184 de
Génie Génétique et de Biologie, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

We describe the cDNA encoding the SV40 transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) 
and show that its translation initiates exclusively at an AUU codon in vivo.
Cloned TEF-1, which is unrelated to other known transcription factors,
specifically binds the SV40 GT-IIC and Sph enhansons. Cloned TEF-1 does not
activate these enhansons in lymphoid MPC11 cells where they are known to be
inactive, but represses the endogenous HeLa TEF-1 activity in vivo and in vitro. 
Repression is also observed with chimeras where the DNA-binding domain of the
GAL4 activator replaces that of TEF-1, showing that repression results from
interference/squelching. Such chimeras stimulate transcription in HeLa, but not
in MPC11, cells in vivo and in HeLa cell extracts in vitro. However, high
concentrations result in self-interference/squelching. These results strongly
suggest that the trans-activation function of TEF-1 is mediated by a highly
limiting, possible cell-specific, titratable transcriptional intermediary
factor(s).

PMID: 1851669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell. 1988 Sep 23;54(7):931-42.

The HeLa cell protein TEF-1 binds specifically and cooperatively to two SV40
enhancer motifs of unrelated sequence.

Davidson I(1), Xiao JH, Rosales R, Staub A, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Faculté de
Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

We have purified a protein (TEF-1) that specifically binds to two sequence
unrelated motifs (GT-IIC and Sph) of the simian virus 40 (SV40) enhancer. TEF-1
binds cooperatively to templates containing tandem but not inverted or spaced
repeats of its cognate motifs. This cooperative binding correlates with the
ability of the tandem repeats to generate enhancer activity in vivo. In contrast,
TEF-1 and a second SV40 enhancer binding protein, TEF-2, bind independently to
templates containing the cognate motifs of both proteins (GT-I and either GT-IIC 
or Sph motifs) even though these motifs cooperate in enhancer activity in vivo.
These results allow us to distinguish different classes of enhancer factors.

PMID: 2843293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


