
1. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan 5. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.204. [Epub ahead of print]

Common variants on 17q25 and gene-gene interactions conferring risk of
schizophrenia in Han Chinese population and regulating gene expressions in human 
brain.

Guan L(1), Wang Q(2), Wang L(2), Wu B(1), Chen Y(3), Liu F(3), Ye F(4), Zhang
T(4), Li K(5), Yan B(5), Lu C(6), Su L(6), Jin G(7), Wang H(7), Tian H(8), Wang
L(8), Chen Z(9), Wang Y(9), Chen J(10), Yuan Y(10), Cong W(11), Zheng J(11), Wang
J(12), Xu X(12), Liu H(13), Xiao W(13), Han C(14), Zhang Y(14), Jia F(15), Qiao
X(15); Genetic REsearch on schizophrenia neTwork-China and Netherland (GREAT-CN),
Zhang D(2), Zhang M(1,)(2), Ma H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University Institute of Mental
Health, Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of Health (Peking University), 
Beijing, China. (2)Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, USA. (3)Xi'an Mental Health Center, Xi'an, China. (4)Shanxi Provincial Mental
Health Center, Taiyuan, China. (5)The Mental Health Center of Hebei Province,
Baoding, China. (6)Shandong Mental Health Center, Jinan, China. (7)Mudanjiang
Neuro-Psychiatric Hospital of Heilongjiang Province, Mudanjiang, China.
(8)Tianjin Anding Hospital, Tianjin, China. (9)Hangzhou Seventh People's
Hospital, Hangzhou, China. (10)Chongqing Mental Health Center, Chongqing, China. 
(11)Neuro-Psychiatric Hospital of Fuzhou, Fujian Province, Fuzhou, China. (12)The
First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.
(13)Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (14)Xicheng Ping'an
Hospital, Beijing, China. (15)Institute of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, China.

Recently, two genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of schizophrenia (SCZ) in
Han Chinese identified several susceptibility loci. Replication efforts aiming to
validate the GWAS findings were made and focused on the top hits. We conducted a 
more extensive follow-up study in an independent sample of 1471 cases and 1528
matched controls to verify 26 genetic variants by including nine top
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that reached genome-wide significance and 
17 promising SNPs nominated in the initial discovery phase. rs8073471 in an
intron of tubulin-folding cofactor D (TBCD) obtained nominal significance
(P<0.01) in single SNP analysis. Logistic regression identified significant
interaction between rs3744165 (5'-untranslated region variant of exon 2 of zinc
finger protein 750 (ZNF750), and in an intron of TBCD) and rs8073471 (Deviance
test P-value=2.77 × 10(-34)). Both SNPs are located at 17q25, an interesting
region that has been implicated in SCZ. By using the Genotype-Tissue Expression
(GTEx) data set, we implemented an expression quantitative trait loci epistasis
analysis to explore the association between the genotype combinations of the two 
SNPs and gene expression levels in 13 areas of human central nervous system. We
observed that rs3744165 × rs8073471 interaction modulated the expression profile 
of TEAD3 (P=1.87 × 10(-8)), SH3TC2 (P=2.00 × 10(-8)), KCNK9 (P=5.20 × 10(-7)) and
PPDPF (P=1.13 × 10(-6)) in postmortem cortex tissue; EFNA1 (P=7.26 × 10(-9)),
RNU4ATAC (P=2.32 × 10(-8)) and NUPL2 (P=6.79 × 10(-8)) in cerebellum tissue. To
the best of our knowledge, our study is the first one that links TBCD and ZNF750 
mutations to SCZ susceptibility and to the transcript levels in human brain
tissues. Further efforts are needed to understand the role of those variants in
the pathogenesis of SCZ.Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 5
January 2016; doi:10.1038/mp.2015.204.

PMID: 26728569  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Structure. 2016 Jan 5;24(1):179-86. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.11.005. Epub 2015 Dec
24.

Palmitoylation of TEAD Transcription Factors Is Required for Their Stability and 
Function in Hippo Pathway Signaling.

Noland CL(1), Gierke S(2), Schnier PD(3), Murray J(1), Sandoval WN(3), Sagolla
M(2), Dey A(4), Hannoush RN(5), Fairbrother WJ(6), Cunningham CN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (2)Center for Advanced Light Microscopy, Genentech,
Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Department of Protein
Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(4)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (5)Department of Early Discovery Biochemistry,
Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (6)Department of 
Early Discovery Biochemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. Electronic address: fairbrother.wayne@gene.com. (7)Department of
Early Discovery Biochemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. Electronic address: cunningham.christian@gene.com.

The Hippo signaling pathway is responsible for regulating the function of TEAD
family transcription factors in metazoans. TEADs, with their co-activators
YAP/TAZ, are critical for controlling cell differentiation and organ size through
their transcriptional activation of genes involved in cell growth and
proliferation. Dysregulation of the Hippo pathway has been implicated in multiple
forms of cancer. Here, we identify a novel form of regulation of TEAD family
proteins. We show that human TEADs are palmitoylated at a universally conserved
cysteine, and report the crystal structures of the human TEAD2 and TEAD3
YAP-binding domains in their palmitoylated forms. These structures show a
palmitate bound within a highly conserved hydrophobic cavity at each protein's
core. Our findings also demonstrate that this modification is required for proper
TEAD folding and stability, indicating a potential new avenue for
pharmacologically regulating the Hippo pathway through the modulation of TEAD
palmitoylation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26724994  [PubMed - in process]


3. Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1969-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.015023.
Epub 2015 Oct 20.

9p21.3 Coronary Artery Disease Risk Variants Disrupt TEAD Transcription
Factor-Dependent Transforming Growth Factor ß Regulation of p16 Expression in
Human Aortic Smooth Muscle Cells.

Almontashiri NA(1), Antoine D(1), Zhou X(1), Vilmundarson RO(1), Zhang SX(1), Hao
KN(1), Chen HH(2), Stewart AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Ruddy Canadian Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart
Institute, Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.);
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and
Inherited Diseases, Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). (2)From Ruddy Canadian
Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ontario,
Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.); Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases,
Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). astewart@ottawaheart.ca
hchen@uottawa.ca.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1943-5.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism whereby the 9p21.3 locus confers risk for coronary
artery disease remains incompletely understood. Risk alleles are associated with 
reduced expression of the cell cycle suppressor genes CDKN2A (p16 and p14) and
CDKN2B (p15) and increased vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. We asked
whether risk alleles disrupt transcription factor binding to account for this
effect.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A bioinformatic screen was used to predict which of 59
single nucleotide polymorphisms at the 9p21.3 locus disrupt (or create)
transcription factor binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift and luciferase
reporter assays examined the binding and functionality of the predicted
regulatory sequences. Primary human aortic smooth muscle cells (HAoSMCs) were
genotyped for 9p21.3, and HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele showed reduced
p15 and p16 levels and increased proliferation. rs10811656 and rs4977757
disrupted functional TEF-1 TEC1 AbaA domain (TEAD) transcription factor binding
sites. TEAD3 and TEAD4 overexpression induced p16 in HAoSMCs homozygous for the
nonrisk allele, but not for the risk allele. Transforming growth factor ß, known 
to activate p16 and also to interact with TEAD factors, failed to induce p16 or
to inhibit proliferation of HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele. Knockdown of 
TEAD3 blocked transforming growth factor ß-induced p16 mRNA and protein
expression, and dual knockdown of TEAD3 and TEAD4 markedly reduced p16 expression
in heterozygous HAoSMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we identify a novel mechanism whereby sequences at the 9p21.3 
risk locus disrupt TEAD factor binding and TEAD3-dependent transforming growth
factor ß induction of p16 in HAoSMCs. This mechanism accounts, in part, for the
9p21.3 coronary artery disease risk.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26487755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Aug 15;193:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.05.019. Epub
2015 May 8.

Stimulation of cardiomyogenesis from mouse embryonic stem cells by nuclear
translocation of cardiotrophin-1.

Mascheck L(1), Sharifpanah F(1), Tsang SY(2), Wartenberg M(3), Sauer H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Justus Liebig University Gießen, Germany. (2)School 
of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Partner 
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, SAR, China. (3)Clinic of Internal Medicine I, Cardiology Division,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. (4)Department of Physiology, Justus 
Liebig University Gießen, Germany. Electronic address:
heinrich.sauer@physiologie.med.uni-giessen.de.

BACKGROUND: Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) controls cardiomyogenesis of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the signaling pathway underlying the action of CT-1 on
cardiac cell differentiation.
METHODS: Protein expression was analyzed by western blot technique and cardiac
areas by immunohistochemistry. Calcium, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric 
oxide (NO) were assessed by microfluorometry using fluo-4, H2DCF, and DAF-2DA,
respectively. Gene inactivation of CT-1 was achieved by siRNA technology.
RESULTS: CT-1 as well as its receptor gp 130 were transiently upregulated during 
differentiation of ES cells. Exogenous CT-1 enhanced cardiomyogenesis, increased 
the cardiac transcription factors MEF2c, Nkx-2.5, TEAD3 and GATA4, the cardiac
proteins a-actinin, MLC2a, MYH7, MLC1a, MLC2v and HCN4 as well as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB),
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). CT-1
downregulation by small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited cardiomyogenesis and
decreased VEGF, PDGF-BB, FGF-2 and ANP expression. CT-1 raised intracellular
calcium which was abolished by the intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA, AM and
thapsigargin. Moreover, CT-1 treatment increased ROS, followed by NO generation
and NOS3 activation. During ES cell differentiation CT-1 was translocated to the 
cell nucleus. Exogenous CT-1 induced nuclear translocation of endogenous CT-1,
which was inhibited by BAPTA, the NOS inhibitor L-N(G)-Nitroarginine methyl ester
(l-NAME), the radical scavenger N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)-glycine (NMPG) as well as
the janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitor AG490 and the PI3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
LY294002.
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear translocation of CT-1 regulates cardiomyogenesis of ES cells
and involves calcium, NO, ROS as well as CT-1 regulated signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26005169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16906-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642363. Epub 2015
May 20.

Hippo Component TAZ Functions as a Co-repressor and Negatively Regulates <U+0394>Np63
Transcription through TEA Domain (TEAD) Transcription Factor.

Valencia-Sama I(1), Zhao Y(1), Lai D(1), Janse van Rensburg HJ(1), Hao Y(1), Yang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
yang@path.queensu.ca.

Transcriptional co-activator with a PDZ binding domain (TAZ) is a WW
domain-containing transcriptional co-activator and a core component of an
emerging Hippo signaling pathway that regulates organ size, tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. TAZ regulates these biological functions by
up-regulating downstream cellular genes through transactivation of transcription 
factors such as TEAD and TTF1. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TAZ-induced tumorigenesis, we have recently performed a gene expression profile
analysis by overexpressing TAZ in mammary cells. In addition to the
TAZ-up-regulated genes that were confirmed in our previous studies, we identified
a large number of cellular genes that were down-regulated by TAZ. In this study, 
we have confirmed these down-regulated genes (including cytokines, chemokines,
and p53 gene family members) as bona fide downstream transcriptional targets of
TAZ. By using human breast and lung epithelial cells, we have further
characterized <U+0394>Np63, a p53 gene family member, and shown that TAZ suppresses
<U+0394>Np63 mRNA, protein expression, and promoter activity through interaction with
the transcription factor TEAD. We also show that TEAD can inhibit <U+0394>Np63 promoter 
activity and that TAZ can directly interact with <U+0394>Np63 promoter-containing TEAD
binding sites. Finally, we provide functional evidence that down-regulation of
<U+0394>Np63 by TAZ may play a role in regulating cell migration. Altogether, this study
provides novel evidence that the Hippo component TAZ can function as a
co-repressor and regulate biological functions by negatively regulating
downstream cellular genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505436 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 25995450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 27;458(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.077. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

YAP/TAZ enhance mammalian embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a
Tead-dependent manner.

Han D(1), Byun SH(1), Park S(1), Kim J(1), Kim I(1), Ha S(1), Kwon M(1), Yoon
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. (2)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea. Electronic
address: keejung@skku.edu.

Mammalian brain development is regulated by multiple signaling pathways
controlling cell proliferation, migration and differentiation. Here we show that 
YAP/TAZ enhance embryonic neural stem cell characteristics in a cell autonomous
fashion using diverse experimental approaches. Introduction of retroviral vectors
expressing YAP or TAZ into the mouse embryonic brain induced cell localization in
the ventricular zone (VZ), which is the embryonic neural stem cell niche. This
change in cell distribution in the cortical layer is due to the increased
stemness of infected cells; YAP-expressing cells were colabeled with Sox2, a
neural stem cell marker, and YAP/TAZ increased the frequency and size of
neurospheres, indicating enhanced self-renewal- and proliferative ability of
neural stem cells. These effects appear to be TEA domain family transcription
factor (Tead)-dependent; a Tead binding-defective YAP mutant lost the ability to 
promote neural stem cell characteristics. Consistently, in utero gene transfer of
a constitutively active form of Tead2 (Tead2-VP16) recapitulated all the features
of YAP/TAZ overexpression, and dominant negative Tead2-EnR resulted in marked
cell exit from the VZ toward outer cortical layers. Taken together, these results
indicate that the Tead-dependent YAP/TAZ signaling pathway plays important roles 
in neural stem cell maintenance by enhancing stemness of neural stem cells during
mammalian brain development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25634692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Cancer. 2015 Aug 1;137(3):638-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29429. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Genetic variants in Hippo pathway genes YAP1, TEAD1 and TEAD4 are associated with
melanoma-specific survival.

Yuan H(1,)(2,)(3), Liu H(1,)(2), Liu Z(1,)(2), Zhu D(4), Amos CI(4), Fang S(5),
Lee JE(5), Wei Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Community and Family 
Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers. The Hippo
pathway controls cell migration, development and sizes of the organs in diverse
species, and deregulation of this pathway may affect CM progression and
prognosis. Therefore, we hypothesized that genetic variants of Hippo pathway
genes might predict survival of CM patients. We used the genotyping data of 1,115
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 12 pathway core genes (i.e.,
MST1, MST2, SAV1, LATS1, LATS2, MOB1A, MOB1B, YAP1, TEAD1, TEAD2, TEAD3 and
TEAD4) from the dataset of our previously published CM genome-wide association
study and comprehensively analyzed their associations with CM-specific survival
(CSS) in 858 CM patients by using the Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox proportional 
hazards regression models. We found a predictive role of YAP1 rs11225163 CC,
TEAD1 rs7944031 AG+GG and TEAD4 rs1990330 CA+AA in the prognosis of CM. In
addition, patients with an increasing number of unfavorable genotypes (NUG) had a
markedly increased risk of death. After incorporating NUG in the model with
clinical variables, the new model showed a significantly improved discriminatory 
ability to classify CSS (AUC increased from 82.03% to 84.56%). Our findings
suggest that genetic variants of Hippo pathway genes, particularly YAP1
rs11225163, TEAD1 rs7944031 and TEAD4 rs1990330, may independently or jointly
modulate survival of CM patients. Additional large, prospective studies are
needed to validate these findings.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4437894 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25628125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Jul;20(7):677-89. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau020. Epub 2014 Mar 
12.

Activation of endocrine-related gene expression in placental choriocarcinoma cell
lines following DNA methylation knock-down.

Hogg K(1), Robinson WP(2), Beristain AG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada Child & Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada khogg@cfri.ca.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada Child & Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (3)Child &
Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Increasingly, placental DNA methylation is assessed as a factor in
pregnancy-related complications, yet the transcriptional impact of such findings 
is not always clear. Using a proliferative in vitro placental model, the effect
of DNA methylation loss on gene activation was evaluated at a number of genes
selected for being differentially methylated in pre-eclampsia-associated
placentae in vivo. We aimed to determine whether reduced DNA methylation at
specific loci was associated with transcriptional changes at the corresponding
gene, thus providing mechanistic underpinnings for previous clinical findings and
to assess the degree of transcriptional response amongst our candidate genes.
BeWo and JEG3 choriocarcinoma cells were exposed to 1 µM 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-Aza-CdR) or vehicle control for 48 h, and re-plated and cultured for a further
72 h in normal media before cells were harvested for RNA and DNA. Bisulphite
pyrosequencing confirmed that DNA methylation was reduced by ~30-50% points at
the selected loci studied in both cell lines. Gene activation, measured by
qRT-PCR, was highly variable and transcript specific, indicating differential
sensitivity to DNA methylation. Most notably, loss of DNA methylation at the
leptin (LEP) promoter corresponded to a 200-fold and 40-fold increase in LEP
expression in BeWo and JEG3 cells, respectively (P < 0.01). Transcripts of
steroidogenic pathway enzymes CYP11A1 and HSD3B1 were up-regulated ~40-fold in
response to 5-Aza-CdR exposure in BeWo cells (P < 0.01). Other transcripts,
including aromatase (CYP19), HSD11B2, inhibin (INHBA) and glucocorticoid receptor
(NR3C1) were more moderately, although significantly, affected by loss of
associated DNA methylation. These data present a mixed effect of DNA methylation 
changes at selected loci supporting cautionary interpretation of DNA methylation 
results in the absence of functional data.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24623739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Vascul Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;60(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2013.10.004. Epub 2013 
Nov 5.

Simvastatin-enhanced expression of promyogenic nuclear factors and
cardiomyogenesis of murine embryonic stem cells.

Yang C(1), Madonna R(2), Li Y(2), Zhang Q(3), Shen WF(3), McNamara K(2), Yang
YJ(4), Geng YJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; The Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ruijin Hospital, Jiao-Tong University Medical School, 
Shanghai, China; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX, USA. (2)The Center for
Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX,
USA. (3)The Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Jiao-Tong
University Medical School, Shanghai, China. (4)FuWai Cardiovascular Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (5)The Center for
Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX,
USA. Electronic address: yong-jian.geng@uth.tmc.edu.

A combination of statin and stem cell therapies has been shown to benefit in
experimental models of myocardial infarction. This study tests whether treatment 
with simvastatin has a direct impact on the cardiomyogenic development of murine 
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in embryoid bodies. In a concentration-dependent
manner, simvastatin treatment enhanced expression of several promyogenic nuclear 
transcription factors, including GATA4, Nkx2.5, DTEF-1 and myocardin A. The
statin-treated cells also displayed higher levels of cardiac proteins, including 
myosin, a-actinin, Ryanodine receptor-2, and atrial natriuretic peptide, and they
developed synchronized contraction. The statin's promyogenic effect was partially
diminished by the addition of the two isoprenoids FPP and GGPP, which are
intermediates of cholesterol synthesis. Thus, simvastatin treatment enhances ESC 
myogenesis during early development perhaps via a mechanism inhibiting the
mevalonate-FPP/GGPP pathway.

© 2013.

PMID: 24200505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e62969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062969. Print 2013.

Early onset pre-eclampsia is associated with altered DNA methylation of
cortisol-signalling and steroidogenic genes in the placenta.

Hogg K(1), Blair JD, McFadden DE, von Dadelszen P, Robinson WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Placental cortisol is inactivated in normotensive pregnancies, but is frequently 
present in pre-eclampsia associated placentae. Since glucocorticoids are strongly
associated with the programming of long-term health, we assessed DNA methylation 
of genes involved in cortisol signalling and bioavailability, and hormonal
signalling in the placenta of normotensive and hypertensive pregnancies.
Candidate genes/CpG sites were selected through analysis of Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array data on control (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>19) and early onset
pre-eclampsia (EOPET; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>19) placental samples. DNA methylation was further
quantified by bisulfite pyrosequencing in a larger cohort of control (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>111)
cases, in addition to EOPET (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>19), late onset pre-eclampsia (LOPET; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>18)
and normotensive intrauterine growth restriction (nIUGR; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>13) cases. DNA
methylation (percentage points) was increased at CpG sites within genes encoding 
the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1 exon 1D promoter; +8.46%; P<0.01) and
corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) binding protein (CRHBP intron 3; +9.14%;
P<0.05), and decreased within CRH (5' UTR; -4.30%; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.11) in EOPET-associated 
placentae, but not in LOPET nor nIUGR cases, compared to controls. Differential
DNA methylation was not observed among groups at the 11ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD11B2) gene promoter. Significant hypomethylation was
observed in pre-eclampsia but not nIUGR placentae for steroidogenic genes,
including CYP11A1 (exon1; EOPET; -9.66%; P<0.00001, and LOPET; -5.77%; P<0.001), 
3ß-hydroxy-delta-5-steroid dehydrogenase type 1 (HSD3B1 exon 2; EOPET; -12.49%;
P<0.00001, and LOPET; -6.88%; P<0.001), TEA domain family member 3 (TEAD3 intron 
1; EOPET; -12.56%; P<0.00001) and CYP19 (placental-specific exon 1.1 promoter;
EOPET; -10.62%, P<0.0001). These data represent dysregulation of the placental
epigenome in pre-eclampsia related to genes involved in maintaining the hormonal 
environment during pregnancy and highlights particular susceptibility in the
early onset syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3647069
PMID: 23667551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3615-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3793. Epub 
2013 Apr 10.

YAP/TEAD-mediated transcription controls cellular senescence.

Xie Q(1), Chen J, Feng H, Peng S, Adams U, Bai Y, Huang L, Li J, Huang J, Meng S,
Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Transcription coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) plays an important role in
the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, we identify a new role 
of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence. We find that the expression
levels of YAP proteins decrease following the replication-induced cellular
senescence in IMR90 cells. Silencing of YAP inhibits cell proliferation and
induces premature senescence. In additional experiments, we observe that cellular
senescence induced by YAP deficiency is TEAD- and Rb/p16/p53-dependent.
Furthermore, we show that Cdk6 is a direct downstream target gene of YAP in the
regulation of cellular senescence, and the expression of Cdk6 is through the
YAP-TEAD complex. Ectopic expression of Cdk6 rescued YAP knockdown-induced
senescence. Finally, we find that downregulation of YAP in tumor cells increases 
senescence in response to chemotherapeutic agents, and YAP or Cdk6 expression
rescues cellular senescence. Taken together, our findings define the critical
role of YAP in the regulation of cellular senescence and provide a novel insight 
into a potential chemotherapeutic avenue for tumor suppression.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23576552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Anim Breed Genet. 2012 Aug;129(4):325-35. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0388.2011.00979.x. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Molecular characterization of the porcine TEAD3 (TEF-5) gene: examination of a
promoter mutation as the causal mutation of a quantitative trait loci affecting
the androstenone level in boar fat.

Robic A(1), Larzul C, Grindflek E, Chevillon P, Hofer A, Fève K, Iannuccelli N,
Milan D, Prunier A, Riquet J.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
annie.robic@toulouse.inra.fr

A quantitative trait loci (QTL) for accumulation of androstenone in fat has been 
identified in an Large White × Meishan cross in a region of SSC7-containing
TEAD3. In humans, TEAD3 is a transcription activator, known to be able to
regulate the transcription of HSD3B. This enzyme is involved in the degradation
of androstenone in the liver. In this study, porcine transcripts of TEAD3 were
characterized and compared with mammalian transcripts. The complete structure of 
porcine TEAD3 gene was characterized including two 5' non-coding exons and one
exon 5 not used in porcine transcripts. Variations were screened in sequences
related to TEAD3: in exons, in flanking sequences of exons and in the promoter
region. A SNP characterized at 726 bp at 5' of the first exon was tested on
several pig populations without coherent and convincing results concerning its
association with androstenone levels. We showed that in the liver of adult boars,
the transcripts levels of TEAD3 and HSD3B were correlated. As in humans, it is
possible that HSD3B is a target gene of TEAD3 in porcine liver. Nevertheless, no 
expression variation was observed for TEAD3 or HSD3B in liver between animals
with different genotypes at the SNP. We concluded that this SNP was not the
causal mutation of this QTL.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 22775265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Cancer. 2011 Dec 20;11:523. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-523.

Downregulation of SAV1 plays a role in pathogenesis of high-grade clear cell
renal cell carcinoma.

Matsuura K(1), Nakada C, Mashio M, Narimatsu T, Yoshimoto T, Tanigawa M,
Tsukamoto Y, Hijiya N, Takeuchi I, Nomura T, Sato F, Mimata H, Seto M, Moriyama
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Oita University, Oita, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Clinical outcome of patients with high-grade ccRCC (clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma) remains still poor despite recent advances in treatment
strategies. Molecular mechanism of pathogenesis in developing high-grade ccRCC
must be clarified. In the present study, we found that SAV1 was significantly
downregulated with copy number loss in high-grade ccRCCs. Therefore, we
investigated the SAV1 function on cell proliferation and apoptosis in vitro.
Furthermore, we attempted to clarify the downstream signaling which is regulated 
by SAV1.
METHODS: We performed array CGH and gene expression analysis of 8 RCC cell lines 
(786-O, 769-P, KMRC-1, KMRC-2, KMRC-3, KMRC-20, TUHR4TKB, and Caki-2), and
expression level of mRNA was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis.
We next re-expressed SAV1 in 786-O cells, and analyzed its colony-forming
activity. Then, we transfected siRNAs of SAV1 into the kidney epithelial cell
line HK2 and renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (RPTECs), and analyzed their 
proliferation and apoptosis. Furthermore, the activity of YAP1, which is a
downstream molecule of SAV1, was evaluated by western blot analysis, reporter
assay and immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: We found that SAV1, a component of the Hippo pathway, is frequently
downregulated in high-grade ccRCC. SAV1 is located on chromosome 14q22.1, where
copy number loss had been observed in 7 of 12 high-grade ccRCCs in our previous
study, suggesting that gene copy number loss is responsible for the
downregulation of SAV1. Colony-forming activity by 786-O cells, which show
homozygous loss of SAV1, was significantly reduced when SAV1 was re-introduced
exogenously. Knockdown of SAV1 promoted proliferation of HK2 and RPTEC. Although 
the phosphorylation level of YAP1 was low in 786-O cells, it was elevated in
SAV1-transduced 786-O cells. Furthermore, the transcriptional activity of the
YAP1 and TEAD3 complex was inhibited in SAV1-transduced 786-O cells.
Immunohistochemistry frequently demonstrated nuclear localization of YAP1 in
ccRCC cases with SAV1 downregulation, and it was preferentially detected in
high-grade ccRCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, downregulation of SAV1 and the consequent YAP1
activation are involved in the pathogenesis of high-grade ccRCC. It is an
attractive hypothesis that Hippo signaling could be candidates for new
therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3292516
PMID: 22185343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Anim Genet. 2011 Dec;42(6):662-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2011.02195.x. Epub
2011 Apr 13.

Expression levels of 25 genes in liver and testis located in a QTL region for
androstenone on SSC7q1.2.

Robic A(1), Fève K, Larzul C, Billon Y, van Son M, Liaubet L, Sarry J, Milan D,
Grindflek E, Bidanel JP, Riquet J.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR444, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
annie.robic@toulouse.inra.fr

A quantitative trait locus (QTL) for boar fat androstenone levels has been
identified near the SSC7 centromere in a Large White × Meishan cross. Backcrosses
were produced to isolate the Chinese haplotype in a European genetic background. 
The expression of 25 genes from the QTL region was studied in the testes and
livers of 5-month-old backcross boars, with the aim of identifying the causal
gene. Using Fluidigm, a new high-throughput technology, the expression of 25
genes was measured in a single real-time PCR experiment. This study found six
significantly down-regulated genes (C6ORF106, C6ORF81, CLPS, SLC26A8, SRPK1 and
MAPK14) in the testes of MS-LW backcross boars. However, according to current
knowledge, none of the genes appear to be related to androstenone metabolism. In 
the livers, none of the genes were significantly up- or down-regulated, including
TEAD3, which was previously designated as a possible candidate to explain this
QTL.

© 2011 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2011 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 22035010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Radiat Res. 2011;52(1):39-46.

Gene silencing of Tead3 abrogates radiation-induced adaptive response in cultured
mouse limb bud cells.

Vares G(1), Wang B, Tanaka K, Shang Y, Taki K, Nakajima T, Nenoi M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan. vares@nirs.go.jp

There is a crucial need to better understand the effects of low-doses of ionizing
radiation in fetal models. Radiation-induced adaptive response (AR) was described
in mouse embryos pre-exposed in utero to low-doses of X-rays, which exhibited
lower apoptotic levels in the limb bud. We previously described AR-specific gene 
modulations in the mouse embryo. In this study, we evaluated the role of three
candidate genes in the apoptotic AR in a micromass culture of limb bud cells:
Csf1, Cacna1a and Tead3. Gene silencing of these three genes abrogated AR.
Knowing that TEAD3 protein levels are significantly higher in adapted cells and
that YAP/TAZ/TEAD are involved in the control of cell proliferation and
apoptosis, we suggest that modulation of Tead3 could play a role in the induction
of AR in our model, seen as a reduction of radiation-induced apoptosis and a
stimulation of proliferation and differentiation in limb bud cells.

PMID: 21293071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 1;22(23):3320-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.1726608. Epub 2008 Nov 17.

YAP regulates neural progenitor cell number via the TEA domain transcription
factor.

Cao X(1), Pfaff SL, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Tight control of cell proliferation is essential for proper growth during
development and for tissue homeostasis in mature animals. The evolutionarily
conserved Hippo pathway restrains proliferation through a kinase cascade that
culminates in the inhibition of the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
Unphosphorylated YAP activates genes involved in cell proliferation and survival 
by interacting with a DNA-binding factor. Here we show that during vertebrate
neural tube development, the TEA domain transcription factor (TEAD) is the
cognate DNA-binding partner of YAP. YAP and TEAD gain of function causes marked
expansion of the neural progenitor population, partly owing to their ability to
promote cell cycle progression by inducing cyclin D1 and to inhibit
differentiation by suppressing NeuroM. Their loss of function results in
increased apoptosis, whereas repressing their target genes leads to premature
neuronal differentiation. Inhibiting the upstream kinases of the Hippo pathway
also causes neural progenitor overproliferation. Thus, the Hippo pathway plays
critical roles in regulating neural progenitor cell number by affecting
proliferation, fate choice, and cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2600760
PMID: 19015275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(8):745-52.

Differential expression of two TEF-1 (TEAD) genes during Xenopus laevis
development and in response to inducing factors.

Naye F(1), Tréguer K, Soulet F, Faucheux C, Fédou S, Thézé N, Thiébaud P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5164, Universite Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.

Transcription enhancer factors 1 (TEF-1 or TEAD) make a highly conserved family
of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins that activate not only viral regulatory
elements but muscle specific genes and are involved in several developmental
processes. In this study, we report the identification and the expression pattern
of NTEF-1 (TEAD1) and DTEF-1 (TEAD3), two members of this family in Xenopus
laevis. Both X. laevis NTEF-1 (XNTEF-1 or XTEAD1) and DTEF-1 (XDTEF-1 or XTEAD3) 
possess a 72 amino acid TEA domain characteristic of TEF-1 proteins. XNTEF-1 is a
426 amino acid protein that has 96% identity with the avian or the mammalian
NTEF-1 proteins while XDTEF-1 is a 433 amino acid protein with 77 to 80% identity
with the avian and mammalian DTEF-1 sequences respectively. Temporal expression
analysis by RT-PCR indicated that the two genes are expressed maternally and
throughout embryonic development. In the adult, the two genes are broadly
expressed although they showed differences of expression between tissues. Spatial
expression analysis by whole mount in situ hybridization showed that the XNTEF-1 
and XDTEF-1 mRNAS were predominantly detected in eye, embryonic brain, somites
and heart. In animal cap assay, the two genes are activated by bFGF but are
differently regulated by BMP4, and the muscle regulatory factor Mef2d.

PMID: 17939122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Aug;18(8):2049-60. Epub 2004 May 6.

Transcription enhancer factor-5 and a GATA-like protein determine
placental-specific expression of the Type I human 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase gene, HSD3B1.

Peng L(1), Huang Y, Jin F, Jiang SW, Payne AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, California
94305-5317, USA.

The enzyme 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase (3betaHSD) is required
for the biosynthesis of all active steroid hormones. It exists as multiple
isoforms in humans and rodents, each a product of a distinct gene. Two isoforms, 
3betaHSD I and II, are expressed in a tissue-specific manner in humans. 3betaHSD 
I is the only isoform expressed in the placenta, where it is required for the
biosynthesis of progesterone and thus essential for the maintenance of pregnancy.
We recently identified two transcription factors, activating protein-2gamma
(AP-2gamma) and the homeodomain protein, distaless-3 (Dlx-3), that are expressed 
in both human and mouse trophoblast cells that were shown to be required for
trophoblast-specific expression of the orthologous murine 3betaHSD, 3betaHSD VI. 
Although we identified specific binding sites for AP-2gamma and Dlx-3 in the
distal promoter of the human 3betaHSD I gene, HSD3B1, it was found that these
transcription factors were not involved in determining placental-specific
expression of human 3betaHSD I. Instead, a 53-bp placental-specific enhancer
element located between -2570 and -2518 of the HSD3B1 promoter was identified.
Within this 53-bp element, two potential placental transcription factor binding
sites were found. EMSAs with a 20-bp oligonucleotide containing these two
potential placental-specific binding sites identified one of the binding sites
specific for the transcription enhancer factor (TEF)-5, which is highly expressed
in human placenta and in placental choriocarcinoma-derived JEG-3 cells and the
other overlapping binding site, specific for a GATA-like protein. Site-specific
mutations in either the TEF-5 binding site or in the GATA binding site, each
resulted in complete loss of enhancer activity. The data indicate that TEF-5 and 
the GATA-like protein act in a coordinate manner to determine the
placental-specific expression of the human 3betaHSD I enzyme and therefore are
critical for placental progesterone production required for the maintenance of
pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3273420
PMID: 15131259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 6;296(5):1279-85.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate activity of the mouse mammary tumor virus
LTR.

Maeda T(1), Maeda M, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, 200 Lothrop Street, 15213, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (LTR) is a potent
transcriptional enhancer. We identified several putative binding sites for the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors (TEF-1, RTEF-1, DTEF-1, and ETF) in the
proximal negative regulatory element of the LTR. Gel mobility shift assays
revealed strong TEF-1 factor binding to one site using nuclear extracts from CV-1
cells and from the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Mutation of this site
increased basal activity of the LTR. In transient transfection assays, TEF-1
squelched the basal LTR activity and completely abrogated the response to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone. RTEF-1 and DTEF-1 had little effect on the basal
activity, whereas ETF activated the LTR. These TEF-1 factors also interfered with
the response to dexamethasone. Taken together, our results reveal an important
new role for TEF-1 factors in regulating MMTV LTR activity and suggest that TEF-1
factors might participate in mammary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12207913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24346-52. Epub 2002 May 1.

Mouse DTEF-1 (ETFR-1, TEF-5) is a transcriptional activator in alpha 1-adrenergic
agonist-stimulated cardiac myocytes.

Maeda T(1), Mazzulli JR, Farrance IK, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

alpha(1)-Adrenergic signaling in cardiac myocytes activates the skeletal muscle
alpha-actin gene through an MCAT cis-element, the binding site of the
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family of transcription factors. TEF-1 
accounts for more than 85% of the MCAT binding activity in neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes. Other TEF-1 family members account for the rest. Although TEF-1 itself 
has little effect on the alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of skeletal muscle
alpha-actin, the related factor RTEF-1 augments the response and is a target of
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling. Here, we examined another TEF-1 family member
expressed in cardiac muscle, DTEF-1, and observed that it also augmented the
alpha(1)-adrenergic response of skeletal muscle alpha-actin. A DTEF-1
peptide-specific antibody revealed that endogenous DTEF-1 accounts for up to 5%
of the MCAT binding activity in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. A TEF-1/DTEF-1
chimera suggests that alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling modulates DTEF-1 function.
Orthophosphate labeling and immunoprecipitation of an epitope-tagged DTEF-1
showed that DTEF-1 is phosphorylated in vivo. alpha(1)-Adrenergic stimulation
increased while phosphatase treatment lowered the MCAT binding by DTEF-1 and the 
endogenous non-TEF-1 MCAT-binding factor. In contrast, alpha(1)-adrenergic
stimulation did not alter, and phosphatase treatment increased, MCAT binding of
TEF-1 and RTEF-1. Taken together, these results suggest that DTEF-1 is a target
for alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of the skeletal muscle alpha-actin gene in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 11986313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):507-20.

Novel cell lines promote the discovery of genes involved in early heart
development.

Brunskill EW(1), Witte DP, Yutzey KE, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3300, USA.

Clonal cell lines representing early cardiomyocytes would provide valuable
reagents for the dissection of the genetic program of early cardiogenesis. Here
we describe the establishment and characterization of cell lines from the hearts 
of transgenic mice and embryos with SV40 large T antigen expressed in the
heart-forming region. Ultrastructure analysis by transmission electron microscopy
showed the primitive, precontractile nature of the resulting cells, with the
absence of myofilaments, Z lines, and intercalated disks. Immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR, Northern blots, and oligonucleotide microarrays were used to determine
the expression levels of thousands of genes in the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines. The
resulting gene-expression profiles showed the transcription of early
cardiomyocyte genes such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, Tbx5, dHAND, cardiac troponin C, and
SM22-alpha. Furthermore, many genes not previously implicated in early cardiac
development were expressed. Two of these genes, Hic-5, a possible negative
regulator of muscle differentiation, and the transcription enhancing factor TEF-5
were selected and shown by in situ hybridizations to be expressed in the early
developing heart. The results show that the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines can be used
to discover novel genes expressed in the early cardiomyocyte.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;13(6):879-89.

Human placental TEF-5 transactivates the human chorionic somatomammotropin gene
enhancer.

Jiang SW(1), Wu K, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) gene expression in the placenta is
controlled by an enhancer (CSEn) containing SV40-related GT-IIC and SphI/SphII
enhansons. These enhancers are controlled by members of the transcription
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family. Recently TEF-5, whose mRNA is abundant in
placenta, was shown to bind cooperatively to a unique, tandemly repeated element 
in CSEn2, suggesting that TEF-5 regulates CSEn activity. However, expression of
TEF-5 using a cDNA lacking the 5'-untranslated region and containing a modified
translation initiation site was not accompanied by CSEn activation. Using nested,
degenerate PCR primers corresponding to conserved TEF domains, several novel
TEF-1-related cDNAs have been cloned from a human placental cDNA library. The
open reading frame of one 3033-bp clone was identical to TEF-5 and contained 300-
and 1423-bp 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions, respectively. The in vitro generated
approximately 53-kDa TEF-5 polypeptide binds specifically to GT-IIC and
SphI/SphII oligonucleotides. Overexpression of TEF-5 in BeWo cells using the
intact 3033-bp cDNA transactivates the hCS and SV40 enhancers and artificial
enhancers comprised of tandemly repeated GT-IIC enhansons, but not OCT enhansons.
The data demonstrate that TEF-5 is a transactivator that is likely involved in
the transactivation of CSEn enhancer function. Further, the data suggest that
elements within the untranslated regions, initiation site, or both control TEF-5 
expression in ways that influence its transactivation function.

PMID: 10379887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mamm Genome. 1999 Jun;10(6):632-4.

Genomic structure and chromosomal mapping of the mouse transcription factor TEF-5
(Tead3) gene.

Jacquemin P(1), Chen Z, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1, rue Laurent Fries, F-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

PMID: 10341100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):127-9.

Localization of human transcription factor TEF-4 and TEF-5 (TEAD2, TEAD3) genes
to chromosomes 19q13.3 and 6p21.2 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid analysis.

Jacquemin P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/, Illkirch Cédex, F-67404, France.

PMID: 9889009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jul;212(3):423-36.

Differential expression of the TEF family of transcription factors in the murine 
placenta and during differentiation of primary human trophoblasts in vitro.

Jacquemin P(1), Sapin V, Alsat E, Evain-Brion D, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of murine (m) Transcriptional Enhancer Factor
(TEF)-5 belonging to the TEF family of transcription factors. We show that mTEF-5
is specifically expressed in trophoblast giant cells and other extra-embryonic
structures at early stages of development. At later stages, mTEF-5 is
specifically expressed in the labyrinthine region of the placenta and in several 
embryonic tissues. We further show that the other mTEFs are differentially
expressed in extraembryonic structures and in the mature placenta. Interestingly,
human (h)TEF-5 is specifically expressed in the differentiated
syncytiotrophoblast of the human term placenta and its expression is upregulated 
during the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts to syncytiotrophoblast in vitro,
whereas that of hTEF-1 is down-regulated. Together with previous results
describing hTEF-binding sites in the human placental lactogen-B gene enhancer,
these novel observations support a role for hTEF-5 in the regulation of this
gene. We further propose that the hTEF factors may play a more general role in
placental gene regulation and development.

PMID: 9671946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Feb;17(2):187-96.

cDNA cloning and characterization of mouse DTEF-1 and ETF, members of the
TEA/ATTS family of transcription factors.

Yockey CE(1), Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of South Carolina School of Medicine,
Columbia 29208, USA.

Members of the TEA/ATTS family of transcription factors have been found in most
representative eukaryotic organisms. In vertebrates, the TEA family contains at
least four members, which share overlapping DNA-binding specificity and have
similar transcriptional activation properties. In this article, we describe the
cDNA cloning and characterization of the murine TEA proteins DTEF-1 (mDTEF-1) and
ETF. Using in situ hybridization analysis of mouse embryos, we found that mDTEF-1
and ETF transcript distributions substantially overlap. ETF is expressed
throughout the embryo except in the myocardium early in development, whereas late
in development, it is enriched in lung and neuroectoderm. Mouse DTEF-1 is
expressed at a much lower level throughout development and is substantially
enriched in ectoderm and skin, as well as in the developing pituitary at
midgestation. Northern blot analysis of adult mouse tissue total RNA showed that 
both ETF and mDTEF-1 are abundant in uterus and lung relative to other tissues.
Using gel mobility shift assays and GAL4-fusion protein analysis, we demonstrated
that the full coding sequences of ETF and mDTEF-1 encode M-CAT/GT-IIC-binding
proteins containing activation domains.

PMID: 9502435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 16;272(20):12928-37.

Human TEF-5 is preferentially expressed in placenta and binds to multiple
functional elements of the human chorionic somatomammotropin-B gene enhancer.

Jacquemin P(1), Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We report the cloning of a cDNA encoding the human transcription factor hTEF-5,
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to the TEF family of
transcription factors. hTEF-5 is expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle, but
the strongest expression is observed in the placenta and in placenta-derived
JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells. In correlation with its placental expression, we
show that hTEF-5 binds to several functional enhansons of the human chorionic
somatomammotropin (hCS)-B gene enhancer. We define a novel functional element in 
this enhancer comprising tandemly repeated sites to which hTEF-5 binds
cooperatively. In the corresponding region of the hCS-A enhancer, which is known 
to be inactive, this element is inactivated by a naturally occurring single base 
mutation that disrupts hTEF-5 binding. We further show that the binding of the
previously described placental protein f/chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer
factor-1 to TEF-binding sites is disrupted by monoclonal antibodies directed
against the TEA domain and that this factor is a proteolytic degradation product 
of the TEF factors. These results strongly suggest that hTEF-5 regulates the
activity of the hCS-B gene enhancer.

PMID: 9148898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):365-70.

A novel family of TEA domain-containing transcription factors with distinct
spatiotemporal expression patterns.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We cloned two novel types of TEA domain-containing transcription factor (ETFR-1
and -2) cDNAs. Amino acid sequences deduced for ETFR-1 and -2 as well as those of
other known proteins of the same family, TEF-1 and ETF, exhibited significant
identity (63-75% overall) to each other not only in the TEA DNA binding domain
but also in the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis revealed that both the
mRNAs were expressed in embryos as well as in many adult tissues, although their 
levels of expression varied. The results demonstrate that the mammalian TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family consists of at least four distinct 
members, TEF-1, ETF, ETFR-1, and ETFR-2, which exhibit overlapping but differing 
spatiotemporal expression patterns, suggesting their redundant yet unique roles
involved in not only developmental control but also tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 8920920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8260-5.

DTEF-1, a novel member of the transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) multigene
family.

Azakie A(1), Larkin SB, Farrance IK, Grenningloh G, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, 94143, USA. 674.

M-CAT motifs mediate muscle-specific transcriptional activity via interaction
with binding factors that are antigenically and biochemically related to
vertebrate transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1), a member of the TEA/ATTS
domain family of transcription factors. M-CAT binding activities present in
cardiac and skeletal muscle tissues cannot be fully accounted for by existing
cloned isoforms of TEF-1. TEF-1-related cDNAs isolated from heart libraries
indicate that at least three classes of TEF-1-related cDNAs are expressed in
these and other tissues. One class are homologues of the human TEF-1 originally
cloned from HeLa cells (Xiao, J. H., Davidson, I., Matthes, H., Garnier, J. M.,
and Chambon, P. (1991) Cell 65, 551-568). A second class represents homologues of
the avian TEF-1-related gene previously isolated (Stewart, A. F., Larkin, S. B., 
Farrance, I. K., Mar, J. H., Hall, D. E., and Ordahl, C. P. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
269, 3147-3150). The third class consists of a novel, divergent TEF-1 cDNA, named
DTEF-1, and its preliminary characterization is described here. Two isoforms of
DTEF-1 (DTEF-1A and DTEF-1B) were isolated as 1.9-kilobase pair clones with
putative open reading frames of 433 and 432 amino acids whose differences are
attributable to alternative splicing at the C terminus of the TEA DNA binding
domain. Cardiac muscle contains high levels of DTEF-1 transcripts, but
unexpectedly low levels are detected in skeletal muscle. DTEF-1 transcripts are
present at intermediate levels in gizzard and lung, and at low levels in kidney. 
DTEF-1A is a sequence-specific M-CAT-binding factor. The distinct spatial pattern
of expression, and unusual amino acid sequence in its DNA binding domain, may
indicate a particular role for DTEF-1 in cell-specific gene regulation. Recent
work also suggests that at least one more TEF-1-related gene exists in
vertebrates. We propose a naming system for the four TEF-1 gene family members
identified to date that preserves existing nomenclature and provides a means for 
extending that nomenclature as additional family members may be identified.

PMID: 8626520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


